The Project Gutenberg EBook of Their Crimes, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Their Crimes

Author: Various

Release Date: November 24, 2003 [EBook #10225]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THEIR CRIMES ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Dave Morgan and PG Distributed Proofreaders




THEIR CRIMES



Translated from the French



1917.




_It is proposed to devote any profits from the sale of this work to The
League of Remembrance, or for relief work in Lorraine_.




CONTENTS


Preface

Introduction

Robbery

Incendiarism

Murder

Outrages on Women and Children

Killing the Wounded

Sheltering behind Women

Martyrdom of Civilian Prisoners

German Excuses: Lies and Calumny

The German Appeal

Appeal by Belgian Workmen

Conclusion




PREFACE.


The purpose of this book is to remind English-speaking people all over
the Empire and our Allies in America of the wanton destruction and
unspeakable terror which have overwhelmed the regions of France and
Belgium occupied by the Boche, and also to quicken a true perception of
the reparation and punishment due when peace is made with the enemy. In
many minds time has dimmed the horrors of August and September 1914.
When war weariness is apt to sap resolution and the possibility of a
patched up peace is furtively canvassed, the great world of the
English-speaking race should call to remembrance the inhuman and barely
credible acts of brutality and bestiality committed in cold blood by the
German race.

No apology is made for this book. It is a translation of a document
which has created a profound impression in France. It is an
authoritative record of German crimes committed on the people of Belgium
and Northern France, attested by the Mayors of twenty-six French towns.
Some time ago permission was obtained from the French Committee of
Publication (the Prefect of Meurthe-and-Moselle, and the Mayors of Nancy
and Luneville) to produce an English version on condition that the
translation be an "exact and literal translation." This has been
completed and the Editor, the Rev. J. Esslemont Adams, an Assistant
Principal Chaplain with the British Expeditionary Force in France, is
indebted to the friends who have assisted in producing the work.




INTRODUCTION


This is a book of horrors, but a book of plain truths! Where have we
discovered our facts? They are taken from three sources: _First_, Four
reports issued by the French Commission of Enquiry[1]; and "Germany's
Violation of the Laws of Warfare," published by the French Ministry of
Foreign Affairs; _Second_, Two volumes containing twenty-two reports of
the Belgian Commission[2], and the Reply to the German White Book of the
15th May, 1915; _Third_, Notebooks found upon a large number of German
soldiers, non-commissioned officers, and officers, who have been wounded
or taken prisoners, and translated under the direction of the French
Government. These valuable records, in which the bandits and their
leaders have imprudently given themselves away, are real "_pieces a
conviction_."

These reports in their entirety form an overwhelming indictment. We
wish that everyone could study them in full. But the books are large,
running to thousands of pages, and will not find their way to the
general public.

Yet everyone ought to know how the Germans carry on war. We have
therefore made selections from these documents in order to compile this
small pamphlet. A dismal task, this wading through mud and blood! And a
hard task, to run through all these reports, pencil in hand, with the
idea of underlining _the essential facts_! You find yourself noting down
each page, marking each paragraph; and, lo and behold, at the end of the
book, you have selected _everything_--- that is to say, nothing. One
might as well start to gather the hundred finest among the leaves of a
forest, or to pick up the hundred most glittering grains among the sand
on a beach. All we can do is to take the first examples which come to
hand. This, then, is not a collection of the most stirring and striking
German crimes, but simply a book of samples. Until complete statistics
are forthcoming, two classes of outrage stand out, and must remain ever
present to the mind: murdered civilians can be counted in thousands;
houses wilfully burned, in tens of thousands.

For want of time and space we have concerned ourselves here only with
crimes committed in Belgium and France, and we have had no thought of
separating the two neighbouring sister nations.

Our part in this work is a modest one. Taking at random a certain number
of _facts_, we have grouped them under different headings to make
perusal easier for the reader. To indicate the references would have
been impossible. Each line would have required a foot-note; the notes
would have been as long as the text, and both the length of, and the
cost of producing this pamphlet would have been doubled.

It is enough to state that there is not a single fact published here
that cannot be verified by our readers in one or other of the documents
already referred to. Nothing but facts are set down, absolute bare
facts, and it is for the reader to form his own conclusions. When he has
studied these "samples," and begins by means of them to learn the truth,
then, and only then, will he have the right to choose, according to his
conscience, between remembrance and oblivion, between pardon and
punishment.

L. MIRMAN, Prefect of Meurthe-et-Moselle.

G. SIMON, Mayor of Nancy.

G. KELLER, Mayor of Luneville.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] The members of this Commission were MM. G. Payelle (Premier
President de la Cour des Comptes), A. Mollard (Ministre
Plenipotentiaire), G. Maringer (Conseiller d'Etat), E. Paillot
(Conseiller a la Cour de Cassation)--Rapports et Proces-verbaux, vols
i., ii., iii., iv., Imprimerie Nationale.

[2] The Commission, consisting of men of the highest position in
Belgium, is presided over by M. Van Iseghem (President de la Cour de
Cassation). Its reports and the "Reply to the German White Book" have
been published by Berger-Levrault, from which firm we have also "Carnets
de Route" (J. de Dampierre) and "Paroles Allemandes." "Crimes allemands
d'apres des te-moi gnages allemands," by J. Bedier, is published by
Colin.




ROBBERY


We shall not waste time over the looting of cellars, of larders, of
poultry yards, of linen-chests, or of whatever can be consumed promptly,
or immediately made use of by the troops--all these are the merest
trifles. Let us also dismiss pillage, organised on a large scale by the
authorities, of all sorts of raw material and industrial machinery: the
bill on this score will come to several thousand million francs. Let us
likewise put aside official robberies, committed by governors of towns,
or provinces, from municipal treasuries (even the treasury of the Red
Cross at Brussels was robbed), usually under the form of fines, or of
taxes imposed under transparent pretences. There again there will be
millions to recover.

We shall deal here with _personal robberies_ only, as distinct from the
pilfering carried on by hungry soldiers, distinct too from the regular
contributions levied on a conquered country by an unscrupulous
administration. These robberies are innumerable, committed sometimes by
private soldiers, but often by officers, doctors, and high officials.
Here are some examples.

(1) _Soldier thieves_: They are rougher in their dealings, and kill
those who offer resistance. It is a case of "Your money or your life."
Madame Maupoix, aged 75, living at Triaucourt, was kicked to death while
soldiers ransacked her cupboards. Monsieur Dalissier, aged 73,
belonging to Congis, was summoned to give up his purse: he declared
that he had no money; they tied him up with a rope and fired fifteen
shots into his body. Let us pass quickly over the "soldier
thief"--merely small fry!

(2) _Officer thieves_: At Baron, an officer compelled the notary to open
his safe, and stole money and jewellery from it. Another, after going
through several houses, was seen wearing on his wrists and fingers six
bracelets and nine rings belonging to women. Soldiers who brought their
officer a stolen jewel received a reward of four shillings. The
robberies at Baccarat and Creil were "directed" by officers. At Creil, a
captain tried to induce Guillot and Demonts to point out the houses of
the richest inhabitants, and their refusal cost them harsh treatment. At
Fosse, a French military doctor in charge of an ambulance, conveying two
hundred patients, and himself wounded, was arrested and taken before a
captain. The captain told the doctor that he would have him shot, and
meanwhile opened the doctor's tunic with his own hand, took out his
pocket-book and appropriated the 400 francs he found in it.

Officers and privates sometimes share the stolen money. From a diary
belonging to a titled Lieutenant of the Guards, let us quote this
note:--

    "Fosse. Village entirely burnt. The 7th Company made
    2000 francs in booty."

From another officer's note-book:--

    "More than 3000 francs booty for the battalion."

Another diary, after the sacking of a place, gives a detailed account
of the distribution thus:--

    "460 francs for the first lieutenant, 390 francs for the
    second lieutenant, etc...."

(3) _Doctor thieves:_ At Choisy-au-Bac, two army doctors, wearing their
brassards, personally sacked the house of a family named Binder. At
Chateau-Thierry some doctors were made prisoners: their mess-tins were
opened and found to be full of stolen articles. After Morhange, a French
doctor of the 20th Corps remained in the German lines to be near his
wounded. He was accosted by one of his German 'confreres.'[3] who with
his own hands stole his watch and pocket-book.

At Raon-sur-Plaine, after the retreat of our troops, Dr. Schneider
remained behind with thirty wounded. Next day up came a German ambulance
with Professor Vulpius, a well-known German scientist of Heidelberg
University, who must have presided over many international medical
congresses. As soon as he was installed, "Herr Professor" intimated to
his French fellow-doctors that he was "going to begin with a small
customary formality." The formality was a simple one: his colleagues
were to hand over to him "all the money they had on them." "I strongly
protested" (declared the French doctor, on oath), "but we were compelled
to hand over our purses and all their contents. Having relieved us in
this way, he turned to our poor wounded, who were all searched and
stripped of their money. There was nothing to be done: we were in the
hands, not of a doctor, but of a regular brute...."

(4) _Royal thieves_: After living about a week in a chateau near Liege,
H.R.H. Prince Eitel Fritz, the Duke of Brunswick, and another nobleman
of less importance, had all the dresses that could be found in the
wardrobes belonging to the lady of the house and her daughters packed up
before their own eyes, and sent to Germany.

       *       *       *       *       *

These thieves are often _facetious_: they give as compensation a
so-called receipt or bond (in German, of course), which in French means,
"Good for a hundred lashes," or "Good for two rabbits," or "To be shot,"
or "Payable in Paris".... They are also _disgusting_. In houses robbed
by them they leave, by way of visiting cards, excrement in beds, on
tables, and in cupboards. They are sometimes _unnaturally vicious_. In a
village of Limbourg they burnt in a stable a stallion valued at 50,000
francs, and "forced the farmer, his wife and children to witness the
crime on their knees with their arms raised." Amongst the crowd of
unfortunate people brought from Louvain to Brussels were thirteen
priests. The soldiers at a German guard-house stopped the column, and
ordered the priests to come out. To shoot them? No. They forced them
into a pigsty, from which they had driven out the only pig. Forthwith
they compelled most of them to strip off all their clothes, and robbed
them of everything of value they possessed.

These thieves are _practical_ too. At Dinant, safes were opened with
oxy-hydrogen blow-pipes, brought expressly for that purpose. They have a
partiality for safes, and in this connection the story of Luneville
deserves recording. A house near the station, belonging to M. Leclerc,
was set on fire; the walls alone remained standing, and in one of them
(on the second floor) a safe was left intact. A non-commissioned
officer, named Weill, with a party blew up the wall with dynamite, and
the safe was extricated from the rubbish, carried to the station, put on
a truck, and sent to Boche-land. This man Weill, before the war, often
came to Luneville on business with hops, was always well received there,
made himself agreeable and knew everybody. When the Germans settled in
the unfortunate town he played a very important part, in spite of his
low rank, in acting as agent, confidential clerk and guide to the
Commanding Officer.

The robbers are also business-like in their transport arrangements as to
carriages, military waggons, lorries, and motor cars. At Compiegne,
where the home of the Orsetti family was sacked, silver plate, jewellery
and articles of value were collected in the courtyard of the chateau,
then classified, registered, packed and "put into two carts, upon which
they took care to place the Red Cross flag." We read in the note-book of
a wounded German soldier, under medical treatment at Brussels, "A car
has arrived at the hospital, bringing war booty, a piano, two sewing
machines and all sorts of other things."

In 1870, our clocks were in most demand; now, pianos form the
attraction, and an immense number have been sent to Germany. They are
the article particularly favoured by the Boche ladies. In a chateau
retaken by our troops, an officer left behind a letter from his wife, in
which is written, "A thousand thanks for the beautiful things you sent
me. The furs are magnificent, the rosewood furniture is exquisite; but
don't forget that Elsa is always waiting for her piano."

These women, however, are not all as patient in waiting as Elsa. They
frequently come and choose for themselves, and preside over the packing.
They have been seen arriving in motor cars from Strasbourg or Metz, at
many towns in Lorraine, at Luneville, Baccarat, and elsewhere.

All note-books, more or less, contain such items as these: "Wholesale
pillage and abundant loot," "Everything destroyed or sacked," "Looting
going strong," "Played the piano; looting going strong." This very
German formula frequently occurs, "_Methodically_ plundered." And again,
"We have been allowed to plunder; we didn't require to be told twice:
whole bales of loot."

"_Rethel._ The Vandals could not have done better." (The officer who
makes this indiscreet admission and seems to protest against the thefts
committed, writes on the following page: "I have found a silk rainproof
coat and a camera for Felix.")

"_Courcy._ The village, and the workmen's cottages looted and sacked.
Atrocious. There is something, after all, in what they say of German
barbarians."

"_Ottignies._ The village was pillaged. The blond beast has made plain
what he is. The Huns and the free-lances of the Middle Ages could not
have done better."

"_Cirey._ During the night incredible things were done: shops sacked,
money stolen, rapes: enough to make one's hair stand on end."


FOOTNOTES:

[3] We have not found this fact recorded in the Commission's Reports. It
was told to us, on his return from captivity, by Dr. Marlier, of the
20th Corps, taken prisoner at Morhange, and Dr. Marlier is the soul of
honour.




INCENDIARISM


In order to punish imaginary crimes, attributed to individuals or
townships, or without even taking the trouble to discover any kind of
pretext, the Germans often, especially after looting, set everything on
fire _so as to make all traces disappear_. Sometimes, as at Courtacon,
they compelled the inhabitants to provide the material for burning their
own houses; or, as at Recquignies, forced prisoners "to set the houses
of the doctor and mayor on fire with lighted straw." But generally they
do the work themselves. They have a _special service_ for this, and all
the requisite incendiary material is carefully prepared; torches,
grenades, fuses, oil pumps, firebrands, satchels of pastilles containing
very inflammable compressed powder, etc. German science has applied
itself to the perfecting of the technique of incendiarism. The village
is set alight by a _drilled_ method. Those concerned act quite coolly,
as a matter of duty, as though in accordance with a drill scheme laid
down and perfected beforehand.

Of course, fire once let loose, these people have to see that it does
its work completely: accordingly, at Louvain, they destroyed the
fire-engines and fire-escapes; at Namur, they stopped the firemen at the
very moment they were preparing to do their duty.

In this way they sometimes wilfully burned down whole blocks of
dwellings (Luneville): sometimes an entire district (105 houses at
Senlis, 112 at Baccarat): sometimes almost a whole town itself (more
than 300 houses at Gerbeviller, 800 at Sermaize, 1,200 at Dinant, 1,800
at Louvain[4]). On other occasions they did not leave a house standing
(Nomeny, Clermont-en-Argonne, Sommeilles).

The complete list of buildings, cottages, farms, villas, factories, or
chateaux, burned wilfully in this way by hand, will be a formidable one,
amounting to tens of thousands.[5]

Refinement of cruelty frequently occurs. At Aerschot "women had to
witness the sight of the conflagration holding their hands up. Their
torture lasted six hours." At Crevic, the Germans began their sinister
work by burning a chateau which they knew belonged to General Lyautey.
The troops, commanded by an officer, shouted out for Madame and
Mademoiselle Lyautey "that they might cut their heads off."

The houses destroyed by fire were not always uninhabited. At Maixe, M.
Demange, wounded in both knees, dragged himself along and fell prostrate
in his kitchen; his house was set on fire and Madame Demange was
forcibly prevented from going to the rescue of her husband, who perished
in the flames. At Nomeny, Madame Cousin, after being shot, was thrown
into the burning building and roasted. At the same place, M. Adam was
thrown alive into the flames. Let us note in connection with him, to
their credit, an act of comparative humanity. Finding that the unhappy
man was not being burnt fast enough, they ended his misery in the flames
by shooting him. At Monceau-sur-Sambre, where they set fire to 300
houses, they confined the two brothers S. in a shed, and the unfortunate
men were burnt alive.[6]

The soldiers' diaries are filled with descriptions of incendiarism, some
of which we now quote. "Returned by Mazerulles, which was burnt as we
passed through, because the engineers found a telephone there connected
up with the French."[7] "The whole village was in ablaze. Everything
destroyed in the street, except one small house; in front of the door
was a poor woman with her six children, her arms raised and begging for
mercy. And every day it is the same thing."

_Parnx_. "The first village burnt (in Lorraine, on the 10th August);
after that the fun began. Villages in flames, one after the other."
Another note-book simply states, "Sommepy--horrible carnage. The village
entirely burnt; the French thrown into the burning houses; civilians
with the rest." Another recalls theatrical memories. "The village is
ablaze; it reminds one of the conflagration of Walhalla in the 'Twilight
of the Gods.'"

Here is a poet speaking: "The soldiers set up the red cock (_i.e._,
fire) upon the houses, just as they like." This poet is moved, and
speaks of "pure vandalism" on the part of his companions in arms. And
again, a musician writes, "Throwing of incendiary grenades into the
houses; a military concert in the evening--'Nun danket alle Gott'! (Now
thank we all our God)." Finally, a Bavarian: "The village
(Saint-Maurice, Meurthe-et-Moselle) was surrounded, and the soldiers
posted one yard apart so that no one could escape. Then the Uhlans set
fire to the place, one house after the other. No man, woman, or child
could possibly escape. Only the cattle were removed in safety, because
cattle have some value. Anyone trying to escape was shot. Everything in
the village was destroyed." We shall see presently that they even went
so far as to burn ambulances.


FOOTNOTES:

[4] They destroyed by fire the Library at Louvain, with its 200,000
volumes and its incomparable treasures. By means of shells and fire they
have injured in one place, totally destroyed in another, wonders of art
that were an integral part of our human heritage; our Cathedrals at
Rheims, Arras, Ypres, &c.

[5] Belgium alone accounts for about 20,000.

[6] This fact is quoted in the admirable book by Captain A. de Gerlache,
entitled "Belgium and the Belgians during the War," published by the
firm of Berger-Levrault.

[7] See note at foot of page 31. (this is foot-note 11)




MURDER


Not having sufficient space for a complete catalogue, we shall here
simply mention the judicial murders of Miss Cavell, Eugene Jacquet,
Battisti, and others, in order to honour the memory of those noble
victims. For the same reason, as they are now well known to everyone, we
content ourselves with merely recalling the criminal torpedoing of the
_Lusitania,_[8] _Ancona, Portugal, Amiral-Ganteaume_.... all merchant
steamers, without any military character whatever, employed in carrying
passengers of every nationality, and the last-named crowded with
refugees.

We may pass over the crimes committed _from a distance_, so to speak, on
unfortified towns, with fieldpieces, long-range guns, aeroplanes, and
Zeppelins, merely noting that the Germans _were the first_ to fire
shells into the centre of towns indiscriminately. If they made an
exception, it was to aim at the cathedral square, when people were
leaving after Mass, as at Nancy, or into the market-place at the time
when women are busiest, as they did at Luneville.

We only mention here such outrages as were committed at close quarters
with hand-weapons, bayonets or rifles. The list is a long one. Will the
exact number of victims ever be known? In Belgium alone it has been
proved that up to now more than 5,000 civilians have been assassinated:
grown men, old people, women and children. They slaughtered their
victims sometimes one by one, sometimes in groups, often in masses. They
were not content only with killing. At one place they organised round
the massacre such tragic scenes, and at another displayed such
refinements of cruelty, that reason falters in face of their acts, and
asks what terrible madness has brought this race to such low depths? Is
it possible? Yes, it is. Judge by the following examples:--

At Foret, the village schoolmaster was shot for refusing to trample
under foot the national flag, torn down from the front of the school.[9]
At Schaffen, A. Willem was tied to a tree and burnt alive, and two other
unfortunate men were buried alive. Madame Luykx and her little girl, 12
years old, were shot together in a cellar. J. Reynders and his young
nephew, 10 years of age, were both shot in the street. At Sompuis, an
old man named Jacquemin, aged 70, was bound to his bed by an officer and
left there without food for three days, dying soon after his release.

A Westphalian prisoner states, "The commanding officer ordered us to
shoot two women, and we did so. One of them was holding a child by the
hand, and in falling she dragged the child over with her. The officer
gave orders to shoot the child, because it could not be left alone in
the world." At Rouves, a Government clerk refused to tell a Bavarian
officer the numbers of the French regiments in the neighbourhood. The
officer killed him with two shots from his revolver. At Crezancy,
another officer shot with his own hand young Lesaint, 18 years old, "to
prevent his being a soldier later on." At Embermenil, Madame Masson was
shot for having, in absolute good faith, given some wrong information.
As she was obviously in a state of pregnancy they made her sit down on a
bench to meet her fate. At Ethe, two priests were shot "for having
buried some weapons." At Marqueglise, a superior officer ordered the
arrest of four young fugitives. Learning that two of them came from
Belgium, he exclaimed, "The Belgians are filthy people," and without
more ado took his revolver and shot them one after the other. Three were
killed outright, the fourth expired the following day.

From the crowd of fugitives which left Louvain in flames, the priests
were singled out, and searched. On one of them, a Jesuit father, by name
Dupierreux, they found a note-book containing the following note in
French, "When I used to read about the Huns under Attila devastating
towns, I smiled. I smile no longer now that I have seen with my own eyes
the hordes of to-day setting fire to the churches and library of
Louvain." In front of the assembled troops the priests were placed in a
semi-circle round the Jesuit Father. The incriminating phrase was read
out, and then translated into German. The lieutenant said that it
constituted an incitement to murder, and that the Jesuit must be shot on
the spot. The sentence was carried out forthwith, and the other
priests, his companions, were made to bury him where he fell.

At Pin, some Uhlans found two young boys on the road. They tied them by
the arms to their horses and galloped off. The bodies of the poor lads
were found a few miles away--their knees were "literally crushed"; one
had his throat cut and both had several bullets in their heads. At
Sermaize, a labourer, named Brocard, and his son, were arrested. His
wife and daughter-in-law, mad with terror, threw themselves into a
neighbouring stream. The old man broke away, and ran to try and save
them. The Germans dragged him away.... Four days later Brocard and the
son, on being liberated, returned home, and after a search, found the
bodies. The two women, while still in the water, had been shot several
times through the head. A parish priest named Dergent was taken to
Aerschot, stripped, and tied to a cross in front of the church; his
fingers and toes were crushed and broken with the butt-end of a rifle.
The inhabitants were made to pass in front of him and were each
compelled to urinate on him in turn; then he was shot and his body
thrown into the canal.[10]

At Herimenil, during the pillage, the inhabitants were shut up in a
church, and kept there for four days without food. When Madame Winger,
23 years of age, and her three young servants, one girl and two boys,
were too slow in leaving her farm to go to the church, the captain
ordered his men to fire on them. Four more dead bodies!

The Germans arrived at Monchy-Humieres. A group of inhabitants watched
them marching past. No provocation whatever was offered, but an officer
thought that he heard someone utter the word "Prussians." He at once
called out three dragoons, and ordered them to fire upon the group--one
killed and two wounded--one of the latter being a little girl of four.

At Sommeilles, when the fire--which destroyed the whole place--broke
out, Madame X. took refuge in a cellar belonging to M. and Madame Adnot,
who were there, with their four children, the eldest a girl of 11 years.
A few days after, on returning to the village, our soldiers found the
seven bodies in the cellar lying in a pool of blood, several of them
being horribly mutilated. Madame X. had her right arm severed from her
body; the little girl's foot had been cut off, and the little boy of
five had his throat cut.

At Louveigne a certain number of men were shut up in a blacksmith's
shop; in the afternoon the murderers opened the door as if it were a
pigeon-shooting competition, drove the prisoners out, and shot them
down--a ghastly group of 17 corpses.

At Senlis the heroic Mayor, M. Odent, and six members of his staff were
shot.

At Gerbeviller they forced their way into the house of M. and Madame
Lingenheld; seized the son, aged 36, exempt from service, and wearing
the badge of the Red Cross, tied his hands, dragged him into the street
and shot him. They then returned to look for the father, an old man of
70. Meanwhile the mother, mad with terror, made her escape. On coming
out she saw her son lying on the ground. As he still showed signs of
life, they threw paraffin over him and roasted him. The father was shot
later on with fourteen other old men. More than 150 victims were
identified in this parish.

At Nomeny, M. Vasse provided shelter for a number of neighbours in his
cellar. Fifty soldiers got in and set fire to the house. To escape the
flames the refugees rushed out and were shot one by one as they emerged.
Mentre was killed first; his son Leon, with his little eight-year-old
sister in his arms, fell next: as he was not quite dead they put the
barrel of a rifle to his ear and blew his brains out. Then came the turn
of a family named Kieffer. The mother was wounded; the father, his boy
and girl, aged respectively 10 and 3, were shot down. They fell on them
with fury. Striffler, Guillaume, and Vasse were afterwards massacred.
Young Mlle. Simonin, 17 years old, and her small sister, afraid to leave
their refuge in the cellar, were eventually driven out by the flames,
and immediately shot at. The younger child had an elbow almost blown off
by a bullet; as the elder girl lay wounded on the ground, she was
deliberately kicked by a soldier. At Nomeny 40 victims were identified.

And now we come to some of the _wholesale slaughters._ At Louvain, more
than 100 victims; at Aerschot, over 150; at Soumagne, 165; at Ethe, 197;
at Andenne, over 300; at Tamines, 400; at Dinant, upwards of 600, of
whom 71 were women, 34 old men of over seventy, 6 children from five to
nine years old, and 11 under five. At Aerschot, a first batch of 78 men
were taken out of the town, and ordered to advance in groups of three,
holding each other by the hand, when they were made to pass in front of
some German Military Police, who shot them all at short range with
revolvers. Others had their hands bound so tightly that many screamed
with pain: they spent the night lying on the ground, and were shot the
next day. Many, before execution, were compelled to dig their own
graves. At Dinant, the victims were placed in two rows, the first
kneeling, the second standing. Then came the order--"Fire!" At Tamines,
several hundred men were massed in the Place Saint-Martin, on the bank
of the Sambre. The assassins stood ten yards away and fired a volley.
All fell, but some were not wounded. The officer in command ordered them
to "stand up." A second volley was fired. As soon as the firing
finished, there was a frightful scene which lasted until the
evening--the killing of the wounded. Many soldiers, some wearing the
badge of the Red Cross, approached their victims by the light of small
lanterns, and passed through their ranks, clubbing them with the butt
end of their rifles, and stabbing with bayonets. A perfect shambles!

In these horrors we do not discern the musical note, or the
acknowledgment of the "Old German God." Yet, here is a specimen:--

At Andenne, Colonel Schumann, in command of the Potsdam Rifles,
organised a grand concert in the evening at the Place des Tilleuls. The
entertainment ended with a prayer!

It now remains for us to publish a few extracts from note-books found
upon officers and privates. Some are short items like the
following:--"Pepinster, 12th August. Burgomaster, Priest and
Schoolmaster shot, and houses burnt to the ground. We resume our march."
Another, "Villers-en-Fagne, village in flames. The population had
notified the French of the approach of the grenadiers; thereupon the
hussars set fire to the village, the Parish Priest and others being
shot."

Others enter into details of the executions. "_Leffe._ We shoot everyone
who fires on our men. We put three, one behind the other, and a Marburg
rifleman kills them outright with a single shot. It is war to the
knife."

Another expresses something other than enthusiasm for such work.
"Considering that the King (of the Belgians) has given orders to defend
the country by all possible means, we have been ordered to shoot every
male inhabitant. At Dinant more than 100 were collected in a crowd and
shot. A dreadful Sunday." Another, an aesthete, writes as follows:
"During the night many more civilians were shot, so many that we were
able to count over 200. Women and children, with lamps in their hands,
were compelled to witness the horrible sight. We afterwards ate our
rice among the dead bodies. Sadly beautiful." He adds (in shorthand)
"Captain Hermann was drunk."

Again another: "_Dinant._ We have been firing on everyone who showed
himself, or on those thrown out of the houses, men or women. The bodies
lie in the streets, in heaps a yard deep."

A Saxon officer writes: "My company is at Bouvignes. Our men behave like
vandals: everything is upset; the sight of the slaughtered inhabitants
defies all description; not a house is left standing. We have dragged
out of every corner all survivors, one after another, men, women, and
children, found in a burning cloister, and have shot them 'en masse.'"

The following depositions on the massacres at Nomeny are made by
prisoners, one a Bavarian officer in the Reserve, the other a private in
the same regiment. The lieutenant says: "I gathered the impression that
it was impossible for the officers at Nomeny to prevent such acts. As
far as I can judge, the crimes committed there, which horrified all the
soldiers who were at Nomeny later on, must be put down to the acts of
unnatural brutes." The soldier says, "At five o'clock regimental orders
were received to kill every male inhabitant of Nomeny, and to raze
everything to the ground; we forced our way into the houses." Here is a
more detailed account of a massacre near Blamont. "All the villagers
fled: it was terrible; their beards thick with blood, and what faces!
They were dreadful to look at. The dead were all buried, numbering
sixty. Among them were many old men and women, and one unfortunate woman
half confined--the whole being frightful to look at. Three children
were clasped in each other's arms, and had died thus. The Altar and the
vaulting of the church were destroyed because there was a telephone[11]
communicating with the enemy. This morning, 2nd September, all the
survivors were expelled. I saw four small boys carrying away on two
sticks a cradle containing a baby of five or six months. All this is
dreadful to see. Blow for blow: thunder against thunder! Every thing is
given up to pillage. I also saw a mother with her two children; one had
a big wound on the head, and one eye knocked out."


FOOTNOTES:

[8] They have decorated the pirates who sank the _Lusitania_. They glory
in the crime, and have even struck a commemorative medal in its honour.

[9] In this case, and many of the following ones, the reader is
requested to note, and remember, the _motive_ for the murders.

[10] This cruel treatment of the Abbe Dergent, priest of Gelrode, near
Louvain, is reported by a neutral witness, Father G., a student at
Louvain. The German soldiers accused the Belgian priests of every
conceivable crime; the Assistant-Priest of Sainte-Gertrude (Louvain),
who was remonstrating with a soldier, received this reply: "We are
Catholics too, but you are pigs and black devils." In Belgium about one
hundred of the clergy were massacred. Note further that in this
unfortunate country _doctors_ were particularly ill-treated;
thirty-seven being shot in the small parishes, while more than one
hundred and fifty disappeared altogether from large towns.

[11] To whom did it belong, and where was it? Telephones exist in every
district of Meurthe-et-Moselle. Besides, our army installed field
telephones which were not all destroyed at the time of their retreat. It
is a most foolish pretext, yet where can one find a more stupid one than
this? A German official communique, in order to prove that the general
rising of the people had been organized for a long time, declares, "that
depots of arms were installed, where each rifle bore the name of the man
for whom it was intended." It is absolutely clear that this applies to
arms taken from civilians by order of the local authorities in Belgium
and France, and deposited at the Town Hall, every weapon bearing the
name of its owner. Would they have taken that for an arsenal? No, stupid
as they may be, they are not so foolish as that. They feign stupidity
simply because they know very well that the conscience of the civilized
world is beginning to be moved.




OUTRAGES ON WOMEN AND CHILDREN


We might write a long and heartbreaking chapter on this pitiful subject,
but let the following suffice. The Report of the French Commission of
Enquiry concludes with these words, "Outrages upon women and young girls
have been common _to an unheard-of extent_." No doubt the bulk of these
crimes will never come to light, for it needs a concatenation of special
circumstances for such acts to be committed in public. Unfortunately and
only too often these circumstances have existed, _e.g._, at
Beton-Bazoches and Sancy-les-Provins, a young girl, and at St.
Denis-les-Rebaix, a mother-in-law and a little boy of eight years old,
and at Coulommiers a husband and two children, were witnesses to
outrages committed on the mother of the family. Sometimes the attacks
were individual and sometimes committed by bodies of men, _e.g._, at
Melen-Labouxhe, Margaret W. was violated by twenty German soldiers, and
then shot by the side of her father and mother. They did not even
respect nuns.[12]

They did not even spare grandmothers (Louppy-le-Chateau,
Vitry-en-Perthois ...).

Nor did they respect children.... At Cirey, a witness (a University
professor), whose statements one of us took down a few days after the
tragedy, cried to a Bavarian officer, "Have you no children in Germany?"
All the officer said in reply was, "My mother never bore swine like
you."

Now and then they let themselves loose on a whole family; at Louppy, the
mother and her two young girls aged thirteen and eight, respectively,
were simultaneous victims of their savagery.

The outrages sometimes lasted till death. At Nimy, the martyrdom of
little Irma G. lasted six hours till death delivered her from her
sufferings. When her father tried to rescue her he was shot, and her
mother was seriously wounded. Indeed, it was certain destruction to any
frenzied parent who tried to defend his child. A clergyman of Dixmude
says, "The burgomaster of Handzaeme was shot for trying to protect his
daughter." And how many other cases have occurred! We have not the heart
to continue the list.


FOOTNOTES:

[12] See the report of the French Commission (vol. i., page 35). See
also, in the "Reply to the White Book," p. 500, the moving letter of
Cardinal Mercier to von Bissing: "My conscience forbids my divulging to
any tribunal the information, alas, only too well substantiated, which I
possess. Outrages on nuns have been committed ..."




KILLING THE WOUNDED


There are _great numbers_ of wounded who, on their solemn oath, have
related how, when lying on the field of battle, they saw their wounded
comrades "finished off" by rifle or revolver shots, or by blows from
butt-ends, or by bayonet stabs, or kicked to death by German soldiers,
non-commissioned officers, and even by officers.[13]

We cannot pause to analyse these innumerable depositions. There is other
evidence. How often, when a counter-attack has put us in possession of
ground lost the day before, have we found poor fellows "finished
off"--with their throats cuts, as in the case of the two sergeants of
the 31st Chasseurs at the Pass of Sainte-Marie, or "with their own
bayonets driven into their mouths," like the poor little fellow of the
17th. The enemy often runs amok like this:--"On August 23rd, the Cure of
Remereville tended Lieutenant Toussaint (who passed out first at the
Forestry School in July). When he fell in battle, this young officer was
bayoneted by all the Germans who passed near him, and his body was a
mass of wounds from head to feet." At Oudrigny "a German officer met a
French vehicle showing the Red Cross flag, and loaded with ten wounded.
He deployed his company, and fired two volleys at it." At Bonviller, an
officer murdered nine French wounded, stretched helpless in a barn, by
shooting them through the ear. On 23rd August at Montigny-le-Tilleul, M.
Vital was caught in the act of tending a French soldier, L. Sohier by
name, wounded in the head and side. Such a crime deserved punishment,
and the wretches first shot the orderly and then the patient.

At Ethe they set a shed on fire and roasted more than twenty wounded who
were lying there.

We all know the celebrated order of General Stenger in the region of
Thiaville (Meurthe-et-Moselle):--"No prisoners are to be taken. All
prisoners, whether wounded or not, must be slaughtered."

It was not only in Lorraine that such orders were given. Listen to the
depositions of a German soldier: "The same day we saw eighteen other
Frenchmen. Lieutenant N. told us to shoot them as he did not know what
else to do with them."

Read this letter found at L'Ecouvillon in a German trench which we
recaptured: "Every day we take many prisoners, but they are shot at once
as we no longer know where to put them."

Think of the diary in which a German soldier near Peronne recorded his
impressions of the day: "They lay in heaps of ten or twelve, some dead
and some still living. Those who could still walk were marched off.
Those who were wounded in the head or lungs, and could not lift
themselves up, were finished off with a bullet. That is the order which
we got."

A German soldier, while being nursed in a hospital at Nancy, confided to
Dr. Roemer that the wound in his stomach "had been inflicted on him by a
German N.C.O. because he refused to finish off a wounded Frenchman."

Wounded were not only massacred on the field of battle, but field
hospitals were also the scene of atrocities. At Gomery, in a casualty
clearing station, under Dr. Sedillot, there were numerous wounded
remaining in the German lines. A German officer with twenty-five men
visited the place and inspected it and retired, saying that all was in
order. But a N.C.O. and a party of soldiers remained in the street
outside. They were excited and kept shouting, "It is war to the death,"
and making signs of cutting throats. They rushed in and with their
revolvers shot down Dr. Sedillot (who happily survived, with others, to
give evidence), and set fire to the place. Maddened by the flames, the
wounded (many of whom had had amputations performed on them that very
morning) leapt from the windows on the first floor and fell into the
garden, where the executioners picked them up, gathering them in a
bunch, and shot them. In this way Lieutenant Jeannin and Dr. Charette
were murdered, and from one hundred to one hundred and twenty officers
and soldiers--whose wounds should have made them sacred--perished from
shot or fire after terrible sufferings.

When all is said, however, it is better to kill wounded soldiers by fire
or sword than by starvation, as the following incident shows: One
hundred wounded Frenchmen, together with Dr. Bender, were brought to the
Stenay barracks, and one hundred and eighty more came in shortly
afterwards; the latter, having been left out unattended on the
battle-field for five days, were in a terrible condition. Dr. Bender in
vain begged the Germans for help in getting the wounded men out of the
ambulances into the hospital. The Boches refused, and simply went on
sucking their pipes. Though wounded himself, the doctor, with the aid of
two male nurses (Frenchmen both), had to do the whole thing himself.
For several days the Boches gave them no food at all. "Our poor fellows
screamed with hunger,"[14] says the doctor, on oath, and adds, "I had
sixty badly wounded with me, and begged the German army doctor to
operate, but he said he had no time. I then asked his leave to operate
myself, but his reply was, "You are in the German lines, and must
conform to our rules." The doctor ends his pathetic evidence with the
words, "Nearly all these unhappy men died of neglect."

We have seen doctors, like Professor Vulpius, actually steal money; but
of all the types of Boche doctors, the most hideous is the hero of the
following tale, taken from the deposition of Dr. Bender. "A French
soldier, at Stenay, was under my treatment. He had a wound in his
foot--not very severe, which did not need an operation at all. What was
my astonishment to find that a German army surgeon had amputated his
thigh? I could not help expressing my indignation, and the surgeon's
only reply was, "He will be a man the less against us in the next
war."[15] They will deny these crimes to-morrow, but in 1914 they
gloried in them.

On the 18th of October a Silesian newspaper published an article sent
from the front by a N.C.O., in which he says, "Men who are particularly
tender-hearted give the French wounded the 'coup de grace' with a
bullet, but the others cut and thrust as much as possible. Our enemies
fought bravely ... whether they are slightly or badly wounded our brave
Fusiliers spare the Fatherland as far as possible the expensive trouble
of looking after numerous enemies. In the evening, with prayers of
thanksgiving on our lips, we go to sleep." Are these mere boastings of
crimes? No. The article was submitted to the Captain of the Company who
certified it as correct and counter-signed it. The N.C.O., the Captain,
the Silesian public, the whole German nation were delighted to see this
abominable story of murder and shame appear in the paper under the
heading, "A Day of Honour for our Regiment."[16]



FOOTNOTES:

[13] Report of the French Commission, vol. iii.

[14] He adds that certain orderlies--Lorrainers, belonging to the German
Army--supplied them with food on the sly.

[15] French chivalry could hardly believe that a doctor would amputate a
wounded enemy's limb without absolute necessity and in mere revenge, but
such cases are, alas, not rare. See the awful tales of torture in the
"Journal d'un Grand Blesse en Allemagne," by Charles Hennebois (pp. 137,
146), and the statement of a German doctor (p. 87), "Your doctors in
France perform amputations as they please on our wounded. The order has
therefore been given to amputate without hesitation, as reprisals, every
damaged limb."

[16] Let us quote, to show the mental "make-up" of certain Germans, the
conditions in which Captain Coustre of the 108th and Captain Lesourd of
the 50th met their deaths. They were wandering over the battle-field
where the enemy had been repulsed. They heard a cry for help. There was
a soldier in one place and an officer in another who asked for a drink.
They stopped and leant over them to give them a drink from their flasks
when the wounded men blew their brains out.




SHELTERING BEHIND WOMEN


Let us call to mind the innumerable instances when the Boches put up
their hands, or waved a white flag, and cried, "Kamerad," pretending to
surrender: thus drawing our unsuspecting men towards them and then
suddenly moving aside, to leave the field open to a party of riflemen or
a machine-gun hidden away behind them. These are the tricks of cowards,
which were constantly employed at the beginning of the war, and our men
(at the cost of many victims) learned at last to guard against them. But
they have done even more cowardly things than this. There was the German
officer who, to protect himself from danger while taking observations,
put three children round him. At Nery, twenty-five persons, women and
children, were compelled to walk at the side of a Boche column to
protect it from being enfiladed. Near Malines, six German soldiers who
were taking with them five young girls, on meeting a Belgian patrol,
placed the girls all round them to prevent the enemy from firing. At
Jodoigne they put a Cure in front of them and made him walk with his
arms folded, and they did the same at Hougaerde to another Cure who was
killed. A similar fate befell several civilians at Mons. At Senlis, our
men were firing to cover our retreat, and the Germans took some
inhabitants out of the houses and made them walk in the middle of the
streets while they themselves kept along by the walls. Many of these
unfortunate people were killed. "In numerous places," says the Belgian
Commission of Enquiry, "the Germans made civilians--men and women--walk
in front of them." In this way a German column passed through
Marchienne, pushing ahead of them a body of several hundred civilians.
They took the road for Montigny-le-Tilleul, where the first important
battle with the French forces took place. At Sempst, during the fighting
on the 25th August, men and women were placed in the front rank of the
firing line. At Erpe, on the 12th September, a German column, attacked
by a Belgian motor-machine-gun, took out of the houses twenty to
twenty-five men and young people (including a child of thirteen), and
made them walk in front in the middle of the road. The machine-gunners,
seeing civilians in front of them, ceased firing. At Alost, a German
company attacked the bridge. In front marched some thirty civilians with
a machine-gun hidden behind them. At Nimy, with the butt-ends of their
rifles, they drove in front of them 500 men, women and children towards
the English, who in consequence dared not fire; and in this way the 84th
and 85th Schleswig Regiments were able to continue their heroic march as
far as Maubeuge.

When their adversary cannot actually see the human shield that they are
using, they send a warning. On the 7th September, 1914, the Death's Head
Hussars shut up all the inhabitants of the village with them in the
Chateau of Saint Ouen-sur-Morin, and then, to avoid being shelled,
informed the English of their "dispositions." They fired on anyone who
tried to escape. At Mouzon, we saw a number of civilians being pushed in
front of the enemy with the butt-ends of rifles, and we stopped firing.
The wretched people moved suddenly to one side of the road, uncovering
the Germans, and then we fired. The Boches, furious, fired their first
volley not at us, but point blank at these non-combatants, who were
decimated.

The cowards chiefly used civilians as shields, but sometimes they also
made use of prisoners. At Keyem, they pushed one hundred Belgian
soldiers in front of them, some with their hands tied, and others with
their arms in the air. At Dixmude, they advanced under the shelter of
forty disarmed marines who had been taken prisoners. When they got in
front of our lines our marines shouted, "For God's sake fire, these are
Germans," and these heroes fell gloriously under the French bullets.
Such deeds are countless.

The Boches will deny them later on, but in 1914 they did not deny them,
but rather gloried in them as a "good idea." We can see this from the
letter of the Bavarian Lieutenant Eberlein, published on the 7th
October, 1914, by a leading Munich paper, "We had arrested three other
civilians when a 'good idea' struck me. We made them sit on chairs in
the middle of the street;--supplications from them, and blows with
butt-ends of rifles from us. At last they were seated outside in the
street with their hands convulsively clasped together. I felt sorry for
them, but the plan worked at once. As I learnt later, the regiment which
entered Saint-Die, further to the north of us, had precisely similar
experiences to our own. The civilians, whom they had put in the same
way in the middle of the street, were killed by French bullets. I saw
their dead bodies."[17]



FOOTNOTES:

[17] We have not, so far, come across any attempted justification, by
German authors, of these cowardly acts; but such we shall have without
fail. It is probable that the 93 "intellectuals" whose manifesto we
recall to memory a few pages further on are preparing a fresh "appeal to
the civilized world" with a view to explaining that the German
troops--the representatives and trustees of _Kultur_--are authorised by
God Himself to use _every means_ for the protection of their precious
lives.




MARTYRDON OF CIVILIAN PRISONERS


After having burnt our villages,[18] and shot the inhabitants by dozens
in some places, and by hundreds in others, they frequently deported all
or a part of the survivors to Germany. It is impossible at this moment
to establish the number of those deported, but they were sent off by
tens of thousands. These unfortunate people, men, women and children,
who had witnessed and survived fires and massacres, who had seen their
houses blazing and so many of those dear to them fall under the bullets
of the assassin, and who were forced in some places to dig graves for
their victims, and in others to hold a light for the executioners while
they were finishing off the wounded,--these poor wretches are despatched
to Germany.[19] What a journey, and what a place of residence!

Let us quote one story among a thousand. "Our escort was commanded by
two German officers. They were unapproachable. Anyone who tried to speak
to them was threatened with a revolver. In order that we might get a
drink, we were made to collect empty meat tins which served as our
drinking cups until we reached Cassel. We were abused and threatened
wherever we went. Sometimes they made signs to us that they were going
to shoot us, or hang us, or cut our heads off. They threw filth at our
heads and spat in our faces. We were not going to stoop before them; the
disgrace was not ours. It is they, not we, who are degraded. An officer
who was present when our march-past took place aimed blows with a
riding-whip at everyone within his reach. Until we arrived at the
railway, it was the same at every place where we met soldiers. We
reached Marche after a nine hours' journey. We were conducted to a room
marked as having accommodation for 100 soldiers, but they put 400 of us
in there. The people of the place sent us slices of bread and butter,
but it was the Germans who ate them. The latter gave us crusts of bread
to eat. We were abominably cramped; a few managed to stretch themselves
out, but the air was so poisonous that they could not remain in that
position. At Melreux station we changed guards. They drove us with the
butt-ends of their rifles to a spot where a train of cattle trucks was
standing in the yard, and we had to get in. The previous occupants had
been cattle, and the trucks had been cleaned in a very perfunctory
fashion. There was neither straw nor seats. Off we went. Every time we
stopped at a station the soldiers on guard there insulted us. It was
even worse when once we arrived in Germany. They opened the doors on the
platform side, and if we were on a line between two platforms, they
opened the doors on both sides so as to rejoice German hearts by the
sight of us. They treated us like wild beasts in a menagerie, and the
officers and soldiers set the example while the women and children were
not behindhand with abuse, and made threatening gestures. Our guards
were applauded as if they were doing something heroic. At one station we
saw a woman looking out of her window and shouting 'Hurrah!' The journey
took 35 hours, and during the whole of that time we were only given food
and drink once, and that thanks only to the Red Cross.[20] We arrived at
Wilhelmshoehe (Cassel) at 3 a.m. on the 28th August, and were made to
walk quickly through the streets. Our arrival had been notified, and in
spite of the early hour, a hostile crowd, abusive and threatening, lined
the route. The old and the lame could not keep up the pace at which we
marched. Their companions helped and dragged them along, constantly
beaten with butt-ends. At length, we arrived at the gaol, where they
shut us in the cells in lots of three or four at a time. M. Brichet
(Inspector of Forests) wanted to take his son (aged 14) with him, but
the gaoler said, 'Not the father and son together.' The prison
authorities showed their surprise at the sort of criminals who had been
entrusted to them, as the bulk of them were shopkeepers and artisans.

"Included in the number were the burgomaster of Dinant, a sheriff,
professors, barristers, and judges. An imbecile, a dozen children of
about 13, and some old men (one of whom was 81) made up the party. At
the end of a week, we were assembled in a yard and told that we were not
under sentence, but were detained in the interests of public safety."

In that prison the poor wretches were treated with much greater severity
than ordinary prisoners, for they were shut up in cells and had no air.
"By climbing on a chest one might open the window and see a little bit
of the landscape. The ordinary prisoners were allowed to do this but we
were forbidden." There was not a single chair. There was the skeleton of
an iron bed which was quite useless as there was no mattress. There were
four blankets, and two bundles of straw which very soon crumbled into
dust. "One day a week we had an hour in the courtyard, and there we
walked round and round in single file, being forbidden to walk two by
two. There was a guard with fixed bayonets always with us. The food was
absolutely inadequate[21] and we suffered continually from hunger. There
was a certain Croibien who had been slightly wounded at Dinant by a
bullet in his arm. His wound, neglected during the journey, had become
septic and in spite of all his sufferings, nothing was done for him. It
was not until after several days that it was decided to take him to the
infirmary where his arm was amputated; he died the next day. Although
his father and brothers were interned with him, they were not allowed to
see him again, alive or dead."

M. Tschoffen, public prosecutor at Dinant, the high official who writes
these lines, finishes his deposition with these words: "They had no
reason whatever for our arrest, and I do not see any reason that they
could have for setting us at liberty. One fine day they told us that we
were going to leave."

Here is another illustration: Before the 28th February, 1915, more than
10,000 persons, old men, women, and children, who had been deported from
France to Germany, had been repatriated by way of Switzerland. All those
who received them on their return were "alarmed at their ragged
condition and weakness," which was so great that the French Commission
of Enquiry received special instructions to question these victims. They
took the evidence of over 300 witnesses in 28 different localities. To
do justice to their case one ought to quote the whole report--children
brutally torn away from their mothers, poor wretches crowded for days
together in carriages so tightly packed that they had to stand up, cases
of madness occurring among these half-stifled crowds, howling with
hunger. But we must confine our quotations to a few items of "Kultur."
"While the men of Combres set out for Germany, the women and children
were shut up in the village church. They were kept there for a month,
and passed their nights seated in the pews. Dysentery and croup raged
among them. The women were allowed to carry excrement only just outside
the church into the churchyard."--"At least four of the prisoners were
massacred because they could not keep up with, the column, being
completely exhausted."--"Fortin, aged 65, and infirm, could not go any
further. They tied a rope to him, and two horsemen held the ends so that
he had to keep the pace of the horses. As he kept falling down at every
moment, they made him get up by poking him with their lances. The poor
wretch, covered with blood, prayed them to kill him."

"189 inhabitants of Sinceny, who were sent to Erfurt, arrived there
after a journey of 84 hours, during which each of them got nothing but a
single morsel of bread weighing less than four ounces. Another convoy
spent four days on the railway journey and were only fed once, and were
beaten with sticks and fists and with knife handles." The same
brutalities were experienced in the German cities through which they
passed, and very few of the civilian prisoners escaped being buffeted by
the infuriated crowds or being spat upon.

So much for the journey. Now for what happened to them after their
arrival! "The declarations made to us show clearly that the bulk of the
prisoners almost collapsed from hunger. After food had been distributed,
when anything was left, you saw some of them rush to the neighbourhood
of the kitchens; hustled and beaten by the sentries, these unfortunates
risked blows and abuse to try and pick up some additional morsels of
the sickening food. You saw men, dying of hunger, picking up herring
heads, and the grounds of the morning's decoction."

At Parchim, where 2,000 French civilians from 12 to 77 years of age were
interned, two starving prisoners who asked for the scraps left over were
beaten with the butt-ends of rifles to such an extent that they died of
their wounds. The young son of one of them who tried to protect his
father was tied to a stake for a week on end.

On oath, Dr. Page deposes: "Those who had no money almost died of
hunger. When a little soup was left, a crowd of unfortunates rushed to
get it, and the non-commissioned officers got rid of them at last by
letting the dogs loose on them." But what is the need of all these
details and of all this evidence? Look at the 10,000 who came back after
being repatriated and see what the bandits have done to them. Reader,
summon up your courage and peruse to the bitter end the conclusions of
the Official Commission of Enquiry. "It is impossible to conceal the
melancholy and indignation we felt on seeing the state of the
'hostages'[22] whom the Germans had returned to us after they had
kidnapped them in defiance of the rights of nations. During our enquiry
we never ceased hearing the perpetual coughs that rent them. We saw
numbers of young people whose cheerfulness had disappeared apparently
for ever, and whose pale and emaciated faces betrayed physical damage
probably beyond repair. In spite of ourselves we could not help thinking
that scientific Germany had applied her methodical ways to try and
spread tuberculosis in our country. Nor were we less profoundly moved to
thought by the sight of women mourning their desolated hearths and
missing or captive children, or by the moral impression left on the
faces and bearing of many prisoners by the hateful regime which was
intended to destroy, in those who were subjected to it, the feeling of
human dignity and self-respect."[23]



FOOTNOTES:

[18] _Prisoners_, as well as wounded, have very often been massacred on
the field of battle. As to the treatment that prisoners--French,
Belgian, Russian and English--have undergone in German camps, it is a
pitiful tale that we do not intend to begin here. Some day it must be
written. With the actual evidence before us, the lot of the German
prisoners in England, Russia and France must be compared with that of
ours in Germany. The most indifferent reader will feel his heart stirred
within him, and will hesitate to say whether we were "generous," or
whether we were "fools."

[19] We speak of those who have left--but what of those who have
remained in Belgium and France, under the German heel? The time has not
yet come for writing this piece of history, but we cannot refrain from
referring to the sufferings of these children of the North, boys and
girls, torn from their families, carried off like bands of slaves to
other invaded regions to be employed on forced labour. France has
apprised the neutral countries of these facts: Will they remain silent?

[20] Further on it will be seen that much worse happened on numerous
other journeys.

[21] "We got one pound of black sour bread per diem. In the morning we
had a tepid decoction intended for coffee; at mid-day a pint and a half
of thick soup, and at night rather less than a pint of thin soup. On
three occasions only did we get potatoes, but never once meat. Cabbage
soup was the usual thing and after a certain time it turned our
stomachs. Certain prisoners were employed in chopping up the cabbages to
make sauerkraut, and they had to keep the broken leaves, as these were
used up for our soup."

[22] Through an old habit, the Commission makes use of this word; they
are not "hostages," of course.

[23] It must also be noted that when the Commissioners making the
enquiry saw the repatriated people, they had had some time in which to
recover, first in Switzerland, and then in France. The arrival of these
pitiable drafts gave rise (even among those of the Swiss people who were
in principle the least hostile to Germany) to such a feeling of horror
for their executioners that the Kaiser took warning and thought it wiser
to suspend the repatriations for several months. For the welcome and the
kind care which our poor martyrs received at the hands of the Swiss, our
grateful thanks and salutations are due!




GERMAN EXCUSES: LIES AND CALUMNY


The Boches have taken up three positions in succession. In the first
place, in their speeches, in their writings and by commemorative
pictures and medals, _they have gloried in their misdeeds_, thus
declaring that Kultur is above morality (as stated by their writer,
Thomas Mann), and that the right of German might is above everything.
Then, in the second place, when they discovered that in the world
outside them there was something known as a "moral conscience," not
understood by them, but still to be reckoned with, _they cynically
denied the charges_. Finally, when they were driven from this second
trench, when simple negation became impossible, _they had perforce to
explain their crimes_.

Their commonest explanation is this, "Civilians fired on us."[24] The
French Commission of Enquiry came to the following conclusion on this
point: "This allegation is false, and those who put it forward have been
powerless to give it the appearance of truth, even though it has been
their custom to fire shots in the neighbourhood of dwellings, in order
to be able to affirm that they have been attacked by innocent
inhabitants, on whose ruin or massacre they had resolved."

Enquiries conducted by high magistrates have established the fact that
German officials are very frequently guilty of premeditated lies. It is
probable, all the same, that many German soldiers, on entering Belgium
or France, were obsessed by the idea of civilians firing on them. The
cry of a soldier trembling with fear, drunk, or thirsting for
pillage--"Man hat geschossen (they have fired)"--is enough for a
locality to be delivered up at once to the wildest fury. "When an
inhabitant has fired on a regiment," said a soldier at Louvain, "the
place belongs to the regiment." What a temptation for a Boche soldier to
fire a shot that will at once unloose pillage and massacre!

Some mistakes have _possibly_ been made which could have been avoided by
the least enquiry. Read this admission recorded in his diary by a Saxon
officer: "The lovely village of Gue-d'Hossus has been given over to the
flames, though innocent in my opinion. I hear that a cyclist fell off
his machine and that his fall caused his rifle to go off of itself. As a
consequence there was firing in his direction. Then, the male
inhabitants were simply hurled straight away into the flames. Such
horrors will not be repeated, we must hope ... There ought to be some
compulsion to verify suspicions of guilt in order to put a check on this
indiscriminate shooting of people."

The only shots fired at them inside, or in the neighbourhood of,
villages have been those of French or Belgian soldiers covering their
retreat. Sometimes this has been discovered, but too late, and they have
continued their crimes--in order to justify them.

Here is the statement of a neutral: "In one village they found corpses
of German soldiers with the fingers cut off, and instantly the officer
in command had the houses set on fire and the inhabitants shot.... In
the same district a German officer was billeted with a famous Flemish
poet; the officer behaved courteously, was treated with consideration,
and allowed himself to talk freely: his complaint was the misdeeds of
his soldiers. Near Haelen, he told his host, he had to have a soldier
shot on finding in his knapsack some fingers covered with rings: the
man, on being questioned, admitted that he had cut them off the bodies
of the German dead."[25]

In exceptional cases an enquiry is held; and in every such instance the
truth is discovered and massacre prevented.

At the end of August, Liebknecht,[26] a member of the Reichstag, set out
in his car for Louvain. He came to a village where there was
considerable excitement going on. The Germans had just found three of
their men lying dead on the road, and accused the peasants of being
responsible for the deed. Liebknecht examined them, and was not long in
obtaining proof that the Germans had been killed by Belgian riflemen. At
Huy there were shots in the night; two soldiers wounded; the populace
accused; the mayor arrested and condemned to death; but he knew that
there were no Allied troops in the neighbourhood, and also that his own
people had not fired a shot. "Shoot me, if you like," he said calmly,
"but not before extracting the bullets from the wounded." The officer,
less of a brute than some, gave his consent to this. The bullets in the
wounds were German bullets. But the Germans do not even require a
pretext to take action. Their first crime, to our knowledge, was on
August 4th. Some officers dashed up to Herve in a car, challenged two
civilians while crossing the bridge and, without giving them time to
answer, shot them down with revolvers.

In their private diaries they accuse one another, each throwing on his
neighbour the responsibility for crimes committed. A cavalryman writes:
"It is unfortunately true that the worst elements of our Army feel
themselves authorised to commit any sort of infamy. This charge applies
particularly to the A.S.C." A bombing officer: "_Rethel_, September 2nd.
Discipline becoming lax. Brandy. Looting. The blame lies with the
_infantry_." An infantry officer: "Discipline in our company
excellent--a contrast with the rest. The _Pioneers_ are not worth much.
As for the _Artillery_, they are a band of brigands." A final extract
seems to be the only one that gives the truth: "Brin ... _troops of all
arms_ are engaged in looting."

It has been possible sometimes to prove premeditation. On the 17th
August, a German officer was billeted with a Belgian magistrate. Their
talk turned on Dinant. "Dinant," said the officer, "is a condemned
town!" M. X ..., of Dinant, happening to be in another town, made the
acquaintance of a German officer, who said to him on August 20th, "You
come from Dinant? Don't go back. It's a bad place, and will be
destroyed." Troops on their march towards Andenne announced in villages
through which they passed that they were going to burn the town and
massacre the inhabitants. At Louvain, a German officer, treated
generously by a middle-class family, and appreciating their courtesy,
rushed to their house on the 25th at 11 o'clock in the morning,[27] and
earnestly pressed his hosts to leave without delay, refusing to give
them any explanation. The family, puzzled and perturbed by his appeal,
went off and so escaped.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the eyes of the moralist the worst of all their crimes will perhaps
be this, that the wretches tried to dishonour Belgium, after first
assassinating her. They have dared to say, write, and proclaim publicly,
and affirm to Neutrals, that Belgian women and girls had mutilated
German wounded soldiers, blinding them with scissors or with boiling
water. The reports of the Belgian Commission of Enquiry have been
replied to in a counter report[28] published as a German White Book.
This enquiry and these documents will live in history. In centuries to
come they will hang as a heavy weight on the Kaiser's memory and the
conscience of Germany. Listen to the pathetic conclusion of the Belgian
reply: "Before God and before man, the Belgian Government has no
hesitation in giving this as its opinion of the conduct of the German
Government towards the Belgian nation: 'He is twice guilty who violates
the rights of others and then attempts, with singular audacity, to
justify himself by imputing to his victim faults that were never
committed.'"[29]

It still remains to be explained how, by what means, by what deadly
influences, this German nation, consisting of men who, as individuals,
are not all brigands, has reached and been led to this state of
savagery? In the preparations for this _collective madness_ of a
people, what part has been played by its leaders of thought and its
politicians, by race and by education? This is a disturbing phenomenon
which students of mental disease[30] will study later, but on the
examination of which we cannot here embark. It is not for us to seek the
pathological cause for this moral decay--this decadence. We have only to
note its _effects_.



FOOTNOTES:

[24] Need it be noted here that even if in any locality an imprudent
civilian had fired a shot, it would still remain--in accordance with the
Hague Convention, International Law, and plain morality--a veritable
crime to massacre in a heap, haphazard, and without enquiry, so many
innocent souls?

[25] L.H. Grondijs, "Les Allemands en Belgique," p. cxix. (Paris,
Berger-Levrault, Publishers).

[26] Liebknecht was too honest and embarrassing a witness for Germany.
He has been thrown into prison. We salute him.

[27] The martyrdom of Dinant began on August 24th; that of Louvain on
the 25th August, at 5 p.m.

[28] It may be recalled that commissions of enquiry, at which _both_
sides should be represented, were offered by Belgian Socialists to
German Socialists, by Belgian Freemasons to German Freemasons, by
Belgian Bishops to German Bishops. Three proposals. Three refusals!

[29] France has suffered from similar calumny. We alluded above (note,
p. 37) to the declaration of a German army doctor that orders were given
to amputate, as a reprisal, "all wounded limbs." So _we_ are said to have
done that? A monstrous lie, which will be spurned indignantly by all who
know the honourable traditions of our ambulances and of our French
doctors. The _method of systematic lying_ has been shown to the life in
connection with the use of asphyxiating gas. The Boches made immense
preparations for the use of this gas. When their organization was
complete, they took care, before acting, to publish each day for a week
in their communiques, little notes announcing that the enemy were
"making wide use of this new method of warfare,"--a statement contrary
to fact, and known by them to be so, but one that was calculated to
mislead public opinion. When they considered that public opinion was
sufficiently "prepared," they launched their deadly gases and their
flaming liquids; and we needed a long time, needed also to overcome our
moral hesitation, to make sure of our defence and our reply. _Cynical
lying_ with the Germans is not only admitted, but _gloried in_. When it
was completely proved that, in order to start the war of 1870, Bismarck
had committed _forgery_. Professor Hans Delbrueck exclaimed, "Blessed is
the hand that forged the Ems despatch."

[30] Who, except the specialist in mental diseases, can deal with this
proclamation of the Kaiser to his Army of the East?: "Remember that you
are the chosen people! The Spirit of the Lord has descended upon me as
Emperor of the Germans! I am the instrument of the Most High. I am His
sword. Woe and death unto those who resist my will! Woe and death unto
those who believe not in my mission!"




THE GERMAN APPEAL


APPEAL TO THE CIVILISED WORLD

Now that we have reached the close of this book of horrors, let us
impanel the 93 Germans of light and learning, and confront them with the
words of their own manifesto:

"As representatives of German Science and Art, we the undersigned,
declare that:--

"It is not true that Germany provoked this War....

"It is not true that we have criminally violated the neutrality of
Belgium....

"It is not true that our soldiers have made any attack on the life or
property of a single Belgian citizen without being forced to it by sheer
necessity....

"It is not true that our troops brutally destroyed Louvain....

"It is not true that we have conducted warfare in defiance of
International Law. Our soldiers commit neither undisciplined acts nor
cruelties....

" ... In this struggle we shall continue to the end to act as a
civilised nation, to whom the heritage of a Goethe, a Beethoven or a
Kant is as sacred as our own hearth and home. We answer for that in our
own name and on our honour."[31]

And since irony is more powerful than abuse, let us set down here,
without a word of comment, a few German utterances:--

The Kaiser: "We are the salt of the earth. God created us to civilise
the world."

The Cardinal-Archbishop of Cologne: "It is with God that our soldiers
set out for this war that has been inflicted upon us, and in which we
are fighting for the sacred treasures of Christianity, and for its own
particular gift, Kultur."

Dryander, a Protestant Minister, and preacher to the Royal Court at
Berlin: "On our side we are fighting with a self-control, a conscience,
and a gentleness unexampled perhaps in the history of the world."

Professor Lasson: "Our characteristics are humanity, gentleness,
conscience--the Christian virtues. In a world of evil, we stand for
love, and God is with us."

And, finally, this older and memorable saying of their great philosopher
Hegel: "The destiny of the German race is to supply the sustaining
pillars of Christian teaching."


FOOTNOTES:

[31] Speaking of honour, it is as well to recall here the reply made by
a German officer to the schoolmaster at Chanteheux. The schoolmaster
quite simply pledged his word of honour that no inhabitant had fired:
"You French pig," the brute shouted, "don't talk of honour--you have
none."




APPEAL BY BELGIAN WORKMEN


800,000 copies of this pamphlet had already been sent out when the world
rang with the tragic appeal of the Belgian workmen to their brother
workers in other lands. This appeal ought to be fixed on the door of
every factory and workshop. Every worker, every citizen, should study
it. We regret that we cannot reprint it here in full, but the following
extracts will at least give an idea of this new crime committed by
Germany:--

    "Workers,--In the name of the international bonds that
    unite all workmen, the working classes of
    Belgium--threatened, without exception, with slavery,
    deportation, and forced labour for the enemy's
    gain--send to the working classes in other lands a
    supreme appeal.

    "Germany, as you know, attacked and terrorised Belgium
    in 1914 for having defended her right to neutrality and
    her faith and honour.

    "Germany has been martyrizing Belgium. She has from that
    moment onwards turned the land into a prison: the
    frontiers are armed against Belgians like a battle
    front.. All our constitutional liberties have been
    abolished. There is no longer safety anywhere; the
    life of our citizens is at the mercy of the
    policeman,--arbitrary, limitless, pitiless ... Belgian
    industrial idleness has been the creation of the
    Germans, maintained by them for their own profit.[32]
    To these 500,000 unemployed they have for the last month
    been saying: 'Either you will sign a contract to work
    for Germany, or you will be reduced to slavery.' In
    either case, it means exile, deportation, forced labour
    in the interests of the enemy, and against the interests
    of our country: formidable punishments, the cruellest
    ever invented by tyranny for the punishment of
    crimes--and what _are_ the crimes alleged?... On the
    western front, Belgian workmen--your brothers and
    ours--are being forced to dig trenches, to build
    aviation camps, to fortify the German lines, and when
    the victims, in spite of everything, are firm in their
    refusal to take part in work forbidden by International
    Law, they are starved and beaten into illness, wounded,
    and sometimes even _killed_.

    "In Germany, they are turned on to work in mines, and at
    lime-kilns, quite regardless of their age, profession,
    or trade. Youths of seventeen, old men of seventy, are
    deported in haphazard masses. _Is not this a revival of
    ancient Slavery with all its horrors_?... Do you know,
    brothers, what the Germans throw to their victims by way
    of pay? 30 pfennigs (3d.) a day!

    "Workers: _Never forget that the soldiers-who are_
    _acting as the torturers or our Belgian workmen are
    themselves German workers!_

    "In the depths of our distress, we count on you. It is
    for you to act! For ourselves, even if brute force
    succeeds for the moment in reducing our bodies to
    servitude, we shall never give our consent.

    "A final word: Whatever tortures we may undergo, we do
    not wish for Peace except with the independence of our
    country and the triumph of justice.

    "THE WORKMEN OF BELGIUM."


FOOTNOTES:

[32] By levying on Belgium a war contribution which already exceeds
L40,000,000--by transporting to Germany food, merchandise and various
products to the value of more than L200,000,000--by seizing and
despatching to their own country the greater portion of our raw
material, machines and accessories--by issuing threatening edicts to
prevent localities from using the unemployed on their own important
works of public utility.




CONCLUSION


What is our object?

Is it to incite our soldiers to commit, if chance arises, atrocities
like theirs? We repudiate with horror a thought such as that.
_Defensive_ reprisals (asphyxiating gas, liquid fire, etc.) are
sometimes indispensable. Reprisals for _revenge_ would be unworthy of
us. But--without speaking of personal punishments, demanded by outraged
conscience, and essential in order that the two indivisible principles
of right and of responsibility may still exist in the world--we must
make it absolutely impossible for the Wild Beast to break out again. And
how, when the settling time draws near, and, in spite of weariness, a
new effort is needed to realise conditions of peace with guarantees for
the future--how could the Allied Nations accept the sacrifices still
demanded of them, if they remained in ignorance?

It is not enough for these crimes to be known by Governments and by a
few hundred people with leisure and inclination to read collections of
great volumes. They must be known by everybody, by the entire people, by
the People, who--in our proud and free countries--control, support,
direct their Governments and are the sole masters of their own destiny.

Our peoples ought to know the crimes committed in the name of "Kultur,"
in order, at all costs, to take the precautions necessary to prevent for
ever their return. That is our first object. The second is this: to all
our martyrs we have a sacred duty--that of remembrance. There, where
they fell, we shall doubtless carve their names in stone or bronze. But
what of a time further away? When, after the long sufferings of this
war, freed humanity takes up again its works of peace, we shall see the
Germans reappear in every land, at every cross-road--men of commerce,
industry, finance, science, men of the people and of society--in every
place where those of all countries, all races and all colours meet and
rub elbows. And what is our attitude to be? Our answer is this: So long
as the nation in whose name and by whose hands these atrocities have
been committed has not herself solemnly cast from her the scoundrels who
dragged her into such decadence, we shall consider that it would betray
our martyrs for us even to rub shoulders with their executioners, and
that until the day arrives--if it ever does arrive--of a striking moral
repentance, to _forget_ would be to _condone_.

L. MIRMAN, Prefect of Meurthe-et-Moselle.

G. SIMON, G. KELLER, Mayor of Nancy. Mayor of Luneville.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Their Crimes, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THEIR CRIMES ***

***** This file should be named 10225.txt or 10225.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/2/10225/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Dave Morgan and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


