Project Gutenberg's The Glands Regulating Personality, by Louis Berman, M.D.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Glands Regulating Personality

Author: Louis Berman, M.D.

Release Date: November 25, 2003 [EBook #10266]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GLANDS REGULATING PERSONALITY ***




Produced by Kevin Handy, Dave Maddock, Josephine Paolucci and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





THE GLANDS REGULATING PERSONALITY

A STUDY OF THE GLANDS OF INTERNAL SECRETION IN RELATION TO THE TYPES
OF HUMAN NATURE

BY LOUIS BERMAN, M.D.

ASSOCIATE IN BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY

1922


The passage from the miracles of nature to those of art is easy.

--Francis Bacon, _Novum Organum_, 1620.




CONTENTS


  INTRODUCTION: ATTITUDES TOWARD HUMAN NATURE
  I.    HOW THE GLANDS OF INTERNAL SECRETION WERE DISCOVERED
  II.   THE GLANDS: THYROID AND PITUITARY
  III.  THE ADRENAL GLANDS, GONADS, AND THYMUS
  IV.   THE GLANDS AS AN INTERLOCKING DIRECTORATE
  V.    HOW THE GLANDS INFLUENCE THE NORMAL BODY
  VI.   THE MECHANICS OF THE MASCULINE AND FEMININE
  VII.  THE RHYTHMS OF SEX
  VIII. HOW THE GLANDS INFLUENCE THE MIND
  IX.   THE BACKGROUNDS OF PERSONALITY
  X.    THE TYPES OF PERSONALITY
  XI.   SOME HISTORIC PERSONAGES
  XII.  APPLICATIONS AND POSSIBILITIES
  XIII. THE EFFECT UPON HUMAN EVOLUTION




THE GLANDS REGULATING PERSONALITY




INTRODUCTION

ATTITUDES TOWARD HUMAN NATURE


THE CASE AGAINST HUMAN NATURE

Man, know thyself, said the old Greek philosopher. Man perforce has
taken that advice to heart. His life-long interest is his own species.
In the cradle he begins to collect observations on the nature of
the queer beings about him. As he grows, the research continues,
amplifies, broadens. Wisdom he measures by the devastating accuracy
of the data he accumulates. When he declares he knows human nature,
consciously cynical maturity speaks. Doctor of human nature--every
man feels himself entitled to that degree from the university
of disillusioning experience. In defense of his claim, only the
limitations of his articulate faculty will curb the vehemence of his
indictment of his fellows.

For all history provides the material, literature the critique,
biology the inexorable logic of the case against human nature. The
historical record is a spectacle of man destroying man, a collection
of chapters on man's increasing cruelty to man. Limitations of time
and space have been shortened and eliminated. Tools of production have
been multiplied and complicated. The sources of energy and power have
been systematically attacked and trapped. But the nature of man has
remained so unchanged that clap trap about progress is easy target for
the barrage of every cheap pamphleteer.

The naturalist probes into codes of conduct, systems of morality,
structures of societies, variations in the scales of value that
individuals, races and nations have subjected themselves to as custom,
law and religion. Again and again the portrait is presented of
man preying upon man, of cunning a parasite upon stupidity and of
predatory strength enslaving the weakling intellect. Until finally are
evoked reactions and consequences that overtake in catastrophe and
cataclysm preyer and preyed upon alike.

Human nature is but part of the magnificent tree of beast nature. Man
is linked by every tie of blood and bone and cell memories with his
brethren of the sea, the jungle, the forest and the fields. The beast
is a seeker of freedom, but a seeker for his own ego alone, and the
satisfaction of his own instincts only. Thus he struggles to a sort of
freedom which makes him the Ishmael of the Universe, everyone's hand
against him, as his own hand is against everyone. The human animal has
achieved no advance beyond the necessities of his ancestors, nor freed
himself from his bondage to their instincts and automatic reflexes.
And so the sociologist, the analyst of human associations, turns out
to be simply the historian and accountant of slaveries.

Yet the history of mankind is, too, a long research into the nature
of the machinery of freedom. All recorded history, indeed, is but
the documentation of that research. Viewed thus, customs, laws,
institutions, sciences, arts, codes of morality and honor, systems
of life, become inventions, come upon, tried out, standardized,
established until scrapped in everlasting search for more and more
perfect means of freeing body and soul from their congenital thralldom
to a host of innumerable masters. Indeed, the history of all life,
vegetable and animal, of bacillus, elephant, orchid, gorilla, as well
as of man is the history of a searching for freedom.

Freedom! What to a living creature is freedom? How completely has it
dominated the life history of every creature that ever crawled upon
the earth? Trace our cellular pedigree, descend our family tree to its
rootlets, our amebic ancestors, and the craving for more freedom is
manifest in the soul of even the lowest, buried in darkness and slime.
When the first clever bit of colloidal ooze, protoplasm as the ameba,
protruded a bit of itself as a pseudopod, it achieved a new freedom.
For, accidentally or deliberately, it created for itself a new
power--the ability to go directly for food in its environment, instead
of waiting, patiently, passively, as the plant does, for food to just
happen along. Therewith developed in place of the previous quietist
pacifist, quaker attitude toward its surroundings, a new religion, a
new tone: aggressive, predatory, careerist.

That adventure was a great step forward for the ameba--a miracle that
freed it forever from the danger of death by starvation. But latent
in that move were all the terrible possibilities of the tiger, the
alligator, the wolf and all the varieties of predaceous beast and
plant, parasitism and slavery. The device that enabled the ameba to
change its position in space of its own will, and so increased its
freedom immeasureably, meant the generation of infinite evil, pain,
suffering and degradation for billions in the womb of time.

THE BREEDING OF INFERIORITY

Human history, being a continuation of vertebrate history, is full of
similar instances. The invention of the stock company, for example,
furnished a certain relative freedom to hundreds, a certain amount of
leisure to think and play, and independence to travel and record, and
immunity from a daily routine and drudgery. In turn, it bore fruit in
miseries and horrors multiplied for millions, like those of the child
lacemakers of Mid-Victorian England, who were dragged from their beds
at two or three o'clock in the morning to work until ten or eleven at
night in the services of a stock company.

A corporation is said to have no soul. The struggle for freedom of
every living thing has no conscience. Throughout the living world,
from ameba to man, parasitism and slavery together with their
by-products, physical and spiritual degeneracy, appear as the after
effects of the more vital individual's efforts to remain alive and
free. The origins of slavery may be seen in the parasitisms of the
infectious diseases which kill man. The change from parasitism to
slavery was an inevitable step of creative intelligence. In the
transition evolution made one of those breaks which it indulges in
periodically as its mode of progress.

The natural effect of slavery has been a selection of two sorts of
individuals along the lines of the survival of the adapted. It has
tended to perpetuate in the breed the qualities of the strong which
would make them stronger, and certain qualities in the weak which
would increase their weakness. For parasitism and likewise slavery
infallibly entail the degradation of certain structures and an
overgrowth of others by the law of use and disuse. The type of organ
which would function normally, were not its possessor parasitic in
that function, invariably degenerates or disappears. Parasitic insects
lose their wings. An entire anatomical system may even be lost. So the
tapeworm, which feeds upon the digested food present in the intestines
of its host, has no alimentary canal of its own because it needs none.
On the other hand, the organs of attack and combat grow by a constant
use into the most remarkable of efficient weapons.

In human society the process continues. Out of the tapeworm nature,
the tiger nature, the wolf nature, the simian nature, human nature
evolves. Repeated episodes of subjugation and suppression mixed with
countless incidents of predaceous cupidity and rapacity have made
Man what he is today. Indeed, by a sort of instinct, society has
constructed its institutions upon empirical observations and
assumptions agreeing with this principle. The deductions concerning
human nature and human traits that an interplanetary visitor would
draw from a study of our common law would be at least slightly
humiliating to our incorrigible pride. Law courts, codes of civil
contract and criminal procedure, the systems of subordination in
armies and navies, castes and classes, men and women, employers and
employees, teachers and pupils, parents and children, are based upon
the fundamental, the conservative axiom that man, especially the
common plain man (Lincoln's phrase), is a being incurably lazy,
stupid, dishonest, muddled, cowardly, greedy, restless, obsessed with
a low cunning and a selfish callousness and insensibility to the
sufferings of his fellow creatures, animal and human.

Why is it that Man, the noblest creature of creation, made in the
image of God, capable of the flights of attainment that distinguish a
Christ, a Caesar, a Plato, a Shakespeare, a Shelley, a Newton, is so
described, not alone by hopeless pessimists like Koheleth, Swift, and
Mark Twain, but by the common law, the common opinion, the common
assumptions of mankind? Because the development of slavery and
parasitism in human society, the subjection of the weak to the strong,
the dull and base to the clever and headstrong, set up a vicious
cycle: the liberation of more energy for the making of more and
more slaves and the propagation of slaves and slave qualities in a
geometrically increasing proportion.

This might be called the _Malthusian law of slavery_. For the
qualities that I have named as man's own characterization of himself
are the qualities of the slave and the slave-soul. Nietzche took great
pains to repeat ad nauseam that these qualities were the qualities of
the slave. But by burdening himself with the hypothesis, evolved from
his inner consciousness, that the slaves imposed from below a morality
of weakness upon their masters, he missed the really obvious process
by which slaves beget more slaves, slavery begets more slavery, and
the slave-soul becomes universal. That process is the simple action
of physical and spiritual reproduction of the slaves. The subnormal
begets the subnormal, the inferior begets the inferior.

Slavery appeared as an invention of the would-be-free. It was a
brilliant flash of genius of a seeker after freedom. However, it
became a boomerang. By multiplication and hereditary transmission, the
inferiority and the number of the slaves created a new overwhelming
problem for the superior few, the upper crust of the free. At last the
problem grew into the problem of problems, the problem of government,
that threatened all freedom, as an epidemic disease threatens even
the most healthy. Government, at first organized for conquest and
subjugation, had to change its character until it became more and more
to consist of experiments in a new social machinery that would free
somebody of the incubus. So through the centuries, one technique of
liberty after another was tested in the laboratory of experience.

But always the attempts are so muddled, because the problem is not
grasped. Muddledom is the essence of the slave-soul. And the
essence infiltrates and poisons the whole atmosphere in which the
would-be-free think and act. Kings' heads are chopped off, a whole
class is guillotined, reform movements come and go, the masters fight
every inch of their retreat, and pile stratagem upon stratagem, device
upon device, to retain their spoils.

The democratic formula of freedom for all comes to the fore. So at
last universal suffrage is introduced as the panacea. Freedom seems
within grasp. Now it looks as if a method and an objective have been
hit upon, that will lead both the free and the enslaved out of their
mutual bondage, and release the handcuffs which have bound them
together. All the trial and error tests to which history had subjected
institutions appeared to culminate in the formula that would
automatically yield Liberty. The French wanted a little more and added
Equality and Fraternity. The Americans put it quite definitely as the
formula that would assist the Pursuit of Life, Liberty, and Happiness.
That formula is: the _democracy of the normals_.

To be sure, a civilization might be organized for the breeding and the
glorification of the supernormals. Such a civilization may yet have to
be tried. But as the supernormals, as we know them today, are merely
biologic sports, in a sense, simple accidents, no one can tell whether
they will turn out true shots or just flashes in the pan. So it looks
the better course to stick to the plan of nature, which seems to be
the raising of the level of the normals, and the gradual increase of
their faculties and powers.

WHAT THE STATESMAN IS UP AGAINST

Under the terms of the democratic formula the problems of the
statesman seem to become enormously simplified. That is, if one
assumes that he has worked out a perfectly clear idea of what
a democracy means and what the normal means. Assuming these
unassumables, his problem simplifies into the definite object of
producing and developing the greatest possible number of normals--or
if you will, the greatest happiness of the greatest number of normal
lives.

Furthermore you then begin to have the entirely novel possibility in
the world: some sort of collective effort for a collective purpose,
beyond the personal greeds and fears, factions and hatreds. So the
state, instead of fulfilling its old function of serving as the tool
of certain powerful individuals, latterly known as the Big Men, might
be transformed into an instrument toward freedom. With the ideal of a
democracy of the normals ever before him, the statesman could go on
to construct and modify his social machinery. That would entail the
satisfaction not alone of the animal needs, but also the highest
aspirations and therefore the provision of the finest conditions of
life for the normal: those most favorable, stimulative, and assistant
to creative activity. For what else is the content of the idea of
freedom?

Without committing the intellectual sin which William James named
Vicious Abstractionism, the goal of the clearest progressive and
liberal thought and forces of the twentieth century might be summed
up as this freedom in a democracy of normals. A good formula which
coincides with the technique of nature in the evolution of species.
A fair fight, a free-for-all who are unhandicapped, is the motto
of natural selection. Where civilization shakes hands with natural
instinct, what but the happiest of results can be expected?

Unfortunately, the formula in human society possesses an Achilles'
heel. Again it is slavery. Where slavery has become bred into the
bone, the standard of the normal becomes reduced so tremendously that
the average of normals, the majority, are hopelessly inferior. In
effect, they are really subnormal. So the ideal of our ideal statesman
is bound to be defeated because of the inadequacy of his material.

No matter how interested in his main business: the promotion of
freedom for creative activities in a democracy of the normals, he is
bound to be beaten by the majority consisting of subnormals. There is
nothing left for him but to cater to the minority of careerists, the
one-eighth of the electorate representing superior intelligence. The
intelligence tests employed in the War showed that and also that
forty-five per cent of the examined, or about one half the total
population, had a mental capacity, or natural ability that would never
develop beyond the stage normal to a twelve-year-old child. They are
doomed to remain forever subnormal.

THE CAREERISTS AS THE ABNORMALS

The careerists are those who practice the careerist religion. The
careerist religion is the religion par excellence of modernity.
Someone once said, with the perfect candor of the North American, that
America is the land of opportunity. He meant that America is the land
of the Careerist or, as it has also been put, it is the land of the
man on the make. The careerist, or the man on the make, is of a
thousand genera and species, varieties and subvarieties, with
transition links between. One finds him at every level of society.

Excepting a negligible minority, the feminine career of today (as of
the last ten thousand years of the race's history) consists in the
acquisition of a husband. After that she is so identified with him
that her own life, as something distinct, individual and unique,
becomes blurred and then completely erased. The feminine careerist,
the careeristina, if you will, is a definite type. Consider the
unimportance of a collective purpose to the woman whose career is the
mate, and then the mate's career. All the kinks and twists of the
feminine mind, resulting from the necessities of that fundamental
primary problem, would form a multitudinous and interesting list. The
most successful careeristinas are the absolutely unconscious ones
because they are not passively besieged nor actively bombarded by any
doubts as to what they want. They play their game exceedingly well as
do not the quasi-rebels and faint-hearted revoltees that form no small
percentage of the Newest Women. For a number of women the feminist
movement has been an attempt to break away from the traditions of
the wife-careerist, and to strike a line of auto-careerism. Can
the careeristina instinct, the fruit of the practice of so many
generations, be uprooted by the good intentions of a mere statesman?

But the masculine careerist is a marvelous creature. He is a biologic
sport, an abnormal variation. New York is the place to watch and
study him in his thousands and tens of thousands. You can observe
him climbing, climbing, climbing, precisely as an ant climbs a tree.
Nothing can really discourage or sway him from his chosen path. If he
is not getting on financially, he is getting on socially, or he is
using the one method of advance to help him with the other. How the
line of least resistance and greatest advantage is determined for and
taken by him is a fascinating process.

The careerist instinct, the inherited flair for a career, must not be
confounded with the instincts of self-preservation, self-expansion
or self-expression, because they are utterly different. Indeed, the
careerist instinct is often their direct antagonist, clashing with and
dominating them. The making of the career involves the distortion, the
mutilation, degradation, degeneration or even the complete suppression
of the true personality. But it is all instinctive. To consider the
life of the careerist as an expression of instinct will explain too
the success of so many who have no inner awareness of what they want.
These go straight for the career, looking neither to the right nor
to the left, without doubt or hesitation, just as they go for the
respiration business as soon as they are born.

Then there is the Super-Careerist. Ordinarily, the careerist is rather
obvious, easily recognizable, with diaphanous motives and conduct. But
there is another and rarer bird, the careerist of talent, even the
careerist of genius, whom it is not so easy to see through. Clever and
brainy, he may be a good all around trifler, or his specific gift for
some line of achievement may make him more effective. There is nothing
he may not call himself: conservative, liberal, progressive, or
radical. Often he is an agnostic about social and political affairs
and problems, which passes for the indecision of the open mind, and is
quite handy to render him all things to all men. But perpetually, the
underlying careerist instinct drives him to use all men and women, all
ideas and movements and forces he comes in contact with for his own
personal advancement, just as the slave making instinct guides the red
ant in all its activities to procure its captives. Ideas do not make a
hero out of him, but he makes heroes of ideas, because they serve him
in his ascent.

Because he is the most subtle, the most complex and the most deceptive
type of careerist, he is the most dangerous to the adventure and
speculation in intellect which mankind is. To say that he is a wolf in
sheepskin is to be unjust to him, since he is most successful when he
is most unaware of his own charlatanry. He is most sincere when he
is most insincere, and most truthful when he lies best. A little
self-consciousness of hypocrisy is a corrupting thing, much of it
completely incompatible with the most successful careerism. Tartuffe
is always applauded by the world when he plays Hamlet, if he really
believes in himself as Hamlet. And, as all he has to do, if he is at
all talented, is to look into his glass and see himself in the part,
he carries it off very well.

WHY THE STATESMAN FAILS

Slaves and careerists, subnormals and abnormals, are the important
elements of the constituency of every modern statesman. The financial
and social careerists as business men, professionals, artists,
publicists, presidents of countries, politicians, philosophers
dominate his outlook, his plans, his horizon. The slaves, the
inferiors, the subnormals exist merely to be exploited by them. No
one questions the causes of the multiplicity of them. No one asks why
there are so many little lives. For a fundamentally minded statesman
the control of the production of the careerist, why he is produced,
and how he may be prevented, becomes the primary problem of his art.

Well, you say, what are you going to do about it? That is human
nature. The Evils of Human Nature! There is the perpetual answer to be
repeated by our clever editors unto Eternity. You cannot get away from
human nature. It is human nature to be a careerist. It is human nature
to put the immediate triumphs of the self and its pleasures above
the more indirect, the more remote and distant benefits of a great,
wonderful, free community. We are all careerists. In so far as
democracy has succeeded as a form, it has persisted because there was
in it for the common man the promise of his getting more out of life
that way than any other way. For himself. And the devil take the
others. The myopia of such crude selfishness continues to determine
his politics to this very day. And so he proceeds to vote for favors
bestowed and patronage past or potential. That is, when he does not
throw his ballot away altogether into the fire of family habit,
sectional inertia, or race prejudice.

Again you say, that is human nature. It is human nature for us to
be narrow, to be confined within the circle of personal thought and
desire, without imagination for the beyond. So the calf is limited in
its wanderings to the radius of the rope by which it is tethered. The
servile soul will always be submissive and docile, greedy and stupid.
What else could you expect from the descendant of the solitary beast
who once lived for thousands of years in caves? Without servility of
the soul, without chains for the spirit of the wild animal against
the world, men could never have been driven to live together for
twenty-four hours in communities.

The conception of human quality out of which all social machinery has
been devised and built is a conception of slave quality and careerist
quality. As we are all caught in the net, as the unconscious memories
of our slave and careerist ancestors flow in our blood and echo in our
cells, all we can do is accept it and work with it. Human nature is an
incurable disease. Like Jehovah's definition of Himself, it is, it has
been, and ever will be. Everywhere the same, always the same, forever
the same, there is no way out.

POOR HUMAN NATURE

All of these strictures upon poor human nature are exceedingly
delightful to our careerists. Every unpleasant social fact, every
outrage to our best instincts, every exhibition of incapacity,
incompetency, inefficiency, indifference, every example of
super-criminal negligence is pardoned as an effect of that universal
sin, human nature. Take the case of the statesman and the diplomats
who failed to prevent the Great War, though they saw it coming for
years, and who should therefore all, Entente as well as German,
American as well as Japanese, be indicted for their criminal
negligence, precisely as a physician would be for failure to report
and stop the spread of an epidemic disease. All these crimes of
omission and commission are excused on the plea that it was all due to
human nature, and that what can be blamed on human nature in general
can be blamed on no one in particular.

Poor human nature! Flagellated on every hand, what are we to do with
it? Why is the careerist so numerous and ubiquitous? Why does the
slave-soul infiltrate like a cancer the soul of society with its black
fluid? Is freedom, the divine idea, nothing but the toy of an orator
to the majority, a distant star in the night to a helpless minority?
Yet the instinct to freedom, the appetite for freedom, flickers
through the centuries as a fitful flame, though snuffed out by every
gust of class passion, every wind of mob resentment, and every storm
of national jealousy. Though the inferior subnormals multiply into
great sheep majorities, and the careerists, like Napoleon, morbid
variants, involve millions in their disease, the idea of freedom
persists obstinately. Have we any reason for regarding it as other
than an illusion?

If freedom is an illusion, we must admit the doom of democracy. And no
Wagnerian crashes of orchestration mitigate the tragedy of the scene
as our eyes are opened to the twilight of our new gods. For what other
social methods are there left to us? In the struggle against nature's
barriers upon human aspiration for perfect satisfactions, it looks as
though every other method has failed us.

In the past, refined aristocracies and benevolent despotisms have
failed as miserably as our democracies are now failing and as we are
sure crude anarchism and communism would. Their inferiority has thrown
them on the scrap heap. As for our present ways of government as a
permanent method, the storage of power in the hands of the Clever Few.
War burns in the lesson of how little the careerist regards either
the subnormal or supernormal. He condemns them all sooner or later to
wholesale slavery and carnage.

Is man then never to be the architect of his own destiny? Are we to
surrender our faith in the future of our kind to the spectacle of a
miserable species sentenced by its own nature to self-destruction? We
thought to rise upon the wings of knowledge and beauty, lured by
the mysteries of color and the magic of design and the might of the
intellect and its words, that have transfigured life into the greatest
adventure ever attempted in time and space. But we find ourselves
merely another experiment, intricate and rather long drawn out, to be
sure, with marvelous pyrotechnics, magnificent effects here and there,
but bound to eliminate itself in the end, to make stuff for the
museums of the real conqueror of the stars yet to come. We are
condemned to be classed with the dodo and the mammoth by the coming
discoverer of an escape from the slave and careerist. And so let
us resign ourselves to fate. Let us eat of the humble bread of the
stoic's consolation in the face of the mocking laughter of the gods,
let us admit that Mind in Man has unconsciously but irretrievably
willed its own self-annihilation. What remains for us except to beat
our breasts and proclaim: So be it, O Lord, so be it?

MAN AS A TRANSIENT

Yet, true as it is that the human animal has achieved no advance
beyond the necessities of his ancestors, nor freed himself from his
bondage to their instincts and automatic reflexes, is there no way out
anywhere? Is there perhaps some ground for hope and consolation in the
thought that we, of the twentieth century, no longer see ourselves,
Man, as something final and fixed? Darwin changed Fate from a static
sphinx into a chameleon flux. Just as certainly as man has arisen from
something whose bones alone remain as reminders of his existence, we
are persuaded man himself is to be the ancestor of another creature,
differing as much from him as he from the Chimpanzi, and who, if he
will not supplant and wipe him out, will probably segregate him and
allow him to play out his existence in cage cities.

The vision of this After-man or From-man is really about as helpful to
us as the water of the oasis mirage is to the lost dying of thirst
in the desert. The outcries of the wretched and miserable, the
gray-and-dreary lived din an unmanageable tinnitus in our ears. Like
God, it may be but a large, vague idea toward which we grope to
snuggle up against. It seems implicit in the doctrines of evolution.
But how do we know that in man the spiral of life has not reached its
apex, and that now, even now, the vortices of its descent are not
beginning? How do we know that the From-man is to be a Superman and
not a Subman? How can we dare to hope that the slave-beast-brute is to
give birth to an heir, fine and free and superior?

We do not know and we have every indication and induction for the most
oppositely contrary conclusions. Life has blundered supremely, in,
while making brains its darling, forgetting or helplessly surrendering
to the egoisms of alimentation. So it has spawned a conflict between
its organs, and a consequent impasse in which the lower centres drive
the higher pitilessly into devising means and instruments for the
suicide of the whole.

As War shows plainly to the most stupidly gross imagination, the germs
of our own self-destruction as a species saturate our blood. The
probability looms with almost the certainty of a syllogistic
deduction, that such will be the outcome to our hundreds of thousands
of years of pain upon earth. In the face of that, speculations upon
a comet or gaseous emanations hitting the planet, or the sun growing
cold, become babyish fancies. How clearly the possibility is pointed
in the discussions about the use in the next War of bacterial bombs
containing the bacilli of cholera, plague, dysentery and many others!
What influenza did in destroying millions, they can repeat a thousand
times and ten thousand times. What else the laboratories will bring
forth, of which no man dreams, in the way of destructive agents acting
at long distance, upon huge masses and over any extent of territory,
is presaged in that single example. But besides thus willing, by an
inner necessity, its own annihilation, Life, in the very structure
and machinery of its being, seems caught into the entanglements of an
inescapable net, an eternity-long bondage it can never rip, to flee
and remake itself into the immortal image that is its God.

And so there go by the board the last alleviations of those unbeatable
optimists who would soothe their aching souls with at least the drop
of comfort: that if man is a mortal species, with not the slightest
prospect of a continuing immortality, not to mention a glorious future
and destiny, there are others. Man, after all, may be simply a bad
habit Life will succeed in shaking off. No philosophy or religion can
afford to be anthropocentric merely. It must include all life and all
living things to which we are blood-related. There are other species
or latent species to take up the torch that burned poor homo sapiens
and ascend the heights. The ant and bee may yet mutate along certain
lines that would make them the masters of the universe.

But no matter what species or variety gets the upper hand in the
struggle for survival and power, the implications of the qualities
necessary to victory in conflicts of individual separate pieces of
protoplasm will be there. Besides, life is always begotten of life.
That is why synthetic protoplasm is nothing but a phrase. It is
impossible to conceive of something alive, possessed of the property
of remembering, that is not possessed of a store of past experiences.
You can no more think of getting rid of these unconscious memories of
protoplasm than you can think of getting rid of the wetness of water.
They are imbedded in the most intimate chemistry of the primeval ameba
as well as in our most complex tissues.

The memories of the cold lone fish and the hot predatory carnivor who
were our begetters, may haunt us to the end of time. The bee and the
ant, too, have woven inextricably into the woof of their cells the
instincts that sooner or later would send their brain ganglia,
even when evolved to the pitch of perfection, to elaborating the
self-and-species murdering inventions and discoveries that are
apparently destined to slay us. The powers of unconscious memory and
unlearnable technique of reaction to experience, once grooved, thus
prove the great gift and the eternal curse of protoplasm. Making it
possible for it to be and become what it is and has, they have
also made it forever impossible for it to be or become its own
contradiction.

Add to this unsloughable remembrance of the past, for better, for
worse, the secretive consciousness of its present needs every living
thing, as against every other living thing, is obsessed with. As a
peregrinating, finite, spatially limited being, it is separated from
all other living beings by inorganic, dead masses, and yet driven to
contact with them by a fundamental impulse to assimilate them into
itself, and make them part of itself. That assimilatory urge is
present in every activity from coarse ingestion as food to the moral
metabolism of the hermit-saint who would influence others to do as he.

FATE AND ANTI-FATE

In effect the history of Life resembles the life history of the
smallest things we know of, the electrons, and the largest, the great
suns and stars of space. The electron begins, perhaps, as a swirl in
the primeval ether, joins other electrons, forms colonies, cities,
empires, elements of an increasing complexity, through stages of a
relative stability, like lead or gold. Until it reaches the stage of
integration which wills its own disintegration, that we have been
taught to look upon with proper awe and reverence as radium. And we
are told that nebulae wander until they collide and give birth to
stars, stars wander and collide and give birth to nebulae. Life begins
as a quivering colloid, goes on painfully to build a brain, which
automatically refines itself to the point of discovering and using
the most efficient methods of destroying others, and by a boomerang
effect, itself. Fate!

The conception of Fate was a Greek idea. The classic formula for
tragedy, the struggle of Man with the sequence of cause and effect
within him and without, that is so utterly beyond his grasp and ken,
or power to modify, originated with them. But they must also be given
the credit for having conceived an idea and started a process which,
at first slowly and gropingly, now slipping and falling, torn and
bleeding among the thorns of the dark forest of human motives,
presently goes on, with a firmer, more practiced, more confident step,
to emerge into the light as the deliberate Conqueror of Fate. That
idea-process, this Anti-Fate is Science.

Science began with the adventures of free-thinking speculators, who
revolted against religious cosmogonies and superstitions. Sceptics
concerning the knowledge that was the accepted monopoly of the
priesthood must have existed in the oldest civilization we know
anything of, more than twenty-five thousand years ago, the
Aurignacians. But it was to the Greeks that we owe that amalgamation
of curiosity delivered of fear, that merger of systematic research
and critical thinking untrammelled by social inhibitions which is the
essence of modern science. Out of them has come the great Tree of
Knowledge of our time, which is, too, the only Ygdrasil of Life,
undying because it lives upon successive generations of human brain
cells.

Science, as the pursuit of the real, began with very small things by
men with very small intentions. Inventories, collections of isolated
data, something permanent for the mind out of the flux of transient
sensations, little tracks and foot paths in the jungle of phenomena,
were their goal. With no sense of themselves as the mightiest of
master-builders, cultivating humility toward their material at any
rate, the little men ploughed their little fields, striking the oil
of a great generalization or classification or explanation with no
fanfare of trumpets.

First as freaks and cranks, then as scholars and pedants, then
protected and perhaps stimulated under the competitive royal patronage
as societies and academies, they prepared for the harvest. Comparing
them to pioneer farmers sowing an undeveloped territory is really
totally inadequate and inaccurate. For the most part, they were like
coral makers, laboriously constructing, with no vision, certainly no
sustained vision, of the whole. To the practical men of affairs, the
shopkeepers and traders, the land-owners and ship-owners, the soldiers
and sailors, the statesmen and politicians, the people who specialized
in maneuvering human beings and materials, they were, for this
futile devotion to abstract knowledge, marked ridiculous and absurd
weaklings, mollycoddles, babies, not to be trusted with the demands
and dangers of public life.

But it so happened remarkably late in history that with the discovery
of the possibilities of coal there was a great boom in the demand for
industrial machinery. At the same time there were thrown up the most
marvelous advances in physics and chemistry. Recurring War became not
the clashes of mercenary armies, but the catapulting of whole nations
at each other. New destructive devices out of the laboratories were
raised into the commandants of the course of history. Then science
acquired prestige.

Science as King, science as power, looms as the great new figure, the
overshadowing novel factor, in practical statesmanship. Unlike the
factor X in the traditional equation, it is the known factor par
excellence, the factor by which the value of all the other factors
of human life will be ascertained and solved. As knowledge of the
conditions determining all life, it stands as the courageous David of
the race against the Goliath territory of the uncontrollable and the
inevitable, even the unknowable. Human history resolves itself into
the drama: Science contra Fate. Quite a change from the vaudeville
show of the restless personal ambitions of vindictive fools and greedy
scoundrels, the mischief and adventures of half-witted geniuses and
licensed rogues that have been figures of the prologue.

The future of science has become the future of the race. So much of
an inkling of the truth is beginning to be appreciated. That is
ordinarily taken to mean that the process by which the Wessex man
became the New York and London man, the accumulation of accidental
discoveries and inspired inventions of scattered individuals, will go
on, providing a succession of marvels and miracles for the careerist
and his retinue. Not only is he to be entertained and served by them,
but any commercial value will also be exploited by him. The natural
wonders of the laboratories have taken the place of the supernatural
absurdities of the medieval mind as a fillip for the imagination of
the man in the street. Even spiritualism apes the technique of the
physicist. The credulity of reporters alone concerning developments
in surgery, for example, is incredible. There is enough rot published
daily for a brief to be made out against the idolatry of science.

THE RELIGION OF SCIENCE

Science also as a religion, as a faith to bind men together, as a
substitute for the moribund old mythologies and theologies which kept
them sundered, is commencing to be talked of in a more serious tone.
The wonder-maker may have forced upon him, may welcome, the honors
of the priest, though he pose as the humble slave of Nature and her
secrets. Presently the foundations and institutes, which coexist with
the cathedrals and churches, just as once the new Christian chapels
and congregations stood side by side with pagan temples and heathen
shrines, may oust their rivals, and assume the monopoly of ritual.
Should its spirit remain fine and clear, should it maintain the
glorious promise of its dawn, should its high priests realize the
perpetually widening intimations of its universal triumph, and escape
the ossification that has overtaken all young and hopeful things and
institutions, the real foundation for a future of the species would be
laid, and so its ultimate suicide prevented.

The time has gone by, however, for any complacent assurance that the
redemption of mankind is to be attained by a new religion of words.
There is no doubt that the damnation or salvation of an individual has
often been determined by a religious crisis, in which the magic of
words have worked their witchery. There is plenty of evidence that a
psychic conversion will effect an actual revolution in the whole way
of living of the victim or patient, as you like it. William James,
in his "Varieties of Religious Experience," established that pretty
definitely. When it comes to groups, races, nations, the outlook is
wholly different. There is a conflict of so many and diverse habits
and interests, beliefs and prejudices, that hope for some common
merely intellectual solvent for all of them is rather forlorn. If at
all, the resolution of the conflict will come by a pooling of actual
powers and interests, in which the religion of science will play
the great part of the Liberator of mankind from the whole system of
torments that have made the way of all flesh a path of rocks along
which a manacled prisoner crawls to his doom.

SCIENCE AND HUMAN NATURE

Science has a future. The religion of science has a future. Can
science assure us that human nature, in spite of its beast-brute-slave
origins holds the possibility of a genuine transformation of its
texture? Can Fate's stranglehold upon us be broken? There will be
certainly a tremendous, an overwhelming increase in the general
stock of informations we call physics and chemistry and biology. An
abundance of new comforts, novel sensations, fresh experiences, and
breath-bereaving devices that will thrill or heal, will follow of
course in their wake. The religion of science will infiltrate
and penetrate and permeate by its capillary action the barbaric
superstitions, the ridiculous rites, the unsanitary insanities of our
social systems.

But what about the poor human soul itself, with its inherent vices
and virtues, its fears and indulgences, audacities and nobilities,
jealousies, shames, blunders, incurable likes, cravings and diseases?
Can science change the texture of the slave and careerist, if they
represent the subnormal and the abnormal? What about the Becky Sharps,
the Mark Tapleys, and Tom Pinches, not to speak of the Nicholas
Nicklebys and the Hamlets, the Micawbers and the Falstaffs? What
future have they as they recur in the generations? Indeed, does not
the very fact of their recurrence, of them and of the hundreds of
other types and temperaments, point implacably to the conclusion to
which the historian, the philosopher and the biologist have driven us:
that in the grip of an endless chain of pasts the human soul has no
future?

That may appear an irrelevant, an immaterial, and an incompetent
question to our men of business and affairs. Human nature, as fallen
angel or ape parvenu, has always looked upon itself as fixed for
eternity. "Human nature never changes, and is everywhere and always
will be the same." "As a man is built." "Bred in the bone." These are
the axioms of our social and economic Euclids. Indeed, Man, assuming
that his nature is as uncontrollable as the course of the stars, has
limited his research into the substance of freedom to a groping for an
understanding of the adequate external conditions of liberty. Thus he
set himself another of the insoluble problems he seems to delight
in by neglecting the most important factor in the equation. Yet the
invisible soul of man, ignored, as a variable, varying quantity, has
upset all societies and constitutions, and all schemes of bondage as
well as of freedom.

For freedom, it becomes obvious as soon as it is clearly stated, is
sheer impossibility until the internal conditions of his nature
are ascertained, and the way paved for their control. A simple
illustration of the working of this principle is supplied by our
democracies, grossly pretenders. How can a democracy be possible
without a knowledge of the control of the individually and socially
subnormal, who, since they offer themselves to exploitation by
the careerists, prove themselves the weak links in the chain of
co-operation with an equal opportunity for all, that is the democratic
ideal? In what does the equality or inequality of men consist? Just
what are the qualities necessary for successful competition, or if you
will, co-living, of man with his fellow-men, and how and why do they
operate? No freedom, independent of the servile repetitions of
history and heredity, is conceivable until these inquiries have been
elaborately carried out toward a certain working finality.

THE PROMISES OF EUGENICS

There are, to be sure, the claims and assertions and negative
achievements of the youngest of the sciences, eugenics. They are
invincible optimists, the eugenists: it is perhaps a case of a virtue
born of necessity. Thus Francis Galton, in the preface to the "Bible
of Eugenics," his essays on Hereditary Genius, declares: "There is
nothing either in the history of domestic animals or in that of
evolution to make us doubt that a race of sane men may be formed
who shall be as much superior, mentally and morally, to the Modern
European, as the Modern European is to the lowest of the Negro races."
High hopes beat in this declaration. But Galton could not have
foreseen that the signing of a scrap of paper by one of the Modern
Europeans would let loose all the other Modern Europeans in a
pandemonium of horrors the lowest of the Negro races could not but
envy as a masterpiece of its kind. It seemed to be suspiciously easy
for him to accept an excuse to slide down the dizzy height he had
climbed from the African level.

The eugenists would put their trust in the encouraged breeding of the
best and the compulsory sterility of the rest. But what is the best,
and who are the best, and where will you find them when they are not
inextricably emulsified with the worst? It's a long, long way to the
day of a segregating out and in of Mendelian unit-characters. Besides,
this is a strange world of choices. Nobody is to be considered worthy
of parenthood until he has fallen in love properly. Nobody who would
permit an outsider's decision as to when he was properly in love would
be worth thirty cents as a parent. There is the ultimate dilemma
of the eugenist--the dilemma which destroys forever the dream of a
control of parenthood from the point of view of merely psychic values.

NEW PSYCHOLOGY

There are the claims and outcries and promises of the
psychologists--the specialists in the probing of the human soul and
human nature. In our time, the demand for a dynamic psychology of
process and becoming, psychology with an energy in it, has split them
into two schools--the emphasizers of instinct and the subconscious,
the McDougallians, and the pleaders for sex and the unconscious, the
Freudians. A synthesis between these two groups is latent, since their
differences are those of horizon merely. For the McDougallians look
upon the world with two eyes and see it whole and broad--the Freudians
see through their telescope a circular field and exclaim that they
behold the universe. It is true that they own a telescope.

But what has either to offer our quest for light on the future of
the species? Nothing very much. Thus, to turn to the disciples
of McDougall. In a recent volume entitled, "Human Nature and its
Remaking," Professor William Ernest Hocking of Harvard contends that
Man, all axioms about his nature to the contrary, is but a creature
of habit, and so the most plastic of living things, since habit is
self-controlled and self-determined. By the self-determination of the
habits of the race will the new freedom be reborn. It sounds old,
very old. And pathetic because it recognizes original and permanent
ingredients of our composition in the words pugnacity, greed, sex,
fear, as elements to be accepted in any system of the principles of
civilization. It is the bubble of education all over again. What in
our cells is pugnacity? What in our bones is greed? What in our
blood is sex? What in our nerves is fear? Until these inquiries are
respected, conscious character building or even stock breeding must
remain the laughing stock of the smoking rooms and the regimental
barracks.

Come the Freudians. To them we owe the aeroplanes to a new universe.
They have opened up for us the geology of the soul. Layer upon layer,
cross-section upon cross-section have been piled before us. And what
a melodramatic cinema of thrills and shivers, villains and heroes,
heroines and adventuresses have they not unfolded. Each motive, as
the stiff psychologist of the nineteenth century, with his
plaster-of-Paris categories and pigeon holes and classifications,
labelled the teeming creatures of the mind, becomes anon a strutting
actor upon a multitudinous stage, and an audience in a crowded
playhouse. Scenes are enacted the febrile fancy of a Poe or a de
Maupassant never could have conjured. The complex, the neurosis, the
compulsion, the obsession, the slip of speech, the trick of manner,
the devotion of a life-time, the culture of a nation all furnish bits
for the Freudian mosaic. Attractions and inhibitions, repulsions and
suppressions are held up as the ultimate pulling and pushing forces of
human nature.

But is the problem solved? Is not human nature primarily animal
nature? And do we so thoroughly understand this animal nature? Does
not all this material of Freudianism consist of variations upon social
burdens imposed on the original human nature? To be sure, at every
moment of life, choices have to be made, and choice involves the
clashing of instincts and motives, with victory for one or some, and
defeat for the others. But the Freudian material per se--the sex
material--is it not merely the by-product of a certain state of
society? A sane society would eliminate nearly all of Freudian
disease, but still have original human nature upon its hands. Why is
it that of two individuals exposed to the same situation, one will
develop a complex, the other will remain immune? The only soil we know
of, the real foundation stones of our being and living, are the cells
we are made of. Tell me the cellular basis of a complex, and I will
grant that you have arrived at some real knowledge.

WAY FOR THE PHYSIOLOGIST

There has grown up, contemporaneously with the teachings of Freud,
a body of discoveries and knowledge in physiology, concerning
these factors, which is like a long sword of light illuminating a
pitch-black spot in the night. The dark places in human nature seem to
have become the sole monopoly of the Freudians and their psychology.
But only seemingly. For all this time the physiologist has been
working. Beginning with a candle and now holding in his hands the most
powerful arc-lights, he has explored two regions, the sympathetic
nervous system and the glands of internal secretion, and has come upon
data which in due course will render a good many of the Freudian
dicta obsolete. Not that the Freudian fundamentals will be scrapped
completely. But they will have to fit into the great synthesis which
must form the basis of any control of the future of human nature. That
future belongs to the physiologist. Already his achievements provide
the foundations. I propose in the following chapters to sketch the
history and outline the elements of this new knowledge, and then to
glimpse some of the larger human reactions to it. A good deal of this
new knowledge is not altogether new. A number of the isolated facts
have been known and talked about for more than two generations. But
the newer additions, and the light they have thrown upon old problems
present the opportunity for a synthesis, which must sooner or later be
made.

THE CHEMISTRY OF THE SOUL

Besides, it is time that the secrets of the laboratories stepped out
into the market place, unashamed. Imaginative man has played for ages
immemorial with wondrous fairy tales and fancies of what he would
achieve. The sciences of physics and chemistry have made everyday
commonplace realities out of his radiant dreams. One need not repeat
the cliches of our editors. But the analogy is there nevertheless. No
control over heat and light and electricity, today our slaves, was
possible until physics and chemistry took them in hand. No control of
the human soul is possible until it too will be taken in hand by them.
We may now look forward to a real future for mankind because we have
before us the beginnings of a chemistry of human nature. The internal
secretions, with their influence upon brain and nervous system as
well as every other part of the body corporation, as essentially
blood-circulating chemical substances, have been discovered the real
governors and arbiters of instincts and dispositions, emotions and
reactions, characters and temperaments, good and bad. A huge complex
of evidence, as various, complicated and obscure as human nature
itself, supports that fundamental law.

The chemistry of the soul! Magnificent phrase! It's a long, long way
to that goal. The exact formula is as yet far beyond our reach. But we
have started upon the long journey and we shall get there. Then will
Man truly become the experimental animal of the future, experimenting
not only with the external conditions of his life, but with the
constituents of his very nature and soul. The chemical conditions of
his being, including the internal secretions, are the steps of the
ladder by which he will climb to those dizzy heights where he will
stretch out his hands and find himself a God. Modern knowledge of
these chemical substances, circulating in the blood, and affecting
every cell of the body, dates back scarce half a century. But already
the paths blazed by the pioneers have led to the exploration of great
countries. The thyroid gland, the pituitary gland, the adrenal glands,
the thymus, the pineal, the sex glands, have yielded secrets. And
certain great postulates have been established. The life of every
individual, normal or abnormal, his physical appearance, and his
psychic traits, are dominated largely by his internal secretions. All
normal as well as abnormal individuals are classifiable according to
the internal secretions which rule in their make-up. Individuals,
families, nations and races show definite internal secretion traits,
which stamp them with the quality of difference. The internal
secretion formula of an individual may, in the future, constitute his
measurement which will place him accurately in the social system.

"More and more we are forced to realize that the general form and
external appearance of the human body depends, to a large extent,
upon the functioning, during the early developmental period, of the
endocrine glands. Our stature, the kinds of faces we have, the
length of our arms and legs, the shape of the pelvis, the color and
consistency of the integument, the quantity and regional location
of our subcutaneous fat, the amount and distribution of hair on our
bodies, the tonicity of our muscles, the sound of the voice, and
the size of the larynx, the emotions to which our exterior gives
expression. All are to a certain extent conditioned by the
productivity of our glands of internal secretion." (Llewellys F.
Barker, Johns Hopkins University, 1st President of Association for
Study of Internal Secretions.)

The implications for the statesman, the educator, the vocational
expert, the student of the neurotic and of genius, of delinquents,
deficients and criminals, the explorers of the exceptional and the
commonplace, the understanding of the poetic and kinetic, base and
dull types, as well as of those two master interests of mankind, Sex
and War, are manifest. The mystery of the individual, in all his
distinct uniqueness, begins to be penetrated. And so every phase
of social life, in which the individual is at bottom the final
determinant, must be reviewed in the light of the new knowledge.
History may be examined from an entirely new angle. The biographies
of our Heroes of the Past, in the Carlylean sense, will bear
reinspection. Even Utopias will have to be revised.

The internal secretions constitute and determine much of the inherited
powers of the individual and their development They control physical
and mental growth and all the metabolic processes of fundamental
importance. They dominate all the vital functions during the three
cycles of life. They co-operate in an intimate relationship which may
be compared to an interlocking directorate. A derangement of their
function, causing an insufficiency of them, an excess, or an
abnormality, upsets the entire equilibrium of the body, with
transforming effects upon the mind and the organs. In short, they
control human nature, and whoever controls them, controls human
nature.

The control of the glands of internal secretion waits upon our
knowledge of them, the nature and precise composition of the
substances manufactured by them, and just what they do to the cells.
Envisaging the future, that knowledge today is meagre. Looking back
fifty years, it becomes an amazing achievement and revelation. It is
worth our while to survey the accomplished, and to trace its general
human significance. For a certain tangible degree of knowledge and
control has been attained and should be part of the average citizen's
equipment in dealing with the everyday problems of his life.

THE ATTITUDE OF THE LABORATORY

A certain number of so-called experimental physiologists, that is,
the physiologists of the animal laboratory, who will have nothing but
syllogistic deductions and quantitative determinations based upon
animal experiments as the data of their science, will be apt to look
askance upon the preceding paragraphs, and those which will follow. To
them, any man who relates the internal secretions to anything, outside
of the routineer's paths, puts his reputation at stake, if he has
any reputation at all to start in with. They would have us deliver
a Scotch verdict upon all the questions which arise as soon as one
attempts to take in the more general significance of the glands of
internal secretion. This, even though the more general implications
concerning the effects of their products, the relations of them to
growth and development, nutrition and energy, environmental
reactions and resistance to disease, as well as the grand complex of
intelligence, are admittedly well ascertained in some directions.

The method of absolute measurement in science has yielded miracles.
For some thousands of years, an isolated individual, here and there
or an isolated institution have devoted themselves to the task,
struggling not only with their own weaknesses, but with religious and
political dogmas which spoiled and vitiated even the beginnings of
their efforts. When, in the seventeenth century, men associated
themselves in research, for free communication and discussion of their
findings, a great invention came alive. Close on its heels was born
the exact experimental method. Amazing triumphs were born of that
marriage which swept away before it ignorance and superstition and
prejudice. Its children and grandchildren have flourished and grown
strong and mighty. They have transmuted the material conditions of
life. Certainly all the laurels belong to the method of absolute,
measured observations.

Yet all this time the old method of inductive observation has not gone
dead. Most magnificent triumph of nineteenth century science, the
evolution theory of Charles Darwin, remains the most conspicuous
instance of clarification of thought in human history. That work was
the outcome of an attempt to relate and interpret a collection of
observations on species and their variations, that had long lain to
hand, a mixture without a solvent. Darwin saw certain generalizations
as solvents, and behold! a clear solution out of the mud. But it was
by piling evidence upon evidence, co-ordinating isolated facts not
directly associated, that the towering structure was erected. There is
no prettier sample extant of the powers of the inductive method.

Not that there are no triumphs of the quantitative method in store for
the biologist. Already, the materials of the Mendelians have become
basic parts of his structure. And today, in pursuit of the solutions
of hundreds of the problems of living matter, chemists and
physiologists are employing the most precise standards, units, and
measures of the physical sciences. Blood chemistry of our time is a
marvel, undreamed of a generation ago. Also, these achievements are
a perfect example of the accomplished fact contradicting a priori
prediction and criticism. For it was one of the accepted dogmas of the
nineteenth century that the phenomena of the living could never be
subjected to accurate quantitative analysis.

However desirable the purely quantitative experimental methods may be,
they naturally need always to be preceded by the qualitative studies
of direct observations. Inevitably there will be numberless errors,
apparent and real inconsistencies and contradictions, and ideas that
will have to be discarded. Just the same there is no other method of
progress. Every bit of evidence points towards the internal secretions
as the holders of the secrets of our inmost being. They are the well
springs of life, the dynamos of the organism. In trailing their scent
we appear to be upon the track not only of the chemistry of our
bodies, but of the chemistry of our very souls. An increasing host of
factors and studies marshal themselves solidly for that declaration.
Endeavor to conceive the consequences and possibilities for the
future. A synthesis of the known in the field provides even now a
means of understanding and control of the perplexities of human nature
and life that are like a vista seen from a mountain top after the
lifting of a fog.

The most precious bit of knowledge we possess today about Man is that
he is the creature of his glands of internal secretion. That is, Man
as a distinctive organism is the product, the by-product, of a number
of cell factories which control the parts of his make-up. Much as the
different divisions of an automobile concern produce the different
parts of a car. These chemical factories consist of cells, manufacture
special substances, which act upon the other cells of the body and so
start and determine the countless processes we call Life. Life, body
and soul emerge from the activities of the magic ooze of their silent
chemistry precisely as a tree of tin crystals arises from the chemical
reactions started in a solution of tin salts by an electric current.

Man is regulated by his Glands of Internal Secretion. At the beginning
of the third decade of the twentieth century, after he had struggled,
for we know at least fifty thousand years, to define and know himself,
that summary may be accepted as the truth about himself. It is
a far-reaching induction, but a valid induction, supported by a
multitude of detailed facts.

Amazingly enough, the incontestable evidence, that first pointed to,
and then proved up to the hilt, this answer to the question: What is
Man? has been gathered in less than the last fifty years. Darwin and
Huxley, and Spencer, who first opened men's eyes to their origins,
were ignorant of the very existence of some of them, and had not the
faintest notion or suspicion of the real importance or function of any
of them.

THE PREJUDICES OF PHILOSOPHERS

Now, there are certain prejudices and problems which appear to be
rudely brushed away by the dogmatic arrogance of the principle stated.
What, you say, is Man but an affair of his peculiar gland chemistry?
But what of mind, soul, consciousness? Still another of these
pathetically one-sided and superficial theories of man as a machine
pure and simple which would make him the most complicated of
mechanisms, a marvel of intricate parts, but would deprive him of his
essence as self-conscious unique in the universe. Man, thinking man,
at any rate, dreads to lose the cherished impregnable conviction that
he is something apart, inherently, and therefore infinitely different
from every other phenomenon in the range of his cosmos.

A thorough dissection of the relation and attitude toward psychic
material of the consistent physiologist, who refuses to deal in
contradictory terms, would lead us a little too far. So would the
reconciliation between the claims of mind and the concept of the
organism as a system of chemical reactions. The most fundamental
aspects of that herculean task, warned by the sign, No Trespassing,
we shall leave to the metaphysicians. The influence of the glands of
internal secretion upon the mind we must consider, but at present
postpone. Yet the hot-headed contenders on both sides may be reminded
of certain facts.

We live in the most iconoclastic of ages. There are sane people alive
today going quietly about their business who deny the very existence
of consciousness. These heretics of course pooh-pooh absolutely the
lions of metaphysics. On the other hand, it may be pointed out to our
mechanists who believe in mechanism to the bitter end, that even if
man can be described entirely as a mere transformer of energy, there
is no reason why he cannot also be described as a transformer of
energy plus someone who makes use of the transformer and of the
energy transformed. The stone wall before the honest mechanist is the
abolition of purpose, and design, an old insoluble problem upon
his premises. Preach, until you are blue in the face, behaviorist
tropisms, in which man is pushed and pulled about in his environment
as are iron filings in a magnetic field. Think up objective
physiologies in which your life and mine become a series of
concatenated influences and compound reflexes. Play with words like
the concentration reflex when you mean idea, and the symbolic reflex
when you mean language. But your most rigid nomenclature will never
abolish the mystic personal purpose in the equation, no matter how low
the step in the animal series to which you descend. The declaration
that a man is dominated by certain glands within his body should not
be taken to give aid and comfort to those who would banish mind from
the universe.




CHAPTER I

HOW THE GLANDS OF INTERNAL SECRETION WERE DISCOVERED


Just what are the glands of internal secretion? And how have we become
possessed of whatever information about them we have? A brief review
of how the idea of a gland of internal secretion came into the human
mind and of the contributions that have converged into a single body
of knowledge is worth while.

A gland is a collection of cells (those viscous globules which are the
units of all tissues and organs). It manufactures substances intended
for a particular effect upon the body economy. The effect may be
either local or upon the body as a whole.

Originally, a gland meant something in the body which was seen to make
something else, generally a juice or a liquid mixture of some sort.
A classical example is the salivary glands elaborating saliva. The
microscope has shown us that every gland is a chemical factory in
which the cells are the workers. The product of the gland work is its
secretion. Thus the sweat glands of the skin secrete the perspiration
as their secretion, the lachrymal glands of the eyes the tears as
theirs. The collectivism of management and control is the only
essential difference between them and the modern soap factory or
T.N.T. plant.

Man as a carnivor, and as a consequent anatomist, has been acquainted
with these more superficially placed glands for some thousands of
years. During all this time and during the epoch of the achievements
of gross anatomy, it was believed that the secretions of all glands
were poured out upon some surface of the body. Either an exterior
surface like the skin, or some interior surface, the various mucous
membranes. This was supported by the discovery of canal-like passage
ways leading from the gland to the particular surface where its
secretion was to act. These corridors, the secretory or excretory
ducts, are present, for example, in the liver, conducting the bile
to the small intestine. Devices of transportation fit happily into
a comparison of a gland to a chemical factory, corresponding thus
closely to the tramways and railroads of our industrial centers.

Little more than a hundred years ago, it was observed that certain
organs, like the thyroid body in the neck, and the adrenal capsules in
the abdomen, hitherto neglected because their function was hopelessly
obscure, had a glandular structure. As in so much scientific advance,
the discovery or improvement of a new instrument or method, a fresh
tool of research, was responsible. The perfection of the microscope
was the reason this time.

If one wishes to trace the idea of internal secretion by cells to an
individual, it is convenient, if not pedantic, to give the credit to
Theophile de Bordeu, a famous physician of Paris in the eighteenth
century. Bordeu came to Paris as a brilliant provincial in his early
twenties and by the charm of his manner and daring therapy fought
his way to the most exclusive aristocratic practice of the court.
Naturally a courtier, taking to the intrigues of the royal court like
a duck to water, making enemies on every hand as well as friends, and
with a fastidious and impatient clientele, he yet found time to dabble
in the wonders of the newly perfected microscope and to speculate upon
the meaning of the novelties revealed by it in the tissues. _He coined
the thought of a gland secretion into the blood_.

It was in the year 1749 that he came to Paris from the Pyrenees,
a young medical graduate, destined to become the most fashionable
practitioner of his time. At the age of twenty-three he was holding
the professorship of anatomy at his alma mater, Montpelier, where
his father was a successful physician. At twenty-five he was elected
corresponding member of the Royal Academy of Sciences. A handsome
presence and a Tartarin de Tarascon disposition assured his success
from the start. The medical world was then composed of the emulsion of
charlatanry and science Moliere ridiculed. Success stimulated envy and
jealousy. One of the richest of the older medical men set himself the
job of procuring his scalp. On a trumped-up charge of stealing jewels
from a dead patient--a favorite accusation against the doctors of the
eighteenth century--he had Bordeu's license taken away from him. The
good graces of certain women to whom Bordeu had always appealed, and
who indeed supplied the funds to get him started in Paris, rammed
through two acts of Parliament to reinstate him. Nothing daunted, he
returned to his quest for a court clientele, and was rewarded finally
by having the moribund Louis XV as a patient.

This was the man with whom the modern history of the internal
secretions begins. Not content with adventures among the courtiers and
desperadoes of the most corrupt court in the most corrupt city of the
world, he went in for research. The high power microscope that came
into vogue when he was studying, revealed vague wonders which he
described in a monograph, "Researches into the mucous tissues or
cellular organs." But what makes him interesting is a slender volume
on the "Medical Analysis of the Blood," published in the year of the
American Declaration of Independence. The sexual side of men and women
aroused Bordeu's most ardent enthusiasms. Starting with observations
on the characters of eunuchs and capons, as well as spayed female
animals, he formulated a conception of sexual secretions absorbed
into the blood, settling the male or female tint of the organism and
setting the seal upon the destiny of the individual. Thus he must be
donated the credit of anticipating the most modern doctrine on the
subject.

The generation after him witnessed the triumph of the cell as the
recognized unit of structure of the tissues, the brick of the organs.
It was soon found that the cells of the more familiar glands, like
the sweat or tear glands, resembled the cells of the more mysterious
structures named the thyroid in the neck, or adrenal in the abdomen,
of which the function was unknown. What had hitherto prevented
classification of the latter as glands was the fact that they
possessed no visible pathways for the removal of their secretion. So
now they were set apart as the _ductless_ glands, the glands without
ducts, as contrasted with the glands normally equipped with ducts.
Since, too, they were observed to have an exceedingly rich supply of
blood, the blood presented itself as the only conceivable mode of
egress for the secretions packed within the cells. So they were also
called the blood or vascular glands.

The names which became most popular were those which represented a
contrast of the glands with the ducts, conveying their secretion to
the exterior, as the glands of EXTERNAL SECRETION and the glands
without the ducts, the secretions of which were kept within the body,
absorbed by the blood and lymph to be used by the other cells, as
the glands of INTERNAL SECRETION. How different these two classes
of glands are may be realized by imagining the existence of great
factories manufacturing food products, which would diffuse through
their walls into the atmosphere, to be absorbed by our bodies.

There are certain terms for the glands of internal secretion which
are used interchangeably. They are spoken of often as the _endocrine_
glands and as the _hormone_ producing glands. Endocrine is most
convenient for it stands for both the gland and its secretion. Hormone
is employed a good deal in the literature of the subject. But it
applies specifically to the internal secretion, and not to the gland.

THE EXPERIMENTAL PIONEER

All this clarification of the concept of the glands of internal
secretion occurred in the first quarter of the nineteenth century.
However, no inkling of their real importance to the body, of which
quantitatively they form so insignificant a part, was apparently
revealed to anyone. Not even the most daring speculation or brilliant
guess work in physiology engaged them as material. Thus Henle, the
great anatomist, calmly affirmed that these glands "have no influence
on animal life: they may be extirpated or they degenerate without
sensation or motion suffering in the least." Johann Mueller, the most
celebrated physiologist of his day and contemporary of Henle, wrote
in 1844 and coolly stated, "The ductless glands are alike in one
particular--they either produce a different change in the blood which
circulates through them or the lymph which they elaborate plays a
special role in the formation of blood or of chyle." In other words,
they were dismissed as curious nonentities, of no real significance
to the running of the body. Laennec, the French founder of the Art of
Diagnosis in Medicine, once said that nothing about a science is more
interesting than the progress of that science itself. He might have
added that nothing either was more interesting than the contradictions
in that progress. For while these grand moguls of their sciences were
enunciating their dogmas, pioneers here and there were already setting
the mines that were to explode them.

The experimental method, to the value of which biologists were
just beginning to awaken, was destined to be the vehicle of Time's
revenges. An application of it to the mysteries of sex was the
immediate occasion. Sex and sex differences have always more or less
obsessed the imagination of mankind. The volumes of theories about
them would constitute a respectable museum. Certain gross facts,
however, were known. The effects of loss of the sex glands upon the
configuration of the body and the predominating constitution in
animals and eunuchs have always attracted attention. The proverbs and
stories of all nations are full of references to them. But up to the
nineteenth century no controlled experimental work was ever carried
out regarding them. It was in 1849, that A.A. Berthold of Goettingen, a
quiet, sedate lecturer, carried out the pioneer experiment of removing
the testes of four roosters and transplanting them under the skin. It
was Berthold's idea to test whether a gland with a definite external
secretion, and a duct through which that secretion was expelled,
but which yet had powers over the body as a whole that were to be
attributed only to an internal secretion, could not be shown, by
a clean-cut experiment, to possess such an internal secretion. He
succeeded perfectly. For he found that, though, in thus separating the
gland from its duct and so cutting off its external secretion, the
action of the cells manufacturing that secretion was destroyed, the
general effects upon the body were not those of castration. The
animals retained their male characteristics as regards voice,
reproductive instinct, fighting spirit and growth of comb and wattles.
Whereas if the glands were entirely removed, these male traits,
peculiar to the rooster, were completely lost. The inference was the
existence of an internal secretion.

To Berthold belongs the honor of being the first experimental
demonstrator who proved the reality of a gland with a true internal
secretion and the power it exercised through the blood upon the
entire organism. Besides, he showed that a typical gland of external
secretion could also have an internal secretion, a possibility never
before considered. That two kinds of cells could live within the same
gland: one set usually recognized as producing the external secretion,
the other evolving the internal secretion, was an astounding original
conception.

ENTER CLAUDE BERNARD

Science is supposed to be immune to the personal prejudices and
emotional habits of the vulgar. It is the tradition that a new
contribution to knowledge emerging from no matter how obscure the
source, should be hailed as a gift from the gods. But the sad truth of
the matter is that a new finding in science requires as much backing
as a new project in high finance or social climbing. Berthold, like
Mendel, the founder of genetics, was a great pioneer. But there was no
personage, no person of consequence, with no patronage by anyone of
consequence, no wife or kin, to push him, and no audience to stimulate
him. His poor four little pages of a report, published ten years
before Darwin's "Origin of Species," attracted not the slightest
notice. Buried in the print of a journal with a subscription list of
possibly two or three hundred, of whom perhaps two dozen may have been
interested enough to read it, but without any recorded reaction on the
part of any of them, it was a flash in the pan. Though it was good,
original, conclusive stuff, it was cut dead, absolutely, by the
scientific world. As a result, forty years elapsed before the
implications of his studies were rediscovered by the Columbus of the
modern approach to the internal secretions, the American Frenchman,
Brown-Sequard.

It took a first class man of genius in his field, in Paris, with a
respected position in the whirl of its medical planetary system and
a university appointment, to boom and advertise the doctrine of the
internal secretions, so that people began to sit up and listen and
take sides--on the wrong grounds. This Frenchman was Claude Bernard.
At a series of lectures on experimental physiology delivered at the
College of France, in 1855, he coined the terms internal secretion and
external secretion and emphasized the opposition between them, on the
basis of an incorrect example, the function of the liver in the supply
of sugar to the blood.

Just as Columbus reached America, carried on a series of logical
syllogisms, built upon unreal pictures of a straight path to the East,
Claude Bernard opened up the continent of the internal secretions to
the experimental enthusiasts of his time by a discovery which today
is not grouped among the phenomena of internal secretion at all. In
attempting to throw light upon the disease diabetes, in which there
is a loss of the normal ability of the cells to burn up sugar, he
examined the sugar content of the blood in different regions of the
body. He found that the blood of the veins, in general, contained less
sugar than the blood of the arteries, which meant that sugar was taken
from the blood in passing through the tissues. But the venous blood of
the right side of the heart contained as much sugar as the arterial
blood. Evidently, somewhere, sugar was added to the blood in the veins
before it got to the heart. The blood of the vein which goes from
the liver to the right side of the heart was then found to contain a
higher percentage of sugar than is present in the arteries. The vein
which transmits the blood from the intestines to the liver had
the usual lower percentage of sugar corresponding to the analysis
established for the other veins. The liver, therefore, must add sugar
to the blood on its way to the heart. Extraction of the liver then
revealed the presence in it of a form of starch, an animal starch,
which Bernard called glycogen, the sugar-maker. The origin of the
sugar added to the blood on its way from the liver to the heart was
thus settled. Bernard went on to hail glycogen and the sugar derivable
as the internal secretions of the liver, and to erect, and then drive
home, a theory of internal secretions and their importance in the body
economy.

The case he had hit upon was exquisitely fortunate, as the liver had
hitherto been regarded purely a gland of external secretion, the bile.
Nowadays, glycogen and the blood sugar are not considered internal
secretions, because they are classified as elementary reserve food,
while the concept of the internal secretions has become narrowed down
to substances acting as starters or inhibitors of different processes.
Moreover, the process of liberation of sugar from glycogen itself in
the liver, upon demand, is today set down to the action of an internal
secretion, adrenalin. Claude Bernard's conception, like a novelist's
characters, has turned upon its creator, taken on a life of its own,
and evolved into something he never intended. He looked upon an
internal secretion as simply maintaining the normal composition of the
blood, which bathed alike and treated alike the democracy of cells.
Today, the blood is believed merely the transporting medium for the
internal secretion, destined for a particular group of cells.

ADDISON'S AS THE FIRST ENGLISH CONTRIBUTION

The years 1855-56 are red-letter years in the history of the glands of
internal secretion. They witnessed, not only the publication of
Claude Bernard's "Lectures on Experimental Physiology," but also the
appearance of a monograph by Thomas Addison, an English physician,
entitled "On the constitutional and local effects of disease of the
suprarenal bodies." In this, he described a fatal disease during which
the individual affected became languid and weak, and developed a dingy
or smoky discoloration of the whole surface of the body, a browning
or bronzing of the skin, caused generally by destructive tuberculous
disease of the suprarenal or adrenal bodies. Addison promptly put down
these constitutional effects of loss of the adrenal bodies to loss
of something produced by them of constitutional importance. He was
particularly struck by the change in the pigmentation of the skin, so
much so that his own designation for the affection was "bronzed
skin." Since then, however, the condition has been universally styled
Addison's Disease.

There is something spectacularly mysterious and picturesque about most
of the malign, insidious effects of the disease which appealed at once
to a number of investigators. The most adventurous, the most daring,
the most imbued with enthusiasm for the experimental method, was the
American Frenchman, Brown-Sequard, who is acknowledged the father of
modern knowledge of the glands of internal secretion, though to Claude
Bernard belong the honors of the grandfather.

BROWN-SEQUARD THE GREAT

Brown-Sequard, as the outstanding figure in the history of the glands
of internal secretion, deserves some notice as a personality. In the
words of the note-makers for novels and plays, he was a card. He was
born in 1817 at Port-Louis, on the island of Mauritius, off Africa,
then French property. His father was a Mr. Brown, an American sea
captain; his mother a Mme. Sequard, a Frenchwoman. Early in childhood,
the father sailed away on one of his voyages and never came back. The
mother thereafter supported herself and her son sewing embroideries.
At fifteen, Brown-Sequard, with the physical appearance of an Indian
Creole, was clerking in a colonial store by day, and composing poetry,
romances and plays by night. The call of Paris was in his blood, which
was indeed a supersaturated solution of wanderlust.

Soon he was landed there to make his fortune in literature, only too
speedily to be disillusioned. Exhibition of manuscripts to a leading
literary light merely evoked curt advice to learn a trade or go into
business. He would have none of either and studied medicine instead,
earning his way by teaching as he learned. In the laboratories, he
made the acquaintance of people who more than once were to be his
salvation in the ups and downs of his career. In 1848 he was one of
the secretaries of the Society of Biology, newly founded by Claude
Bernard.

Some trouble, perhaps some effect upon his health of cholera which
then swept Paris, caused him to return to his native Mauritius, to
encounter an epidemic of cholera. There he slaved manfully, for which
a gold medal was afterward struck for him. That over with, he embarked
in 1852 for New York, without a word of American, learning English on
board. This was the first of a series of voyages. As he often boasted,
he crossed the ocean sixty times, not a bad record for the days when
the _Mauretania_ was still in the womb of time. He made a hopeless
failure out of practice in New York, became so poor as to practice
obstetrics at five dollars a case, and married a niece of Daniel
Webster. Then he went back to Paris. Back to America next as Professor
of Physiology at the University of Richmond, Virginia, a job occupied
for a few months only because of his opinions on slavery, ostensibly
anyhow.

To Paris then the rolling stone meandered again. So that soon after he
was offered and accepted the charge of a great newly opened hospital
for epileptics in London. That proved merely an interlude and in
1863 we find him back in his fatherland (if we may hold France his
motherland) as Professor of Neuropathology at Harvard. In New York
fame preceded him now with a thousand trumpets, so that on the day of
his arrival, he was kept busy seeing patients until night, when he
had to desist because of exhaustion. But still he did not prosper. An
unfortunate second marriage almost broke his heart, and an attempt
to found in New York a new medical periodical, the _Archives of
Scientific and Practical Medicine and Surgery_, got him into hot
water. Not until the death of Claude Bernard in 1878 left vacant the
chair of physiology in the College of France, did he find peace and
rest. He hastened to Paris, was appointed, and lived, in spite of the
most erratic of existences, to the ripe old age of 78, working up to
the last minute.

Addison's monograph stimulated Brown-Sequard, in the year after its
printing, to reproduce the fatal disease experimentally by excising
the suprarenal capsules in animals. Addison was very modest in his
monograph. He stated that the first case of the malady had been
reported by his great predecessor at Guy's Hospital, London, Richard
Bright, the describer of Bright's Disease. Then he talks about the
"curious facts" he had "stumbled upon" and refers to an "ill-defined
impression" that these suprarenal bodies, in common with the spleen
and other organs, "in some way or other minister to the elaboration of
the blood." In the preface to his work he had spoken more confidently
of the fact that Nature, as an experimenter and a vivisector, can
beat the physiologist to a frazzle. Indeed, he begins like this: "If
Pathology be to disease what Physiology is to health, it appears
reasonable to conclude that, in any given structure or organ, the laws
of the former will be as fixed and significant as those of the latter:
and that the peculiar characters of any structure or organ may be as
certainly recognized in the phenomena of disease as in the phenomena
of health. Although pathology, therefore, as a branch of medical
science, is necessarily founded on physiology, questions may
nevertheless arise regarding the true character of a structure or
organ, to which occasionally the pathologist may be able to return a
more satisfactory and decisive reply than the physiologist--these two
branches of medical knowledge being thus found mutually to advance and
illustrate each other. Indeed, as regards the functions of individual
organs, the mutual aids of these two branches of knowledge are
probably much more nearly balanced than many may be disposed to admit:
for in estimating them we are very apt to forget how large an amount
of our present physiological knowledge respecting the functions of
these organs has been the immediate result of casual observations made
on the effects of disease." William James expressed the same thought
some decades later, when he emphasized that the abnormal was but the
normal exaggerated and magnified, played upon by the limelight, and
therefore the best teacher and indicator of the exact definition and
limitations of the normal.

Addison, speaking before the South London Medical Society in 1849,
declared that in all of three afflicted individuals there was found a
diseased condition of the suprarenal capsules, and that in spite of
the consciousness "of the bias and prejudice inseparable from the hope
or vanity of an original discovery ... he could not help entertaining
a very strong impression that these hitherto mysterious organs--the
suprarenal capsules--may be either directly or indirectly concerned
in sanguification (the making of the blood): and that a diseased
condition of them, functional or structural, may interfere with the
proper elaboration of the body generally, or of the red particles more
especially...." A modern, acquainted with after developments, would
say that Addison was very hot upon the trail indeed. But withal,
though he must have been well aware of John Hunter's advice to Jenner
on vaccination, "Don't think, make some observations," his training in
the indirect reasoning and deductions of the clinician prevented him
from going right on to a direct experimental test of his theories.

This Brown-Sequard proceeded to do. Removing the adrenal glands in
several species of animals, he found, meant a terrible weakness in
twenty-four to forty-eight hours, and death shortly after. If only one
were removed, there was no change apparent in the normal animal, but
death occurred rapidly upon removal of the other, even after a long
interval. Furthermore, transfusion of blood from a normal into
one deprived of its suprarenals prevented death for a long time,
indicating that the suprarenals normally secreted something into the
blood necessary to life.

The years 1855-1856 beheld two other important glands of internal
secretion, the thyroid, the gland in the neck astride the windpipe,
and the thymus, in the chest above the heart, make their debut.

The thymus was introduced by the great classic monograph of Friedleben
on the "Physiology of the Thymus," in which he mentioned the usual
forgotten pioneers: Felix Plater, a Swiss physician, who in 1614 had
found an enlarged thymus in an infant dying suddenly, and Restelli,
an Italian, who interested himself in the effects of removal of the
thymus more than ten years before. Friedleben believed that in the
young without a thymus, there occurred a softening of the bones, and
general physical and mental deterioration. He started the ball rolling
for a number of researches.

Moritz Schiff, of Frankfort-on-the-Main, showed that excision of the
thyroid gland in dogs is invariably fatal. A number of physicians in
the first half of the century had reported certain remarkable symptoms
associated with enlargement of the thyroid gland, as goitre. In 1825
the collected posthumous writings of Caleb Perry, an eminent physician
of Bath, England, recorded eight cases, in which, together with
enlargement of the gland, there developed enlargement and palpitation
of the heart, a distinct protrusion of the eyes from their sockets and
an appearance of agitation and distress. Schiff's paper was the first
to throw any light on the subject. But for some reason, probably the
same as in Berthold's forlorn experiments with the sex glands, the
work of a person of no importance was ignored, or perhaps the more
charitable view is that it was forgotten. Yet the tide of observation
kept sweeping in relevant data.

In 1850, Curling, an English pathologist, studying the cretinous
idiots of Salzburg, written about centuries before by Paracelsus,
discovered that with their defective brain and mentality there
was associated an absence of the thyroid body, and accompanying
symmetrical swellings of fat tissue at the sides of the neck. Then
Sir William Gull in 1873 painted the singular details of a cretinous
condition developing in adult women, a condition to which another
Englishman, William Ord, of London, five years later donated the title
of myxedema, because of a characteristic thickening and infiltration
of the skin that is one of its features.

Surgery then enters upon the scene. The great Swiss surgeon. Theodore
Kocher, performed the first excision of the thyroid gland in human
beings for goitre, in the same year. In 1882, J.L. Reverdin, another
surgeon of Geneva, noticed that in man complete removal of the thyroid
was followed by symptoms identical with those collected under the name
of myxedema, and used the phrase "operative myxedema" to emphasize
his conviction of the connection between them. Then Schiff, in
1884, neglected twenty-five years, came back, with an array of
demonstrations, proving that the various symptoms, tremors, spasms and
convulsions, following removal of the thyroid, could be prevented by
a previous graft of a piece of the gland under the skin, or by the
injection of thyroid juice into a vein or under the skin, or by the
ingestion of thyroid juice or the raw thyroid by mouth.

A crystallization of ideas about the true function of the thyroid was
now inevitable. In 1884, Sir Victor Horsley produced an experimental
myxedema by removal of the thyroid in monkeys, resembling closely in
its symptom-picture the disease as it occurs in human beings. Moebius,
a German neurologist, came out boldly for the conception that a number
of ailments could be due to qualitative and quantitative changes in
the secretion of the thyroid, and that just as myxedema and cretinism
were due to an insufficiency of the secretion, Parry's disease was
to be ascribed to an excessive outpouring of it. The next steps
were easy. In 1888, Sir Felix Semon, as an outcome of a collective
investigation, established for all time that cretinism, myxedema and
post-operative myxedema were one and the same.

It was bound to occur to someone that if human myxedema and animal
experimental myxedema were one and the same, Schiff's procedure of
prevention and cure by feeding thyroid gland by mouth in the latter
could be applied to the former. The idea occurred to two men, Murray
and Howitz, in 1891. Murray's patient, a Mrs. H., was shown before the
Northcumberland and Durham Medical Society, an English country medical
organization, in February, 1891. She was forty-two years old and had
borne nine children. The illness attacking her had begun insidiously,
with a gradual enlargement and thickening of her face and hands.
She had become very slow in speech and gait, sensitive to cold, and
languid and depressed in spirit to the point of inability to go about
alone. Murray, employing the glycerin extract of the thyroid gland of
a freshly killed sheep, injected twenty-four drops hypodermically,
twice a week. There was an immediate and marvelous improvement, which
continued steadily, Murray finding that it could be maintained by
feeding the gland by mouth. The features and skin returned to the
normal, speech quickened and she became able to walk about and live
her life without hesitation or assistance. She lived to the age of
seventy-four, dying in 1919. In the twenty-eight years, during which
it was always necessary to administer the thyroid, she consumed over
nine pints of thyroid, comprising the glands of 870 sheep.

Giants and dwarfs and fat people have always interested people as
freaks, departures from the usual and the normal, and have formed the
stock of popular museum, circus and country fair. Every mythology has
concerned itself with them. The Titans among the Greeks, Og, Gog
and Magog among the Hebrews, are examples of the fascination of the
superlarge. John Hunter, the founder of experimental surgery, spent a
fortune in chasing after the skeleton of a famous Irish Giant in 1783.
Dwarfs have also fascinated--witness the short-limbed satyrs of the
Greeks and the dwarf gods (Ptah and Bes) of Egypt, as well as the
vogue of the court dwarf-buffoons, of whom Velasquez has left us some
portraits. Fat people, obesity as a manifestation of personality, have
aroused wonder and amusement the world over. The Fat Boy has always
furnished good sport to the Sam Wellers.

All these characters, tall or short, fat or lean, are related to the
activity of a gland of internal secretion in the head, the pituitary,
which became a centre of interest in the late eighties. Because of its
situation, the opinion of the ancients was that it was the source of
the mucus of the nose, an opinion reinforced by the greatest anatomist
of the Dark Ages, Galen, and held up to the seventeenth century. In
other words, it was considered simply a gland of external secretion.
Experimental removal of the pituitary was essayed by Horsley in 1886,
the same man who two years before had reproduced myxedema successfully
in monkeys. Others succeeded his attempt. But the conclusions drawn
were uncertain or contradictory, resulting from the difficulties of
the operative technique of getting at a gland placed at the base
of the brain. Not until 1908 was the problem solved by Paulesco of
Bucharest, who devised a way of reaching it by trepanning the skull.
He was thus able to prove beyond a doubt that the pituitary gland was
essential to life, and that without it no animal could continue to
live for any length of time. Soon after, Harvey Gushing and his
associates at Johns Hopkins Hospital discovered that removal of part
of the gland was followed by a pronounced obesity and sluggishness.
A basis for the understanding of obesity and growth was then
established.

In the eighties, there came to the clinic of Pierre Marie in Paris,
a pupil of the great Charcot, various women complaining of headache.
They also told him about an enlargement of their hands and feet, and
an alarming change in the bones of the face. He differentiated the
affection from its imitators, and created its present designation of
"acromegaly" (enlargement of the extremities). Also he correlated
their relationship to the giants who have been mentioned. Acromegalics
have been also likened to the Neanderthal Man, who had probably, as
the gorillas may have, an excess of the pituitary in their systems.
For four years he studied the morbid phenomena in the tissues of these
sufferers at last consigned to their end. First one, and then another,
and then a third and a fourth exhibited a striking hypertrophy of the
pituitary body and a consequent widening of the portion of the base
of the skull which cradles the gland. He proceeded to say so in
the graduating thesis of his pupil, Souza Leite. The inference
was inevitable that the entire process was to be put down to an
overactivity of the pituitary. Ever since, too, the growth of the
skeleton has been accepted as controlled by that gland.

About this time another set of old observations came to life again,
related to those of Docent Berthold on the auto-grafting of the testes
of a cock, with complete retention of its sexual characters, which he
said, must be due "to the productive action of the testes, i.e., to
its effect upon the blood, and thence to the corresponding effect of
such blood upon the entire organism." Of course, stock raisers and
poultry fanciers have noted the interesting outcome of castration for
about as long as their professions have existed. And for ages the
diminution of sexual activity as a predecessor to the decadence of
senility has been harped upon. Rejuvenation, especially in connection
with sexual activity, as well as with tissue and spiritual elasticity,
has been one of the haunting phantoms of the imagination for as long
as we have records of articulate humanity. Together with El Dorado,
the Elixir of Youth has shared the honors with the Philosopher's
Stone. The idea of employing the chemical materials of the sex glands,
the testes or the ovaries, to bring back youth, to restore juvenility,
had not, as far as we know, occurred to anyone who at any rate put
himself on record, by word or deed, until 1889. The hero of the new
departure was the hero of so many daring adventures among speculative
experiments, Brown-Sequard.

At this time the wanderer was an aged sage, seventy-two years old,
fit, as custom goes, only for retirement and resignation to the fate
of all flesh. The old passion of experimenting upon himself as well as
upon the guinea-pigs, dogs, cats and monkeys, by which he was always
surrounded, was as alive and kicking as ever. I suppose he had been
thinking for years concerning some method for the resumption of youth,
for we find him exclaiming, when the opportunity loomed of a great
laboratory on Agassiz Island, Long Island, on one of his recurrent
flights to New York: "Would that I were thirty!" And other passages in
his personal communications refer again and again to his consciousness
of growing old. The miracles that were being performed by injecting
thyroid and feeding thyroid in animals probably acted as the spark to
an inflammable mass of ideas long smouldering in the subcellars of his
mind. The effects were reported to the Society of Biology in Paris,
one memorable evening, June 1, 1889, in two notes on the results of
the hypodermic injection in man of the testis juice of monkeys and
dogs, and certain generalizations deduced therefrom. Such juices, he
stated, had a definite energy-mobilizing or, as he put it, dynamogenic
action upon the subject himself, stimulating amazingly his general
health, muscular power and mental activity.

These experiments, their nature, the manner in which they were
conducted, the character and age of the experimenter, and the results
claimed, were exquisitely good stuff for ridicule. Cartoonists and
reporters leaped upon the theme with the avidity of the true-blue
interviewer. Paris, where to be ridiculed is to be killed in public
with the most ignominious of deaths, reacted as only the French
temperament can react. The wits of the salons crackled, the
bourgeoisie chortled, the proletariat roared. The Elixir of Life had
been discovered and it was excellent sport.

But Brown-Sequard remained unshaken. He had all the roues of Paris
running to him, and consequent charges of quackery and charlatanism.
How much of these unsavory epithets really applied to him will not be
determined until we have a better acquaintance with his more intimate
life. A biography and collection of his letters is needed. But it is
certain that the general principles he arrived at, aided as much by
the wings of intuition as by the clues of incomplete and incompletely
controlled experiments, survive as the foundations of whatever we know
about the internal secretions, and all our present viewpoints. He
summed these up in 1891 as follows:

"All the tissues, in our view, are modifiers of the blood by means of
an internal secretion taken from them by the venous blood. From this
we are forced to the conclusion that, if subcutaneous injections of
the liquids drawn from these parts are ineffectual, then we should
inject some of the venous blood supplying these parts.... We admit
that each tissue, and, more generally, each cell of the organism,
secretes on its own account, certain products or special ferments,
which, through this medium (the blood), influence all other cells of
the body, a definite solidarity being thus established among all the
cells through a mechanism other than the nervous system.... All
the tissues (glands and other organs) have thus a special internal
secretion, and so give to the blood something more than the waste
products of metabolism. The internal secretions, whether by direct
favorable influence, or whether through the obstacles they oppose to
deleterious processes, seem to be of great utility in maintaining the
organism in its normal state."

The only part of this statement not conceded today is that relating to
the formation of internal secretions by tissues other than those of
which the cells are definitely glandular, that is secretory: as can be
determined under the microscope. Brown-Sequard added to the concept
of internal secretions, fathered by Claude Bernard, the idea of a
correlation, a mutual influencing of them and of the different organs
of the body through them. The nervous system had hitherto been
regarded as the sole means of communication between cells, by its
telegraphic arrangements of nerve filaments reaching out everywhere,
interweaving with each other and the cells. The Brown-Sequard
conception inferred the existence of a postal system between cells,
the blood supplying the highway for travel and transmission of the
post, the post consisting of the chemical substances secreted by
the glands. To be sure, the doctrine was only an inference, though
well-founded, of which the direct experimental proof was not to
be obtained until the researches of Bayliss and Starling. Yet to
Brown-Sequard belongs the immortal credit, if not of the originator,
at any rate of the resurrector of the idea of using gland extracts to
influence the body. The unwarranted hopes aroused by his enthusiastic
reports of rejuvenating miracles have long since been dissipated.
Moreover, they smeared the whole subject with a disrepute which clings
to certain narrow and unreasonable minds to this day. But as every
physiologist since has acknowledged, he was and remains the great
path-breaker in the conquest of the internal secretions.

THE HORMONES

The problem of the internal secretions was now attacked from another
angle. A great Russian physiologist, Pawlow, called attention to the
fact that the introduction of a dilute mineral acid, such as the
hydrochloric acid, normally a constituent of the stomach digestive
fluid, into the upper part of the intestine, provoked a secretion
of the pancreas, which is so important for intestinal digestion. He
explained the phenomenon as a reflex, a matter of the nerves going
from the intestine to the pancreas.

His pupil, Popielski, threw doubt upon so easy an explanation, by
proving that the same reaction could be elicited even after all the
nerve connections between the gut and the spinal cord were severed. If
the relation was a reflex, it would have to be classed now as one of
those local nerve circuits, which are pretty common among the viscera,
a local call and reply as it were, without mediation of the great long
distance trunk lines in the spinal cord and the medulla oblongata.

The work of Bayliss and Starling, two English physiologists, was
commenced then to test the hypothesis. They soon found that the
experiment could be so devised as to exclude any influence whatever on
the part of the nervous tissues, and yet result positively. Thus, if a
loop of intestine was so prepared as to be attached to the rest of the
body only by means of its blood vessels, all the nerves being cut,
putting some acid into it was still followed by a flow of pancreatic
juice, no less marked than when none of the parts about the piece
of gut had been disturbed. It was evident that the stimulus to the
pancreas was carried by way of the blood stream. That the stimulating
substance was not the acid itself, was shown by the failure of the
reaction to occur when the acid was injected directly into the blood
stream. Since there was this difference in the effects between acid in
the intestine and acid in the blood, it was manifest that the active
substance must be some material elaborated in the intestinal mucous
membrane under the influence of the acid. So they scraped some of the
lining of the bowel, rubbed it up with acid, and injected the filtered
mixture into the blood. They were rewarded by a flow of pancreatic
juice greater in amount than any obtained in their other experiments.
From the filtered mixture they isolated in an impure form, a solid
substance which, when introduced into the circulation, has a similar
action. To this, of which the exact chemical make-up is as yet an
unknown, they gave the name secretin.

Secretin and its properties they used to generalize as a perfectly
direct and amply demonstrable example of an internal secretion.
Metaphors are no less valuable in physiology than in poetry. They
declared that the internal secretions appeared to them to be chemical
messengers, telegraph boys sent from one organ to another through the
public highways, the blood (really more like a moving platform). So
they christened them all hormones, deriving the word from the Greek
verb meaning to rouse or set in motion. As a science is a well-made
language, a new word is an event. It sums up details, economizes
brain-work and so is cherished by the intellect. The study of the
internal secretions has advanced by leaps and bounds since it became
convenient to speak of them as hormones. Withal, the brilliant work of
Bayliss and Starling stands as the third great foundation stone,
the first Claude Bernard's and the second Brown-Sequard's, in the
architecture of the modern concepts of the internal secretions.




CHAPTER II

THE GLANDS: THYROID AND PITUITARY


The glands of internal secretion, the history of which, as tools of
thought, I reviewed in the previous chapter, have each an interesting
evolutionary story. Without some acquaintance with that story, the
rough outline of their physical architecture, and the particular work
they are called upon to perform in the body, no adequate understanding
of their influence upon types of human nature and personality is
possible.

THE THYROID GLAND

This gland consists of two maroon colored masses astride the neck,
above the windpipe, close to the larynx. These are bridged by a narrow
isthmus of the same tissue. They remind one of the flaps of a purse
opened up. The gland has always attracted much attention because its
enlargement constitutes the prominent deformity known as goitre.

To begin with, the thyroid was once a sex gland, pure and simple. In
the lowest vertebrates and in the homologous tissues of the higher
invertebrates, the fractions of the thyroid are intimately connected
with the ducts of the sexual organs. They are indeed accessory sexual
organs, uterine glands, satellites of the sex process. From Petromyzon
upward that relationship is lost, the thyroid migrates more and more
to the head region, to become the great link between sex and brain.
How alive that function still is, is grossly shown by the swelling of
the gland with sexual excitement, menstruation and pregnancy.

Relative to the body weight it is largest in the mammalia, and
smallest in the fishes. It therefore grows larger as the vertebrate
ascends in the scale. It has, in fact, developed in direct proportion
to and side by side with the fundamental, differentiating vertebrate
characteristics. Of these, the possession of a dry hairy skin instead
of a moist or mucus bearing, chitinous skin, the ownership of
an internal bony skeleton and a large skull, and a complicated
development of brain, are the diagnostic signs. Thyroid internal
secretion has a very definite controlling relation to all of them: to
skin, its hairiness, moisture and amount of mucus, to the growth and
size of the bones, especially the bones of the extremities and the
skull, and to intelligence and the complexity of the convolutions of
the brain. Injury to the thyroid, especially in growing animals, is
followed by profound retrogression or arrest of development in skin,
skeleton and brain.

In the fishes and the cyclostomes the thyroid is represented only by
some small scrubby patches, little larger than the heads of pins,
scattered along the aorta, the great blood vessels from the heart, and
out a little way along each gill. It becomes larger and more compact
among the amphibians and reptiles, but still remains quite small.
Large and prominent among the birds and mammalia, it is largest and
most prominent among the primates and man. It is hence permissible to
think of the thyroid as a dictator of evolution, to crown it as the
vertebrate gland par excellence, and to call the typical vertebrate
brand marks secondary _thyroid_ characteristics in precisely the
sense of Darwin classing the horns of cattle as secondary _sexual_
characteristics.

In such enthusiasm for the thyroid as a determinant of evolution, its
pillar of cloud by day and column of fire by night, one should not
forget the other glands of internal secretion. In them all, we may
suppose, Life, tired of inventing merely prehensile, destructive and
reproductive organs, hit upon the happy thought of contrivances which
are in essence chemical factories to speed up the rate of variation
and so of a higher evolution.

CREATOR OF THE LAND ANIMAL

According to this conception the thyroid played a fundamental part in
the change of sea creatures into land animals. Experimentally, thyroid
has been used to transform one into the other. Thus the occasional
change of a Mexican axolotl, a purely aquatic newt, breathing through
gills, into the amblystoma, a terrestrial salamander, with spotted
skin, breathing by means of lungs, has long been known. Feeding the
axolotl on thyroid gland produces the metamorphosis very quickly, even
if the axolotl is kept in water. In the reptile house at the London
Zoological Gardens full-grown examples of the common black axolotl and
the pretty white variety are exhibited. Some are nearly three inches
long. Alongside are shown several examples of the amblystoma stage,
produced in one of the laboratories of Oxford University and at
the gardens by thyroid feeding. A variation of the thyroid in the
direction of increased secretion was probably responsible for the
first land animals.

THYROXIN, SECRETION OF THE THYROID

Under the microscope, as in the test tube, the thyroid shows
remarkable and unique features. Closed spherules lined by a single
layer of cells enclosing a gelatinous material known as colloid, which
stains deeply with acid dyes, comprise the units of its architecture.
Essentially, it may be pictured as a series of jelly bubbles secreted
by outlying cells.

A relatively high percentage of iodine is the unique distinctive fact
in its chemistry. Discovered by Baumann in 1895, the presence of the
element has focused the intelligence of chemists upon the gland,
with the consequent demonstration of arsenic also in it. It was soon
manifest that the secretion of the gland was dependent upon the
iodine content for its activity. Active extracts of the thyroid like
thyreoglobulin and iodothyrin were proven to contain iodine, and to
become inactive when the iodine was removed. Efforts to isolate the
iodine containing active principle in pure form were fruitless until
the work of Kendall at the Mayo Foundation. He obtained it as a white,
finely crystalline, odorless and tasteless substance, heat stable,
and analyzable. The free form separates as a sheaf of fine needles.
Kendall at first called it the a-iodine compound, then named it
thyroxin.

There are other internal secretions of the thyroid, with a function of
their own, that have no iodine. But they are secondary, and obscure.
Thyroxin is accepted today as the purified internal secretion of the
thyroid because all the effects of the whole gland may be elicited
with it. Thyroxin produces results with doses amazingly minute
compared with the quantity of whole gland necessary. Moreover, a dose
of thyroxin appears to last an organism in need of it over a period of
time; the other has to be administered continuously.

Studies with thyroxin carried on in recent years have rounded out the
whole concept of the business of the thyroid in the body economy.
One may sum it up by saying that the thyroid secretion is the _great
controller of the speed of living_. The more thyroid one has, the
faster one lives; the less one has, the more slowly one lives.

That is not to imply any direct proportion between the amount of
thyroid secretion in an individual, and the length of life to which he
is destined. The speed of living, in the chemical sense (which is the
fundamental sense), and the rate at which the chemical reactions go on
that constitute the process of life, are dependent upon the thyroid.
When the reactions go faster, more oxygen and food material are burned
up or oxidized, more energy is liberated, the metabolic wheel rotates
more quickly, the individual senses, feels, thinks and acts more
quickly.

Likening one energy machine to another, the thyroid may be compared
to the accelerator of an automobile. That is a rough and superficial
comparison because an accelerator lets in more of the fuel to be
burned up, while the thyroid makes the fuel more combustible. It thus
resembles more the primer, for a rich mixture of gasoline and air
burns at a greater velocity than a poor one. But the action of thyroid
could really be simulated only by some substance that could be
introduced into the best possible of gasoline mixtures, to increase
its combustibility by a hundred per cent or more. For that is what
thyroid will do to our food. Nor has it only this destructive or
combustion side. Withal there is at the same time a constructive
action, for the process frees energy to be used for heat, motion or
other need. The thyroid, therefore, in addition to its role as an
accelerator, acts, too, as the efficient lubricator for energy
transformations. So we see it as accelerator, lubricator and
transformer of our energies.

THE GLAND OF ENERGY PRODUCTION

The isolation of thyroxin has made possible the determination of the
influence of the thyroid hormone upon the evolution of energy in any
higher animal organism. There is, for every individual, a constant,
known as the metabolic rate, or the combustion rate, a reading of the
rate at which his cells are consuming material for heat. The metabolic
rate is thus a gauge of the energy pressure within the organism.
It may be calculated by measuring the amount of carbon dioxide gas
exhaled during a unit of time, and the number of calories of heat
radiated by the skin simultaneously. A simplified device has lately
rendered it practicable to make actual determinations by a few
five-minute readings of the rate of oxygen absorption by the lungs.
Plummer, also connected with the Mayo Foundation, has shown that what
would amount to less than a grain of the thyroxin would more than
double the amount of energy produced in a unit of time. To be exact,
one milligram of thyroxin increases the metabolic rate two per cent.
That illustrates some of the power of the internal secretion of the
thyroid and its importance to normal life.

THE MOBILIZATION OF ENERGY

But not only is the height of pressure of energy in the cells
controlled by the thyroid. The mobility of that energy is also
controlled. Without it, rapid and large fluctuations of energy output,
and elasticity and flexibility of energy mobilization for any sudden
mental or muscular act, let alone an emergency, become impossible. A
woman suffering with myxedema, the condition described by the English
physician Gull as a cretinoid state supervening in the adult life
of woman, has an insufficient amount of thyroxin in her blood and
tissues. She is clumsy and awkward and will stumble when endeavoring
to walk upstairs. Any effort is almost paralyzed because the range
of fluctuation of energy, the ability to mobilize energy, in turn
dependent upon an ability to increase the metabolic rate, is limited.
In slang phrase, she cannot step on it. Her existence is set to go at
a rate in the neighborhood of forty per cent below the normal. By the
administration of thyroxin, her metabolic rate can be raised to any
desired figure, the spark can be adjusted, so to speak, to any point
we like, and it can be so maintained for years.

In the normal animal, to be sure, the internal secretion of the
thyroid is not absolutely essential to life. So it contrasts with the
hormone of the minute parathyroids placed so closely to it, a minimum
dose of which is absolutely a prerequisite for continued life. The
fundamental chemical reactions within the cells occur in the complete
absense of thyroxin. But they go on in a relatively fixed, rigid and
unvarying way, confined within the narrow limits of a constant figure.
Under such conditions, the level of energy production is bound to be
low, and to remain low, and the modus of its mobilization slow and
unwieldy. With thyroid is introduced the trick of _catalysis_, or the
speeding up of the vital chemical reactions, through the agency of an
_intermediate_ which accelerates the process. It is par excellence the
great catalyst of energy in the body. (A catalyst is an intermediary
like the trace of water, which will bring about an explosion between
dry oxygen and hydrogen that without it have stayed inert with the
strongest currents of electricity.) Thus it supplies a mechanism not
only for quantity output of that subtle reality we label energy, but
also an apparatus for varying the available amount of it, and for
permitting the maximum range in ease and rapidity of its utilization.
The thyroid is still another device of life for procuring more and
more variation and differentiation, its goal, as far as we can peer
through the opalescent screen upon which its manifestations quiver.

From another point of view, the thyroid may be looked upon as the
organ evolved for maintaining the same amount of iodine in the blood
as there is in sea water. Sea water was our original habitat, since,
like Venus, we have all come up out of the sea.

The more intimate study of the composition of the blood has revealed
the most astonishing parallelism between it and the compounds of sea
water. The blood is sea water, to which has been added hemoglobin as
a pigment for carrying oxygen to the cells not in direct contact with
the atmosphere, nutrients to take the place of the prey our marine
ancestors gobbled up frankly and directly, and white cells to act as
the first line of defense. To keep the concentration of iodine in the
blood a constant, the thyroid evolved, since there is no iodine in
most foods and very little in those which do contain it.

That a minimum amount of iodine in the food is necessary to health is
shown by the existence of goitre regions. Around some of the Great
Lakes in the United States, for instance, the water does not contain
enough iodine. As a result, numerous cases of goitre occur. Iodine in
the form of sodium iodide in small doses will act as a prophylactic.
The amount of iodine in the blood is about one or two parts to ten
millions, and that of the liver is about three or four parts to ten
millions. Since the liver is the most complex and active chemical
factory in the body, its appropriation of a greater amount of iodine
for itself is understandable.

When thyroxin is administered in a single dose, there is a distinct
lag in the absorption of it by the tissues. A single dose does not
generate its maximum effect until the tenth day. This effect continues
for about ten days. Then there is a gradual decrease in the intensity
of reaction for another ten days. So that the length of time a single
administration of thyroxin functions within the body is about three
weeks. Again we have occasion to notice a protective device of the
cells. Since the presence of thyroxin in the tissues determines the
rate at which they burn themselves up, it is obvious that if there
were no mechanism for retarding its action, and at need varying it,
they really would set fire to themselves. That is to say, if the
tissues held a maximum of the thyroid internal secretion, and had to
take up more and more as it was fed out to them by the thyroid through
the blood, the pressure of energy production would attain the state of
a boiler without a safety valve. Even if self-destruction were avoided
by the ingestion of the largest quantities of energy-bearing foods,
rest for the cells would be difficult, if not impossible.

The thyroxin in the tissues diminishes after a period of great
exertion, the thyroxin probably being carried back to the thyroid
gland and kept there as reserve until further demand. So it has been
discovered that during the winter months, the thyroid glands of beef,
sheep and hogs all contain much less iodine than during the summer
months. During the winter months, manifestly, more energy is required
to maintain body temperature, hence the gland surrenders more of its
secretion to the tissues and so keeps less of it itself. There must
be, too, a certain wearing out of the potency of the iodine with time.
Even dead inorganic catalysts, made of simple elements, wear out after
having been used time and time again.

Though the thyroid is the supreme energizer, life is incompatible with
a certain excess of it. Death can be produced by successive daily
injections of its internal secretion. But it has, besides the
energizing effect, certain formative and nervous influences equally
marvelous. As illustrations, there are the cases of thyroid
deprivation in human beings, cretinism and myxedema, as well as
those in which it is believed there occurs an excess of the
thyroid secretion in the blood and tissues, the condition of
_hyper_thyroidism.

CRETINISM AS THYROID DEFICIENCY

Not that there is any arresting contrast of startling difference
between the phenomena presented by different species. The younger the
animal, the grosser the morbid symptoms witnessed. The animal fails to
grow. The bones and cartilage, except of the skull, fail to develop.
The abdomen projects and becomes large and flabby. The sex organs
atrophy. There is sterility. Pregnant rabbits abort, hens produce
very small eggs or none at all. These are the results of removing the
thyroid in animals.

Apathetic, indifferent, dirty, awkward, apparently idiotic, describe
the human cretins. Their skin is rough and coarse, peeling in sheets.
In some it is considerably knarled and creased as in the aged, and in
others swollen, hard and resistant. The hair becomes shaggy and rough,
losing all luster, and tends to grow irregularly and fall out. The
temperature becomes subnormal and an anemia supervenes. There is a
distinct reduction in the resistance to infections and intoxications.

Cretinism in the human is a condition in which the burning taper we
call Life flickers and smoulders and smokes. Thirty years ago it
was an example of the most hopeless idiocy. Whole populations were
afflicted with it. But neither man of science, nor bigot-fanatic,
assured by the Divine Confidence of its meaning as a visitation,
believed it could be modified an iota. Today, that inept word "cure"
may be applied to our power of attack upon it, provided it is
permitted to attack early enough. Modification, in the direction of
the most surprising betterment, is the miracle that has been wrought.

The history of a cretin runs somewhat as follows: A baby is born,
which in all appearances seems normal. Perhaps the nose is a trifle
squatter than even the average new-born's flat nose. There may also be
abnormal sleepiness, greater even than that of the normal baby in the
first month or two in that there is no spontaneous awakening from
the coma for food. But in most cases this is put down to normal
variability, or maybe to that limbo of all a baby's troubles:
weakness. After some months, it is noticed that the infant is failing
to grow at the normal rate, either physically or mentally. Examination
at this time reveals a curious thickening of the dental ridges. Then
the tongue takes the centre of the scene, by becoming unusually thick
and prominent, to the point of projecting beyond the mouth at all
times, and interfering with breathing, when the infant is in a
recumbent position.

More and more of the characteristics of the affection turn up. The
queer, repulsive, pitiful face of the cretins, which makes them all
seem brothers or twins, shapes itself. A yellowish, white or waxy
pallor; rough, dry, scaly, bloated skin; swollen, often wrinkled brow;
watery eyes, often almost concealed by the thickened eyelids; the
depressed pug nose with its wide, thick nostrils; large, erect ears;
the wobbly, drooling tongue, sticking out at one, yet not in derision;
the hair thin, and like tow in texture rather than human; eyebrows
and eyelashes are scant, and often absent; the nails short, thin and
brittle; the teeth, very late in coming, may be represented by a few
sharp points, irregular, decaying quickly, sometimes not succeeded at
all by those of the second dentition.

Whatever growth occurs is irregular and disproportionate. The trunk,
though small compared with the head, appears massive against the
background of the diminutive extremities. The back is somewhat humped,
arching at the waist-line, while the abdomen protrudes like a balloon,
with a hernia, often, at the navel. The extremities are short, bowed,
cold, and livid, covered with rolls of the infiltrated skin, rolls
which cannot be smoothed out. Hands and feet are broad, pudgy, and
floppy, the fingers stiff, square and spade-like, the toes spread
apart, like a duck's, by the solid skin. Above the collar bones there
are frequently great pads of fat which sometimes encircle the narrow
bull neck.

The mental state varies with the degree of deprivation of the internal
secretion of the thyroid. In the worst cases it is repulsively
vegetable. Even the intelligence common to the higher animals is
wanting. The cretins of the "human plant" kind, as they have been
nicknamed, will not recognize mother or father or any person about
them, or even a person from an object, and manifest no interest in
anything or anybody, not even toys. Hunger and thirst they manifest by
grunts and inarticulate sounds, or by screaming. They neither smile,
cough, nor laugh, but sit like sphinxes, breathing, but not reacting.

There are, of course, all grades and varieties. There are those who
recognize parents and familiar faces, and exhibit some evidence of
affection for them, acquire a limited vocabulary, and then cease, no
progress possible even with the alphabet. They attain the size and age
of two or three years and there stop altogether, as if a permanent
brake were applied to the wheels of their growth. Some higher types
may even come to speak connected sentences, and exhibit a certain
mild spontaneity, though stupid and slow and abnormally deliberate,
resembling the acquired form of thyroid deprivation or insufficiency,
for which Ord invented the name myxedema.

I have filled in with some detail this thumbnail sketch of thyroid
deprivation as it occurs in infancy to illustrate how wide a sweep the
gland's lariat embraces. Skin, hair, bones, muscle and fat, brain and
intelligence, growth and development, are modified precisely as the
size and shape of certain crystals are modified by the presence or
absence of ingredients in an apparently homogeneous solution. A
fertilized ovum, in which the predecessor of the thyroid gland is
present, that is to say, in which there is the seed and soil for its
sprouting, looks the same as one without that formative material. Yet,
when the time comes for the internal secretion of the thyroid to put
in its oar in the metabolic game, its presence or absence makes all
the difference in the world to the individual.

In the middle of the nineteenth century, when the concentration of
phosphorus in the brain was established as significant, the cry for
the emphasis of that fact was--without phosphorus no thought is
possible. We can much more relevantly declare that without thyroid,
no thought, no growth, no distinctive humanity or even animality is
possible. For the epigram about phosphorus was bombast, since it can
be declaimed with equal truth that without oxygen, without carbon,
without nitrogen, without any of the food elements that go to make
up the chemical composition of brain matter, no thought is possible.
Indeed, if one were set upon the indictment of a single chemical
element as the begetter of consciousness, the prisoner at the bar
would have to be copper. There is more copper in the brain by a
considerable degree than in any other organ of the body. Which perhaps
will be exceedingly regretted by the patrons of the aristocracy of the
soul who would have it as an emanation of a deposit in the brain of
silver at least, if not gold. They are like the old lady who would
never permit herself to be cured of her ailments except by gold plated
pills. Copper, however, is not necessary to intelligence. Without
thyroid there can be no complexity of thought, no learning, no
education, no habit-formation, no responsive energy for situations,
as well as no physical unfolding of faculty and function, and no
reproduction of kind, with no sign of adolescence at the expected age,
and no exhibition of sex tendencies thereafter.

EFFECTS OF FEEDING THYROID

How subtly the internal secretion affects every phase and aspect of
child as well as adult, by doing something to the speed of activities
in their cells, is told straightway by the effects of it when eaten
or introduced into the skin or blood of various people. A cretin,
idiotic, dwarfish, deformed, hopeless, an incessantly prodding burden
of sorrow to the mother, who looks upon the masterpiece she had
labored to bring forth, and beholds a terrible gargoyle, becomes
transformed when fed thyroid.

In a few days the cretin will get warmer, and require much less
wrapping and bed-clothing. With the improvement in circulation, the
color becomes better and the extremities lose their coldness. In a
week or so, irritability and resentment at disturbance appear. He will
begin to recognize and know his parents, smile and play. There is
a gradual return to the normal of the facial appearance, and a
resumption of growth. All kinds of marvelous growth effects occur.
Twenty teeth may be cut in six months. Coarse, rough dry, shaggy hair
becomes fine, silken, long and curly. The skin becomes soft, moist and
roseate. Inches in height may be added every month. Bright, active,
even talkative, are the descriptive terms an observer would apply
after a few months. A complete remaking of body and soul is apparently
affected.

Yet, should the administration of the thyroid cease, an almost
immediate reversion to the original vegetative condition is
inevitable. After a few days, reactiveness slows down, the child will
speak only when spoken to, will sit quietly in a chair all day and
act semi-anesthetized. Gradually hair and skin return to the previous
cold-blooded animal state, and the whole picture of the cretin is in
full bloom. Supplying the internal secretion of the gland promptly
repeats the transformation.

One wonders what is to be the ultimate fate of these reformed cretins.
Since the tale of the opening of life to them, once considered
hopeless idiots, is scarce a generation old, we have no data, as
yet, as to the character of their children or grandchildren, their
adventures and vicissitudes, in short, their life history. Those of
whom we have any record are normal and healthy school children or
workers, alive to the interests of childhood or their occupation
and social circles. No one outside their family knows that they are
cretins, and the most acute observer would be hard put to it to
suspect. What a theme for the reflections upon appearances the eminent
Victorians loved!

There are possibilities the imagination may envisage. One may suppose
such a cretin, with all his other ductless glands intact, grown
successfully to manhood under careful medical guidance. No one but
himself is aware of his affliction, outside of his medical advisers.
Luck aids him to rise in the world, or perhaps he has been born with
a spoon of the precious metals in his mouth. Adolescence, love and
marriage dance their sequence. Our hero of course keeps his dread
secret to himself. Whether such an omission of confidence would
entitle his wife to a divorce is something courts will be called upon
to decide sooner or later. But, without anticipating, the honeymoon
involves a trip to the South Seas. A storm and a wreck throws them
alone on an island, tropical, easy to live on, and rescue in the
course of a few months certain. The man, to his horror, discovers that
he has saved of his medicaments only a pill box containing half a
dozen of thyroid tablets, his requirement being one a day. He sees
them go day by day. Finally they are all gone. He feels his faculties
slipping hour by hour. Shall he tell her? Indecision grips him, and he
delays until the day when his consciousness sinks to the point where
his mind no longer grasps his problem. The wife must endure the
spectacle of the enchantment of her husband, and his change from
gallant lover to dull animal ogre. A new version of Beauty and the
Beast!

Cretinism as one manifestation of a soul without thyroid or without
enough thyroid is not all. The first great successes with thyroid were
achieved in adults, particularly adult women, exhibiting a peculiar
obesity, coldness, loss of hair and teeth and a remarkable lassitude
and torpor that might be summed up as a chronic drowsiness, like a
saturation of the blood with some narcotic drug. Or there may be a
melancholia, or a lack of ability to seize the finer points of a
mental process, or an argument treated in the abstract. Children
are said to be lazy, slow or dull. They experience an irritating
difficulty in understanding questions and expressing their wants and
desires, and so are declared to be vicious, or stupid.

All these are grades of the degeneration which Ord, the Englishman,
named myxedema. At its worst it is a sort of bloating and drying of
the body and the mind. Then there is infantilism, which is helped by
the giving of thyroid extract. It differs from the ordinary cretinism
in that, while one is reminded of the latter by the physical stunting
and the other stigmata, there is a certain amount of intelligence
which enables the individual to hold his own while he is a child. He
becomes a grown-up baby: at twenty prefers the company of children of
ten, and passes under the evil influence of designing so-called normal
persons. So dominated he will lie, steal, start fires, commit almost
any crime, with no inherent flair for criminality, but because of a
lack of independent judgment and inability to resist suggestion, and
a desire to please friends. He is simply an overgrown child who still
loves to play with toys, laughs and cries, becomes angry or afraid,
unreasonably and ridiculously, and yells for mamma when thwarted or
scared.

So much for what happens when there is not sufficient of the thyroid
secretion in the blood and tissues. Now to consider the effects of
an excess of it, the condition called hyperthyroidism, as the
insufficiency of it is labelled subthyroidism. Too much thyroxin can
be introduced into the system of a normal individual, or even a cretin
by the simple administration of too large doses or over too long
a time. Also a train of symptoms similar to those evoked by an
oversecretion of the thyroid may be mobilized by the taking of too
much iodine. Great sorrow, great joy, a sudden severe jolt to the
nervous equilibrium, sexual excitement, an overwhelming anger or grief
may leave in their wake a permanent hyperthyroidism. The symptoms are
the reverse of cretinism and myxedema. There is an over-excitability
of the nerves in place of sluggishness, and an over-reactivity of the
whole organism to its environment. The heart's action is too fast, and
under the slightest stimulus gets faster to the point of obtruding
itself into the conscious mind as a palpitation. Instead of the
lowered temperature and coldness of the cretin, there is a heightened
temperature, one or two degrees above the normal, and a feeling of
heat. The individual has a high warm color, does not sleep well,
becomes or remains thin no matter how much he or she eats, is
abnormally susceptible sexually, may suffer from a definite insomnia,
is emotional, and perspires freely. Alert, neurotic or high-strung,
magnetic, and imaginative are some of the descriptive adjectives
applicable. The eyes are bright and prominent, large and beautiful,
when they have not reached the stage entitled "pop-eyed." Or they may
even become so protuberant and bulging as to develop the expression of
one staring aghast at some ineffable horror. The latter is the feature
of only the severest types, when there is an associated goitre, the
combination designated as exopthalmic goitre.

There are, too, individuals in whom hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism
are mixed, or rather alternate. At one time they present the phenomena
of the one, at another of the other. They are the people who complain
of the cyclic quality of their moods and purposes. Their mood will
be a heaven of exaltation and exhilaration, and then descend into a
slough of despond from which they feel themselves inextricable. They
are always talking about the ups and downs of their mental states.
Headache and languor and fatigability, dry skin and lack of appetite
for food or exertion on one day or for one week, give way on the next
day, or for the next week, to an energetic gayety, and sweaty, flushed
skin, a prominent appetite for food and every sort of activity. Driven
to be forever on the go, for one period, in the next they feel like
lying down most of the day, with no inclination for any life whatever.
The stage of depression may go as far as a melancholia, the stage of
stimulation as far as mania. They may simulate manic-depressive or
cyclic insanity. Something restrains them, and holds them bound as in
a vise in the one cycle. And then they are driven on beyond themselves
by some invisible whip in the next.

THYROID AS DIFFERENTIATOR

Besides the action of the thyroid as energizer, lubricator, and growth
catalyzer, it has a remarkable power as a differentiator of tissues.
It determines the embryonic etchings of the different organs which in
their totality comprise the unique individual. Every multicellular
animal must first have existed as a single cell, the impregnated ovum.
With the body and personality of the ovum, the creature is one and
continuous, literally something the single cell has made of itself by
sub-dividing and differentiating. In the process, the cell mass often
goes through stages which stand out as individualities in themselves,
that appear on the surface absolutely unrelated. So the caterpillar
and the butterfly, to the naive child, seem as far apart as worm and
bird. In the case of the frog, the tadpole as a first sketch seems
completely an impossible and wild absurdity. Yet we know that there is
an orderly progression of events, a propagation of cells, a forward
going arrangement of chemical reactions, that results in expansion and
intricate complication of the organism. Just what the forces at work
in this most mysterious of all natural processes are, has been an
intellectual mystery that the best minds of the race have attempted
to get rid of with words like pangenesis (Darwin). Words of Black
(Mediterranean or Greek and Latin) origin, as Allen Upward has named
them, always cover a multitude of ignorances. The glands of internal
secretion, here, as in so many other dark places, provide the open
sesame to certain long closed doors of biology. They offer themselves
to us as the first definitely tangible agents which are known to keep
the process of growth going, and undoubtedly initiate the marvelous
unfolding of tissues and functions, organs and faculties summed up as
development or differentiation.

Thus by the direct feeding of thyroid at particular points in the
differentiating history most curious effects have been elicited. If
the gland is made part of the nutriment, the bathing environment, of
the tadpole, a hastening of its metamorphosis is attained. The tadpole
lives not out its day as a tadpole, but precociously turns into a
frog. But such a frog! It is a miniature frog, a dwarf frog, a frog
seen by looking through the wrong end of the telescope, a frog not
magnified, but micrified. Frogs have been so created the size of
flies. There has occurred a splitting of the two reactions which
ordinarily go hand in hand: the reaction of growth which is just brute
increase of total mass or weight and volume, and the reaction of
differentiation which is the finer process. The picture is a frog, but
a frog the size of a tadpole, a frog which has missed its childhood,
adolescence and youth, skipping over these transition stages into the
adult age, as a pigmy.

It is all as if a baby were suddenly to grow a beard and moustache,
evolve and shed teeth, and acquire the manner of an earnest citizen,
and yet retain the height and weight of a baby. That the spectacle
of such a superbaby is not quite the most fantastic of all
improbabilities is shown by the condition of progeria, first recorded
by the Briton, Hastings Guilford. A queer spectacle in which a child
incontinently grows old without having lived--in the course of a few
weeks or months. You look upon him and see senility on a small scale,
but with all its peculiarities: wrinkled skin, apathy, gray hair and
all the rest of it. All we can say about it is that it is probably due
to a paralysis of all the glands of internal secretion, a removal
of their influence upon the cells. Contrariwise to the feeding of
thyroid, removal of the thyroid of tadpoles will prevent their
development into frogs. If iodine is then fed to them, say mixed with
flour, normal metamorphosis will occur. If Body is the tool chest
which we carry about with us, as Samuel Butler said, then to the
thyroid belongs the name of tool-maker.

Another function of thyroid that must be taken into consideration is
what has been spoken of as its antitoxic function--in plainer English,
its power to prevent poisoning, or to increase resistance against
poisons, including the bacteria and other living agents which
cause the infectious diseases. Each molecule of food, ingested for
assimilation into our substance, accumulates a history of wanderings
and pilgrimages, attachments and transformations beside which the
gross trampings of a Marco Polo become the rambling steps of a
seven-league booted giant. In the course of its peregrinations, it
becomes a potential poison, potential because it is never allowed to
grow in concentration to the danger point. The thyroid plays its role
of protector like all the internal secretory machines. In an animal
deprived of a thyroid the feeding of meat shortens life--a single
sample of how it works to guard against intoxication from within. The
feeding of thyroid will also raise the ability of the cells to stand
poisons introduced from without--intoxications of all sorts. Alcohol
and morphine will affect in much smaller doses the subthyroid person
than the normal or the hyperthyroid. As regards the infections, which
directly or indirectly kill most of us, the injection of thyroid will
increase the content in the blood of the protective antibodies which
preserve us, temporarily at any rate, against malignant invaders. The
opsonins, for example, those substances which butter the bacteria so
that the appetite of the white cells for them is properly roused, are
mobilized by thyroid feeding or injection. Other substances in the
blood which destroy and dissolve bacteria are also increased. The
thyroid probably performs these functions by sending its secretion
to the cells directly responsible for the immunity reactions, and
stimulating them to activity.

A sketch of the thyroid like the foregoing shows it as the wondrous
controller of vitality and growth, and indefatigable protector against
intoxicants and injuries. When it is sufficiently active, life is
worth while; when it is defective, life is a difficult threatening
blackness. That would make it out as the gland of glands. It is
tremendously important, without a doubt, in normal everyday life. But
no more so than the other members of the cast. The position of star it
may claim, but in vain. The other glands of internal secretion to
be sketched will each, when the marvels of its business in the
cell-corporation are considered, present itself as candidate for the
honors of the president. Justice should give fair credit to all
the organs which fabricate the reagents of individuality, and the
regulators of personality.

THE PITUITARY

In the human skull, the pituitary is a lump of tissue about the size
of a pea lying at the base of the brain, a short distance behind the
root of the nose. It is of a grayish-yellow color, unpretentious and
insignificant enough in appearance, and so long neglected by the
scientists who boast their immunity to the glamor of the spectacular.
Guesses at its nature date back to Aristotle.

Like most of its colleagues among the glands of internal secretion,
it is really two glands in one, two glands with but a single name. At
least it consists of two different parts, distinct in their origin,
history, function and secretions, but juxtaposed and fused into what
is apparently a homogeneous entity. They are conveniently spoken of as
the anterior gland and the posterior gland.

In the embryo, the anterior gland is derived by a proliferation of
cells from the mouth area. The posterior gland represents an outgrowth
of the oldest part of the nervous system. When it is traced back along
the tree of the vertebrate species, it is found to be present in all
of them. An ancient invention, its precursor has been identified in
worms and molluscs and even among the starfish. "The pituitary
is practically the same, from myxine to man." A trusted veteran,
therefore, among the internal secretory organs, its importance can be
surmised.

To understand the story of the pituitary, variously acquired bits of
information concerning it have been assembled and fitted together like
the fragments of a picture puzzle, as Cushing has so well put it. Here
and there pieces stick out, obviously out of place. The relations of
some of them to one another or to the whole design are not at all
clear. Parts appear to have been irrevocably lost, or not yet to have
turned up. Chance bystanders will select odd figures and articulate
them into a new harmony. Yet out of the jumble of fragments, a fairly
respectable insight has been gained in less than a half century.

The pituitary is cradled in a niche at the base of the skull which,
because of its form, is known as the Sella Turcica or Turkish saddle.
So situated, an operative approach to it is overwhelmingly difficult.
On the other hand, X-ray studies are favored. "Nature's darling
treasure" it might be called, since there has been provided a skull
within the skull to shelter it.

Under the most highly magnifying lenses of the microscope, three kinds
of cells have been distinguished. The anterior gland is a collection
of solid columns of cells, surrounded by blood spaces into which their
secretion is undoubtedly directly poured. A gelatinous material,
presumed to be the internal secretion of the gland, has, in fact, been
observed emerging from the cells into the blood spaces. The posterior
lobe, or gland, consists of secreting cells producing a glassy
substance which finds its way into the spinal fluid that bathes the
nervous system. The spinal fluid itself is a secretion of another
gland at the base of the brain, the choroid. Nerves and internal
secretion are associated here with a closeness symbolic of their
general relations.

From each portion of the gland (to stick to the accepted nomenclature
of speaking of the two glands as one) an active substance has been
isolated. Robertson, an American chemist, separated from the anterior
lobe a substance soluble in the fat solvents, like ether and gasoline,
which he christened tethelin. But P.E. Smith has shown that the active
material is soluble neither in boiling water nor in boiling alcohol,
the typical fat solvent. A number of facts favor the idea of the
anterior lobe cells as stimulants of growth of bone and connecting
and supporting tissues generally. From the posterior lobe, pituitrin,
believed its internal secretion, has been obtained in solution.

Pituitrin is a substance of many marvelous functions. In general, it
controls the _tone_ of the tissues, of involuntary or smooth muscle
fibres of the blood vessels and the contractile organs of the body
like the intestines, the bladder and uterus. When injected, it will
slowly raise the blood pressure and keep it raised for some time, and
will increase the flow of urine from the kidneys and of milk from the
breasts. It will also cause an intense continued contraction of the
bladder and the uterus. It is also said to control the salt content of
the blood upon which its electrical conductivity and other properties
depend. Normally, there is a certain fixed ratio of the salts in the
blood, which keeps them like the ratio in sea-water. Again, we have
an example of the curious atavism of the internal secretions. The
thyroid, remember, keeps the iodine concentration of the blood like
that of the ocean, our original habitat. Pituitrin likewise does its
part to maintain our internal environment as near as possible to what
was once the surrounding medium. A substance somewhat similar has been
found in the skin glands of toads.

The extraordinarily well protected position of the pituitary, its
persistence throughout life, and its abundant blood supply, emphasize
its vital importance. No other gland of internal secretion can
adequately substitute for it. Complete expiration means death, in two
or three days, with a peculiar lethargy, unsteadiness of gait and loss
of appetite, emaciation, and a fall of temperature, so that the
animal becomes cold-blooded, its temperature the same as that of the
atmosphere it occupies. If only part of the anterior lobe is taken
away, there occurs a remarkable degeneration of the individual. The
degeneration is not a mucinous infiltration of the skin and the
internal organs which occurs with thyroid deprivation, but a fatty
degeneration, with a tendency to inversion of sex. A singular
somnolence, a dry skin, loss of hair, a dull mentality, sometimes
epilepsy, and a noticeable craving for and tolerance of sweets appear.
These are but a few of the observations obtained in experimental
sub-pituitarism, that is, underaction or insufficient secretion of the
pituitary, produced by removing part of the anterior gland.

If such an experimental sub-pituitarism is started in infancy, for
instance in puppies, there is a cessation, or marked hindering and
slowing of growth. That is, dwarfs are artificially created. Apropos,
pathologists have shown that in several true human dwarfs the gland
is rudimentary or inadequate. All of which goes hand in hand with the
evidence that the skeleton stands directly under the domination of the
pituitary.

REGULATOR OF ORGANIC RHYTHMS

There are certain other singular by-effects of the gland in its
relation to the periodic phenomena of the organism like hibernation,
sleep, and the critical sex epochs of both sexes. In hibernation, or
winter sleep, the animal in cold weather passes into a cataleptic
state in which it continues to breathe, more deeply but more slowly
than when awake, but shows no other signs of consciousness or life.
A lowered blood pressure and a marked insensitivity to painful and
emotional stimuli go with it. There is a preliminary storage of starch
in the liver, and of fat throughout the fat depots of the body. These
are so like what happens after part of the pituitary is removed, that
a comparison of the two becomes inevitable. Common to both conditions
is a drop in the rate of tissue combustion or metabolism, which can
be relieved by injection of an extract of the pituitary, a rise of
temperature occuring simultaneously. Moreover, examination of the
glands of internal secretion of hibernating species, like the
woodchuck, during the period of hibernation, shows changes in all of
them, but most marked in the pituitary, the shrunken cells staining
as if they too were asleep, or in a resting stage. The characteristic
alive qualities of these cells return, without relation to food
or climate, when the animal comes to in the spring, at the vernal
equinox. Hibernation may, perhaps, be put down to a seasonal wave of
inactivity of the pituitary gland.

Now winter sleep may be looked upon as an exaggeration of ordinary
night sleep, the latter differing from the former only in its brevity.
In the natural sleep of non-hibernating species there occurs, too,
a fall in temperature. Moreover, they all, even man, have a certain
capacity for winter sleep, as the experiences of travellers and
explorers in the arctic regions indicate. In certain parts of Russia,
where there is a scarcity of food during the winter months, the
peasants pass weeks at a time in a somnolent state, arousing once a
day for a scant meal. Just as the sex glands influence the body and
mind profoundly with a certain cyclic periodicity of activity and
inactivity (rut, heat, menstrual period and so on), which has been
demonstrated to have a very close functional relationship with the
pituitary, so sleep and hibernation will bear interpretation as
products of a temporary dormancy of the same gland. We have, then,
to set up in the place of Morpheus and Apollo, the new gods of the
internal secretion of a chemical-making bit of the brain, as an
explanation of the rhythms of sleep and wakefulness.

There are individuals who go about outside of hospital walls,
quasi-normally, who are semi-hibernators or partial hibernators, and
who are really in a state of subpituitarism. They are people who may
have something wrong or inferior with their pituitary, but not to the
extent of interference with their daily life. They go about with their
type stamped upon them for the seeing eye. The classical type is
obese, with fat distributed everywhere, but more so in the lower
abdomen and the lower extremities. They are slow and dull, and
sexually inactive, often impotent. They are sometimes tall, but most
often dwarfish, and may be subject to epileptic seizures. They recall
the picture of what happens to young dogs partially deprived of the
pituitary. Dickens delivered a perfect likeness of an extreme degree
of the condition in the Fat Boy of the "Pickwick Papers," whose
employment with Mr. Wardle consisted in alternate sleeping and eating.

WHEN THE PITUITARY OVERACTS

All grades of overaction of the pituitary exist. Then its peculiar
power to act as a stimulant to the growth of bone and the soft
supporting and connecting tissues like tendons and ligaments comes
into play. If the overaction or excess of secretion begins in
childhood or adolescence, that is, before puberty, there results a
great elongation of the bones, so that a giant is the consequence. Now
giants have always appealed to the imagination of the little man, and
have had all kinds of wonderful abilities ascribed to them by him. The
giants and ogres of folk-lore and fairy tales are favored with the
most extraordinary mental advantages. Direct and analytic acquaintance
with the giants of our own day, as well as a probing of their conduct
in the past, has shown that normal giants--persons of exceptional size
free from physical or mental deformities--are rare. There are people
with _hyper_-pituitarism who exhibit the highest mental powers. In
them is an increased activity of the posterior lobe in association
with enlargement and hyperfunction of the anterior, overgrowth is not
so marked, and the individual is lean and mentally acute. But the
ordinary giant is one in whom there is degeneration of the pituitary
after too much action of the anterior and too little of the posterior
glands. A tumor or disease process in the gland is most often
responsible.

If the overaction of the anterior happens after puberty, when the
long bones have set, and can not grow longer, a peculiar diffuse
enlargement of the individual occurs, especially of his hands and feet
and head. The nose, ears, lips and eyes get larger and coarser.
As these people are rather big and tall to begin with, the effect
produced is that of a heavy-jawed, burly, bulking person, with bushy
overhanging eyebrows, and an aggressive manner. For there is, too,
something distinctive about their mentality which has been as often
portrayed as those of the pathologic giant. Rabelais' most famous
character, Gargantua, belongs to the group. We recruit more
drum-majors than prime ministers from among these people. They
often suffer much from torturing boring headaches, and a consequent
despondency and feeling of hopelessness which colors gray the entire
spiritual spectrum. Up to a certain point these sufferers have a
remarkable alertness and capacity. When conscious of the malady, they
often meet it with a doggedly courageous optimism, which is another
characteristic, although women occasionally commit suicide.

In both the semi-hibernators who remind one of cattle, and in the
giant or acromegalic types who remind one of the anthropoid ape, there
develops a distinct diminution of sexual life. An abnormal process in
the anterior gland, whether of oversecretion or of undersecretion,
may interfere with the proper functioning of the posterior gland, the
secretion of which is tonic not only to the brain cells, but also to
the sex cells. Thus, young animals deprived of the pituitary will not,
if male, grow spermatozoa, nor ripe ova in the female. Moreover, the
feeding of pituitary increases sexual activity. In the case of hens,
this has been demonstrated to be about thirty per cent by a pretty
experiment. At a time of the year when eggs diminish, six hundred
and fifty-five hens laid two hundred and seventy-three eggs upon an
ordinary diet. When pituitary was added to their food for four days,
the number of eggs rose to three hundred and fifty-two, an increase of
seventy-nine. In addition, the fertility of the chicks born of these
eggs was augmented, especially if both parents had been fed on
pituitary. There are other aspects of the relation of the pituitary to
sex, which will be treated in another chapter.

THE BONY CRADLE OF THE PITUITARY

Always, in attempting to understand the pituitary, it is necessary to
remember that it is tightly packed in the bony cradle, the Turkish
Saddle or Sella Turcica. Should some stimulus, local, or in the blood,
arouse the gland to growth, a good deal will depend upon whether it
has room to grow in, or it will make room by eroding the bone. With
space for the formation of a large anterior and posterior pituitary
gland, there will be created the long, lean individual, with a
tendency to high blood pressure and sexual trends, great mental
activity, initiative, irritability and endurance. An outstanding trait
of these favorites of fortune is that they remain thin no matter how
much food they consume, and they have the best of appetites. They
often are subject to severe headaches because of intermittent swelling
of the gland against the bone of its container.

If the bony container is or becomes too small for its contents, it
is interesting that along with the other signs of pituitary
insufficiency, such as undersize, obesity, and asymmetry, there
developes conspicuous moral and intellectual inferiority. The
unfortunates suffer from compulsions and obsessions and lack
inhibitions. They are the pathological liars with little or no
initiative or conscience--amoral, not merely theoretically, but
instinctively and unconsciously, with all the certitude and perfection
of the unconscious accomplishment.

THYROID AND PITUITARY

The thyroid and the pituitary have often been compared. The anterior
gland and the thyroid arise from almost the same spot in the embryonic
oesophagus, the thyroid being an outgrowth in front, the anterior
pituitary an outgrowth behind of the same soil. They both control
growth marvelously, also the differentiation, the mass and intricacy
of the tissues. But they differ in the site of their control. The
thyroid bears more directly upon the inner and outer coverings of the
body, the skin, the skin glands and the hair, the mucous membranes,
and the irritability and the preparedness for response of the nerves.
The pituitary acts more upon the framework of the body, the skeleton
and the mechanical supports and movers. Bone and ligament, muscle
and tendon seem to be within its immediate sway. The secretion or
secretions of the pituitary diffuse directly into the fluid bathing
the nervous system, supplying beneficent stimulants and aiding in the
abstraction of harmful waste. So while the thyroid raises the energy
level of the brain, and the whole nervous system, as a byproduct of
its general awakening effect upon all the cells of the body, the
pituitary probably stimulates the brain cells more directly, perhaps
in the manner of caffeine or cocaine.

The difference between the thyroid and the pituitary might be put this
way: that while the thyroid increases energy evolution and so makes
available a greater supply of crude energy, by speeding up cellular
processes, the pituitary assists in energy transformation, in energy
expenditure and conversion, especially of the brain, and of the sexual
system. In short, the thyroid facilitates energy production, the
pituitary its consumption. The pituitary appears therefore as the
gland of continued effort. Hence fatigability, an inability to
maintain effort, is one of the prominent complaints when there is
destruction or an insufficiency of it for one reason or another. As
such, it contrasts with the glands of emergency effort, known as the
adrenals.




CHAPTER III

THE ADRENAL GLANDS, THE GONADS, AND THYMUS


Like the pituitary, each adrenal gland is a double gland, that is,
consists of two distinct portions, united together, one might say, by
the accident of birth. It would be confusing, however, to speak of
each as two glands, because there are, as a matter of fact, two
separate adrenal glands, one in the right side of the abdomen, and the
other in the left. Each gland is composite, or duplex. How the two
parts came to be united is a long story, interesting but too long to
be recounted here. In fishes they are apart and independent.

Each adrenal is a cocked hat shaped affair, astride the kidneys,
easily recognized because of its yellowish fatty color. Indeed, for
centuries the glands were not given a separate status as organs, but
were passed up as part of the fat ensheathing the kidney. In childhood
and youth, in common with the other glands, they are relatively larger
and more prominent than in the adult. Also, at every age, the amount
of blood passing through them is very large compared to their size.
Their tremendous importance in the body economy accounts for their
being so favored.

The two parts of which each gland is composed, are known as the cortex
or outer portion (literally the bark) and the medulla or inner portion
(literally the core). No clean-cut boundary sharply delimits the two,
as strands and peninsulas of tissue of one portion penetrate the
other. In the history of their development in the species and the
individual, and in their chemistry and function, a sharp difference
contrasts them.

In the embryo, the cortex is derived from the same patch that gives
rise to the sex organs, the ovaries in the female, and the testes in
the male, described as the germinal epithelium. How intimately the
two sets of glands are connected is neatly pointed by this fact of a
common ancestor. All vertebrates possess adrenal glands. In the lowest
of the vertebrates, Petromyzon, the two parts are distinct, the cells
of the cortex-to-be are situated in the walls of the kidney blood
vessels, projecting as peninsulas in the blood stream, the blood
sweeping over and past them. The medulla-to-be consists of cells
accompanying the vegetative nerves. Among reptiles, the two become
adjacent for the first time, and among birds one part occupies the
meshes of the other. The size of the cortex varies directly with the
sexuality and the pugnacity of the animal. The charging buffalo, for
example, owns a strikingly wide adrenal cortex. The fleeing rabbit,
on the other hand, is conspicuous for a narrow strip of cortex in its
adrenal. Human beings possess a cortex larger than that of any other
animal.

No definite chemical substance has as yet been isolated from the
cortex. That remains a problem for the investigator of the future. But
certain observations, especially concerning the relation between
the development and behaviour of the so-called secondary sex
characteristics, those qualities of skin, hair and fat distribution,
physical configuration and mental attitudes, which distinguish the
sexes, and the condition of the gland, indicate clearly that an
internal secretion will be isolated, and that it will in its activity
furnish certain predictable features.

Three different layers of cells, arranged in strings, that
interpenetrate to form a network directly bathed by blood, that breaks
in upon them from _open_ blood vessels, compose the cortex. Most
remarkable is this method of blood supply for it is exceedingly common
among the invertebrates and rare among the vertebrates.

In certain disturbances of these glands, especially when there are
tumors, which supply a massive dose of the secretion to the blood
presumably, peculiar sex phenomena and general developmental anomalies
and irregularities are produced. If the disease be present in the
fetus, taking hold before birth, and so brought into the world with
the child, there evolves the condition of pseudo-hermaphroditism. The
individual, if a female, presents to a greater or less extent the
external habits and character of the other sex. So that she is
actually taken for a man, although the primary sex organs are ovaries,
often not discovered to be such except when examined after an
operation or death. How closely such an occurrence touches upon the
problems of sex inversion and perversion comes at once to mind.

If the process involving the adrenal cortex attacks it after birth,
the symmetrical correspondence and harmony of the primary sex organs
and the secondary sex characters are not affected. But there follows
a curious hastening of the ripening of body and mind summed up in the
word puberty, a precocious puberty, with the most startling effects.
A little girl of 2, 3, or 4 years of age perhaps will come to exhibit
the growth and appearance of a girl of 14. She begins to menstruate,
her breasts swell, she shoots up in height and weight, sprouts the
hair distribution of the adult, and the mentality of the adolescent,
restless, acquiring, doubting, emerge. A tot bewitched into puberty!
A boy of six or seven may suddenly, in the course of a few weeks or
months, become a little man, robust, rather short and stocky, but
moustached, with the muscular strength and sexual powers of a man and
thinking as a man. It is all as if into some fermentable medium or
solution a little yeast were dropped that changed the quiet calm of
its surface into a bubbling, effervescing revolution. It suggests at
once that maturation, the transformation of the child into the man or
woman, must be due to the pouring into the blood and the body fluids
of some substance which acts like the yeast in the fermentable
solution. The adrenal cortex is one source of the maturity-producing
internal secretions.

If trouble in the adrenal cortex starts after puberty, phenomena of
the same type, but of a different order, exhibit themselves. A woman,
say in the thirties, becomes thus afflicted. Slowly or quickly her
body will be covered by an abundant growth of hair, more or less of a
beard and moustache appear upon the face, her voice will become deep
and penetrating, her muscles will harden, and she will show a capacity
for hard physical labor. Sexually she appears to be made over,
masculinity now predominates in her make-up. Virilism is the name by
which the French in particular have popularized the knowledge of the
condition. Virilists have to shave or be shaved regularly and are not
bothered in the least by the cares, responsibilities, jealousies and
anxieties of personal beauty, for the change in their spirituality
makes them immune to the preoccupations of the feminine. The cause of
such a transformation in a previously entirely normal woman has been
found to be a tumor of the adrenal cortex.

But not only is sexuality, and the conduct of the secondary sex
characters, connected with the adventures of the adrenal cortex. The
development of the master tissues of the body, the brain, the pride
and darling of evolution, is in some subtle way correlated with
it. The adrenal cortex contains more of the phosphorus-containing
substances of the general nature of those found in the central nervous
system than any other gland or non-nervous tissues in the body. During
human intrauterine life the adrenal glands are large and conspicuous,
in the first half of the second month being twice as large as the
kidneys. Most of this relatively huge size, which happens in the human
alone, and not in other animals, is due to enlargement of the cortex.
Should this preponderance of the cortex over the medullary portion not
occur in the human, that is, if the proportions remain like those of
other animals, the brain fails to develop properly, or an entirely
brainless monster is generated. The human brain, therefore, probably
owes its superiority over the animal brain, to the adrenal cortex, in
development anyhow. The growth of the brain cells, their number and
complexity is thus controlled by the adrenal cortex.

Besides its action upon the sex cells and the brain cells, the
internal secretion of the adrenal cortex acts upon the pigment cells
of the skin, blunting their sensitiveness to light. In degeneration
of the interior of the gland, which destroys the medulla, but not the
cortex, the color of the skin is left unmodified. If, however, the
cortex is invaded, as happens most often in the classical tuberculosis
of the adrenals which drew the attention of the Englishman Addison
to them, then a darkening of the skin, which may go on to a negroid
bronzing, follows. That means an increased sensitiveness of the
pigment cells of the skin to light. Skin color control may therefore
be looked upon as an adrenal cortex function.

So much is known about the adrenal cortex. Upon the medulla, the
interior gland of the gland, there has been lavished an amount of
attention beside which the cortex is to be classed as a neglected
wall-flower. Nearly everything that possibly could be determined
about an internal secretion has in its case been settled or plausibly
guessed at. The cells manufacturing the secretion, its exact chemistry
and function, its action upon the blood, the liver and spleen, the
heart and lungs, the brain and nervous system, have been minutely
investigated, studied and charted. Its source in the food, its fate in
the body, its place in the history of the individual and the species,
its importance as a weapon in the struggle for existence, and the
survival of the fittest have been made the subject of an astonishing
number of researches, considering the short period of scarce three
decades that intensive science has centered its barrage upon it.

In the first place, the medulla contains numerous nerve cells,
belonging to the vegetative, also called the sympathetic nervous
system. But these nerve cells are merely minor notes of the symphony.
The motif is settled by a majority of large, granular cells, which
stain a distinctive yellowish-brown when the gland is fixed in a
solution of bichromate of potash. All chromium salts, in fact, stain
the therefore labelled chromaffin cells. The characteristic staining
power appears to be dependent upon, or correlated with, the presence
of the internal secretion of the medulla of the adrenal, adrenalin.
For the content of adrenalin, as calculated chemically, and the
depth of stain as seen under the microscope, rise and fall together.
Chromaffin reaction and adrenalin content go together. The poisonous
skin glands of the toad have been found to give a marked chromaffin
reaction, and to contain a large amount of adrenalin. Other masses
of cells in the human body, especially along the course of the
sympathetic nervous system, have been shown to give the reaction and
to contain adrenalin.

The erratic Brown-Sequard pounded and hammered away for more than
thirty years on the importance to life of the adrenal glands, since
death occurred so quickly after their removal. But it was not until
Schaefer, the Scotch physiologist, (who has done more than any other
living man to stimulate study of the internal secretions) found that
an extract of them, when injected into a vein, produced a remarkable
though temporary rise of the blood pressure, that a real enthusiasm
for its investigation was generated. As the upshot, a number of other
significant properties besides the first of blood-pressure raising,
have been put down to its credit. Chemical tests demonstrated that
it originated in the medulla. The exact amount of it present in the
medulla, in the blood issuing from the adrenals and in the circulation
in general have been determined. The concentration in the blood is
about one part in twenty million, while there is about a hundred
thousand times as much stored in the gland as reserve. In infections
and intoxications, after muscular exertion, and with profound
emotions, there is a decrease of it in the gland and an increase in
the blood. Pain and excitement, especially fear and rage, will bring
about its discharge from the gland. With its entry into the blood,
there is a tremendous heightening of the tone, a _tensing_, of the
nervous system. The nerve cells become more sensitive to stimuli,
more sugar is poured into the blood from the liver, more red blood
corpuscles are squeezed into the circulation from the blood lakes of
the liver and spleen. There is a redistribution of the whole blood
mass, a good deal of it being withdrawn from the internal viscera, and
hurried to the skeleton muscles and the brain. The heart beats more
strongly, the eye sees more clearly, the ear hears more distinctly,
and the breathing is more rapid. The temperature rises, the hair of
the head and the body becomes erect, the skin gets moist and greasy.
It will help a fatigued muscle to regain its normal tone. In short, it
has a reinforcing action upon the nutritive properties of the blood,
the tone of the muscles, and the activity of the brain and the
vegetative nerves.

Chemists set themselves the task of discovering just what was the
substance possessed of such extraordinary and hitherto unimagined
properties. The pure adrenalin was isolated, capable of evoking all
the reactions of the impure adrenal extract mixtures. The final
triumph was the preparation of it artificially in the laboratory,
its synthesis. When a substance can be synthesized in the chemist's
laboratory, it means that its composition has become thoroughly
understood. Here at last was an example of those mysterious internal
secretions, the existence of which had indeed been postulated and
proven, but which had never actually been inspected by the eye of
mortal man. To have it in a test-tube, indeed to possess it in large
quantities in bottles, to be able to manipulate and examine it without
fear of the co-action of admixed impurities, to see it with the eye,
and to taste it with the tongue, was truly a marvel. The miracle
aroused at once scores of researches.

THE GLAND OF COMBAT AND FIGHT

Considering its effects, one is reminded at once of the similarity
to the expression of a primitive emotion like anger or fear. So, by
turning a relation upside down, it was argued that if artificial
adrenalin could produce all these effects of an emotion like fear, the
emotion itself should produce an increase of the natural adrenalin in
the blood. This was found to be the case. Cannon of Harvard has built
up an entire theory of the adrenal as the gland of emergencies upon
the basis of these effects. In the facing of crises the adrenal
functions as the gland of combat. And indeed, as I have mentioned,
the more combative and pugnacious an animal, the more adrenal it has,
while the timid and meek and weak have less.

The Glands of Combat, the glands of emergency energy, the glands
of preparedness,--such are the adrenal glands when viewed from the
adrenalin standpoint. A picture of its activity in the evolutionary
scheme of struggle and survival is something like the following:
meeting an enemy, the animal is put in danger. It must fight or flee
for its life. In either case, certain conditions must be fulfilled, if
the body of the animal endangered is to be saved. To prevent injury to
itself, and to do as much injury as possible to the foe--that becomes
its immediate urge and necessity. Of the two animals, if in one the
heart should begin to beat more strongly, the blood pressure to rise,
the blood to flow more rapidly through the attacking instruments, the
muscles, the teeth and claws, the brain and its eyes, while the other
animal experiences none of these, the former will be the victor in
fight or flight. Adrenalin may be looked upon as the invention for the
mobilization at a moment's notice, or as we say, after generations of
use, by instinct, of all these visceral and blood advantages in the
struggle of combat or flight.

The nature of instinct, in its relation to the glands of internal
secretion, is a problem for another chapter. But we may note that the
James-Lange theory of an emotion regards it as a consciousness of the
very changes in the organism adrenalin causes. Since adrenalin is the
starter of the whole process, and since McDougal has defined emotion
as the feeling aspect of an instinct, just as an instinct may
be defined as the motor aspect of an emotion, the adrenals as
emotion-genetic, and instinct-genetic, play a part in the most
profound processes of the subconscious and unconscious.

THE MECHANISM OF FEAR

We may therefore visualize a mechanism of fear. An instant excess of
adrenalin occurs in the blood of, say, a cat when it is alarmed by the
sight of a dog. In that cat, at the image of its hereditary enemy,
certain brain cells vibrate. A nerve tract, in use as the line for
that particular message in a hundred thousand generations of cats,
whirrs its yell to the medulla of the adrenal gland. Through the tiny,
solitary veins of the glands, an infinitesimal quantity of the reserve
adrenalin responds. And with what an effect! The blood, that primary
medium of life, the precious fluid that is everything, must all, or
nearly all, be sent to the firing line, the battle trenches, the
brain and muscles, now or never. So the blood is drafted from the
non-essential industries--from the skin where it serves normally to
regulate the heat of the body--from the digestive organs, the stomach
and intestine, which must forsooth stop now, since if the organism
will die, their last effort of digestion has been done--from the liver
and spleen, great chemical factories in normal times, but now of no
moment. Besides, should they be wounded, it is better they should
be bloodless, and so run the least chance of bleeding to death, or
getting infected, for the more tissue there is around, the greater the
danger of infection. So, like the skin, the liver which usually holds
in its great lakes and vessels about a quarter of all the blood in
the body, is almost drained and blanched. At the same time, its great
storehouses of sugar open their sluices and pour into the blood,
increasing its sugar content by about a third because the combustion
of sugar is the easiest way of getting energy free in the cells, sugar
being the most quickly burned up of all the foods, and so the great
food of the muscles and the heart. The poisons of fatigue, acid
products of the contraction of muscles, are antagonized and
neutralized by substances formed in the course of the oxidation of the
sugar. Adrenalin, too, is directly fatigue antagonist. It causes the
blood to clot faster than under ordinary circumstances. It erects the
hair of the animal, and dilates the pupils of the eyes. There is an
increase of the apparent size, all of which are to intimidate the
enemy, like an Indian's painting of his face blue and green. It
also--but what else does it not do?

The story of adrenalin would have delighted the heart of Samuel
Butler. His "Note Books," opulent as they are, would have been the
richer in pages and pages with his comments on it. Contending as he
did with the pompous, dogmatic mechanism worship of the new scientific
clique of his time on the one hand, and the superstitions of the old
theological caste on the other, he had to fight the hardest kind of
guerrilla warfare in defense of the Purpose of Life. Adrenalin, that
weapon of a gland tracing its ancestry back to the begetter of the
brain itself, for brain and adrenal gland both have evolved from the
small nerve ganglia of the invertebrates, would have backed up to the
hilt his argument, which he had to elaborate on the indirect grounds
of analogy and induction. Essential for defense, and for protection,--
an organ in which everything necessary for the stratagems of retreat,
or the offensives of attack, are supplied ad libitum, while everything
non-essential or detrimental to the matter of the moment is inhibited,
arrested and suppressed--no more perfect sample of the design with
which Life is drenched could be imagined by the most closeted of
passionate idealists.

FAILURE OF THE ADRENALS

As the gland of acute stress and strain, the adrenals in modern life
are called upon to function more heavily and frequently than in the
past. As a matter of fact, the life of the beast of jungle and field,
as well as of savage and barbarian, is just as full of emergencies and
shocks as that of the average city man or woman. In the case of the
latter, however, inhibitions, education, and the conditions of modern
living, improper food, sedentary indoor confinement, and universal
rack and noise, have undoubtedly made greater and greater demands upon
the adrenal glands. Chemical quantitative studies have shown that by
repeated stimulation, the adrenal glands may be exhausted of their
reserve supply of secretion, which returns only insufficiently if not
enough time is given for recuperation. There results a condition of
temporary or chronic adrenal insufficiency, supposedly an insufficient
functioning of the gland as a whole. In persons so afflicted there
appears a fatigability, a sensitiveness to cold, cold hands and feet,
which are sometimes mottled bluish-red, a loss of appetite and zest in
life, and a mental instability characterized by an indecision, and a
tendency to worry, a weepishness upon the slightest provocation.

A certain number of the temporary breakdowns or nervous prostrations,
which seem to be growing more common or fashionable, may be sometimes
traced to such a deficiency of normal response to the needs of
everyday conflict by the adrenal gland. In some, mental and physical
elasticity are totally lost, and even the slightest exertion in
either field often causes so much weariness and exhaustion as to be
prohibited. Depression and even melancholia are associated with the
fear of not being able to accomplish good work hitherto easy and
enjoyed. Sometimes they are obsessed with the thought that they have
lost their nerve completely, and so dread to commit themselves in even
the most trivial of situations. The vacillating frame of mind is so
distressing at times as to arouse thoughts of suicide. When these
symptoms concur in the type of personality whom I shall describe
as the unstable adrenal-centered individual, there is evidence for
explaining the process as the effect of an insufficiency of secretion
by the adrenal gland.

Shock, collapse, heart failure and sudden death following abnormal
emotion, like an attack of rage, or the terrors of a railroad
accident, or bad news, or excessive exertion like running a long race
or climbing a high mountain when in poor general health, as the phrase
goes, or in the terminal stages of infections like epidemic influenza
or Asiatic cholera, have been put down to an acute insufficiency of
the adrenal gland. A lowered temperature, blood pressure, and blood
vessel tone, exhibited in tests of the response of the skin to
stroking, are present in all of these and point the same moral.

In the second half of the 19th century, an American physician, Beard,
described Neurasthenia, a general disturbance of the body and mind,
not properly classifiable as a disease, but serious enough to
incapacitate or at least greatly limit the sufferer. The neurasthenic
is to be recognized by the fact that the most painstaking objective
examination of his organs reveals nothing the matter with them. Yet,
according to his complaint, everything is the matter with him. He
cannot sleep when he lies down, he cannot keep awake when he stands
up. He cannot concentrate, but still he is pitifully worried about his
life. The slightest irritant causes him to go off the handle. As
he works himself up into his hysterical state as a reaction to a
disagreeable person or problem, irregular blotches may appear on
his face and neck. Generally, his hands and feet are clammy and
perspiring, his face is abnormally flushed or pallid, the eyes are
worried or starey, unwonted wandering sensations involving now this
area of the body, or now that obsess him. As the blood pressure is
too low for the age, the circulation is nearly always inadequate and
palpitation of the heart is a frequent complaint. So frequent, that
attention is often centered upon the heart, a diagnosis of heart
disease is made, and the unfortunate is doomed for life--to brood
over horrible possibilities. The brooding over themselves and their
troubles is one of the distinctive features of the whole complex.
Neurasthenia may masquerade as any organic disease. An individual with
a soil for a neurasthenic reaction to life will become neurasthenic
when confronted by any stone wall, including a serious ailment within
himself.

Beard's Neurasthenia leaped at once into the limelight. It was seized
upon and applauded in Europe as a good new name for an old condition,
observed particularly in Americans abroad to rest from the fatigues of
the get-rich-quick games of industrial speculators. In fact, the name
of the American Disease was given to it. Various theories about the
effects of climate, sunlight per square inch and unit of time, oxygen
content of the air, and so on, were offered up upon the altar of
scientific explanation. Sir Arbuthnot Lane, famous protagonist of
Lane's intestinal kink, said that all Americans were neurasthenic.
Neurasthenia became one of the most popular of diagnoses, and remains
so today.

Neurasthenia, regarded as a reaction of people to the stress and
strain of life, has without a doubt increased. The most casual of
observers will tell you that the generation of the Great War is a
neurasthenic generation. It takes its pleasures too intensely,
its pains too seriously, its troubles too flippantly. But what is
neurasthenia? Beard himself regarded it as a chronic fatigue and loss
of tone of the nervous system, a literal interpretation of his term.
That the conception, as far as it goes, is valid is proved by the fact
that it is the neurasthenics who furnish the majority of the clientele
of the cults, the Christian Scientists, the osteopaths and the
chiropractors, and who are the subjects of the faith and miracle
cures, like those of Lourdes. That is because their particular
disease, or what appears to them to be their very own disease--and
they certainly cherish their ailments--is but an expression of, a
compensation for, indeed a consolation for, the underlying feelings of
insufficiency or inferiority. Were there no moral code, were there
no social system, nor the consequent inculcated conscience to be
responsible to, there would be no such disguising symptom as
the disease which preoccupies the consciousness. The feeling of
insufficiency would be there, and would be recognized as in itself
the disease. To the physiologist and the psychologist, the feeling of
insufficiency is the disease, no matter how spectacular the overlaying
phenomena--a cripple on crutches or a man blind and speechless. Shell
shock is now acknowledged to belong to this group.

Now one of the outstanding effects of disease of the adrenal glands is
the feelings of muscular and mental inefficiency. And as a matter
of fact, a good number of observations conspire for the idea that a
certain number of neurasthenics are suffering from insufficiency of
the adrenal gland. The chronic state of the acute phenomenon, known as
the nervous breakdown, really represents in them a breakdown of the
reserves of the adrenals, and an elimination of their factor
of safety. In the light of that conception, the great American
disease--dementia americana--is seen to be adrenal disease--and the
American life to be the adrenal life, often making too great demands
upon that life, and so breaking down with it.

ADRENAL EXCESS

The converse of adrenal insufficiency, that of adrenal excess, also
exists. In certain types of the middle-aged, a high blood pressure,
accompanied by a great capacity for work, has been shown to be
associated with hypertrophy of the cortex. In women, there is a
degree of masculinity, as the adrenal in women makes for masculinity,
neutralising more or less the specifically feminine influences of
the internal secretions of the ovary. Such women possess a vigor and
energy above the normal, and command responsible positions in society,
not only among their own sex, but also among men. They are the ones
who, in the present overturn of the traditional sex relationships,
will become the professional politicians, bankers, captains of
industry, and directors of affairs in general.

THE GONADS

(_Sexual, Puberty or Interstitial Glands_)

The gonads is the name applied to the generative or reproductive
glands considered collectively. In the male, they are the testes; in
the female, the ovaries. They are, therefore, sometimes called the
sexual glands. As they possess definite canals for the removal of
their gross secretion, the specific reproductive cells, ova or
spermatozoa, to a surface of the body, they are first of all glands of
external secretion. But they have been also found to hold secretory
cells not concerned with the making of the reproductive corpuscles,
but, as all the evidence indicates, with the manufacture of an
internal secretion. These interstitial cells form the interstitial
gland. A classic example of a gland of internal secretion lodged in
the interstices of a gland of external secretion is thus furnished by
the gonads.

ORIGIN OF SEX TRAITS

The history of sex goes back far in the scheme of life. The
immortality of the ameba was at one time one of the indisputables of
biology. Then some observations were made which threw doubt upon a
long accepted fact, now declared a dogma. Lately, opinion has veered
back to immortality. But in the case of a close relative of the ameba,
the one-celled animal known as the paramecium, union with another
paramecium, true conjugation, has been proved necessary to prevent
death sooner or later. Sex here appears in its most primitive form, on
the basis of exchange of necessary materials, between individuals to
prevent death, their own having been, so to speak, worn out, in the
course of metabolism.

Specifically different sexes come later, when mortality is a universal
fate, as a means of rebirth and escape from death. Then the sexes
develop their latest function, most prominent among the younger
vertebrates, of acting as nature's most potent method of variation and
differentiation. In the pursuit of the different, nature has exalted
sex, and the intensity of the sex life. As far as the preservation of
a species is concerned, and the reproduction of the individual, the
asexual methods, budding, for example, would have done well enough.
But when it comes to enacting a different individual apart from the
effects of environment, sex stands out as the favored method of Life.

The development of the sexes and the sexual life brought a new element
of conflict into the living world. Before the advent of the sexes the
conflict was essentially for the means of existence, food alone. But
with the sexual life came a conflict for sex pleasure, a competition
among members of the same species for the same individual as their sex
partners. The result was the introduction of a factor in evolution
which Darwin examined so closely in the "Descent of Man."

The sex conflict has been the cause for the origin and the survival
of certain physical and mental traits, helpful in sex attraction, sex
combat, the growth of the embryo, and the nutrition and safety of the
young of a species,--in short, the whole process of sexual selection.
The proportions of the skeleton, the distribution of hair and fat, the
construction of organs of attack and defense, the color of the skin,
the cyclic processes of preparation for impregnation, the oestrus or
heat period in animals, the menstrual period in the human being, the
psychic reactions to danger and combat have all been thus determined.
That man is bearded while woman is not,--that woman has potentially
functional breasts while man has not,--the aggressive pugnacity of
man contrasted with the more passive timidity of woman, have all been
evolved in the sex struggle, surviving because most effective in that
struggle. These so-called secondary sexual characteristics are an
expression of the influence of the internal secretion of the gonads,
or the interstitial glands. Some call them puberty glands, because
their ripening initiates puberty.

We know that these interstitial glands, to stick to that name, (rather
than to the name of the puberty glands, since they serve not only
to induce puberty but to maintain maturity) are the actual primary
dictators of the process by which male and female are distinguished,
if not created. Castration was probably the first surgical operation
carried out for experimental purposes, suggested no doubt by a
curiosity concerning its effects. Trepanning of the skull, the
geologic record indicates, was done even by the cave man. But as an
experimental operation, castration seems to hold the primary position
in the annals of surgery.

Its effects noted, the satisfaction of one of the lower human
instincts, jealousy, popularised it. From the days of Semiramis,
eunuchs have been commonplace figures of the East, their function
definite: to guard the harems of the powerful. The age of Abdul Hamid
witnessed no diminution of the barbaric tortures by which children are
prepared for the profession. It is to the credit of England that in
its dominions in the Orient the practice has been abolished. But it
goes on even today. According to the best authorities, four out of
five of these victims at the auto-da-fe of a vicious human instinct
die immediately or soon after from exhaustion due to pain and
infection. Not all of the ancient nations countenanced the brutal
horror. The Hebrews placarded castration an unpardonable sin, making
it a sin to castrate even animals. Nor was any man so mutilated
permitted to worship in the house of the Lord (Deuteronomy xxiii, 11).
Yet we have evidence that the latter Jewish kings employed foreign
eunuchs in their harems, who often held the most important positions
as ministers of the court.

Besides the eunuchs, another group of people have presented material
for the study of the interstitial glands. These are the Skoptzi of
Russia and the Lipowaner of Roumania. Among them castration is a
religious ritual. Mankind has always been most brutal to itself in the
name of the ideal. These sects were founded because in the eighteenth
century an antipode of Joseph Smith and Brigham Young discovered this
passage in Matthew xix, 12.

"For there are some eunuchs which were so born from their mother's
womb, and there are some eunuchs which were made eunuchs of men: and
there be eunuchs _which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom
of heaven's sake_. He that is able to receive it, let him receive it."

He decided that he was inspired to spread the gospel of castration. A
sect was founded who thought that surgery was the easiest way to enter
the gates of Paradise, and they multiplied and fructified. The sect
exists today, and some of the most interesting studies of the internal
secretion of the interstitial glands have been made among them.

Related to acquired eunuchism is the condition of eunuchoidism, the
eunuchs which were so born from their mother's womb. Baron Larey, the
great surgeon of Napoleon's armies, was their first painter. He was
the only altruist Bonaparte said he had ever met in his life. He
portrayed a group of soldiers with peculiarly high-pitched voices,
smooth and hairless skins, and atrophied generative organs. A somewhat
similar picture is evolved in certain types of insufficiency of
the pituitary gland. Features of the picture are exhibited with
disturbances of the other internal secretory glands also, like the
thymus.

But a host of experiments and data prove the interstitial glands to be
the direct controllers of elementary sexuality and the specific sex
traits of male and female. Beginning with Berthold back in the first
half of the nineteenth century, who studied the fowl, a number of
observations have been made on the effects of excision, translocation
and transplantation of these glands.

The results of the experiments and observations can be summed up as
follows: if the male individual is castrated before puberty, that is,
before the advent of the sexual life, secondary sex qualities do not
develop. In males, the generative organs do not grow, hair on the face
does not appear, hair elsewhere on the body remains generally scanty,
the voice continues as high-pitched as the child's, there is more
or less muscle weakness, obesity, and mental sluggishness. In other
words, we have an effeminate man, technically a eunuch. In the
castrated female, the pelvis does not grow to the normal feminine
size, the breasts do not swell as they should, more or less hair comes
out on the face, the voice is low-pitched, and tends to be rather
husky, the legs are longer, and again, the mentality is dulled. That
is, a masculine sort of woman is produced.

In short, the castrated male takes on a feminine type, and the
castrated female, a male type. In either case there is also an
infantilism, a retention of the infantile mental traits, a lack of
development of the adult mental attitudes and reactions. Now, if
in the castrated male is transplanted an ovary, the positive
characteristics of the female are evoked, such as enlarged mammary
glands, and a tendency to secretion of milk. Experiments have also
been reported in which a uterus was also placed in such an animal,
with a means of entry, and pregnancy followed. If in the castrated
female a testicle is planted, the masculine traits become much more
marked and striking. A direct exchange of the male and female
roles can thus be achieved. Castration after puberty cannot modify
profoundly structures like the skeleton which are already completed.
Yet it may unquestionably bring about definite retrogressive changes
in the secondary sex characters: reduction or loss of virility,
diminution of facial and body hair, and a general presenility or
hastening of senility.

How remarkably these interstitial cells influence the entire structure
and vitality of the organism is indicated by these facts. How much
they have to do with sexual impulses, sexual excitement, and sexual
desire, what the Freudians have popularized as the libido, and how
subtly they act upon the coming and duration of adolescence and
maturity, as well as sexual precocity and peversions, we shall
consider in a later chapter. But it is enough now to remember that
these interstitial glands are the primary dictators of the genital
sense and flair of the individual. In any attempt at measurement of
men and women, the quality and quantity of the internal secretion
of the interstitial cells must be respected as a fundamental
consideration. The womanly woman and the manly man, those ideals of
the Victorians, which crumbled before the attack of the Ibsenites,
Strindbergians and Shavians in the nineties, but which must be
recognized as quite valid biologically, are the masterpieces of these
interstitial cells when in their perfection. They are such solely
because of the right concentration in the blood of the substances
manufactured not only by these cells, but by all the glands of
internal secretion. For it cannot be repeated and emphasized too often
that the interstitial cells of the sex glands are most sensitive to
all kinds of other influences, and, in particular, the other internal
secretory organs. They may indeed be watched as an index scale or
barometer of the general tone of the whole internal secretion system.
Sex variations offer a variety of clues to variations, disturbances,
predominances and abnormalities in all the components of the ductless
gland association.

To take a single instance, the development of the long bones is
dependent upon the handling of food lime by the body. Eunuchs and
eunuchoids, that is, individuals with insufficient internal secretion
of the interstitial cells, have longer bones and more fragile bones
than the normal. Vice versa, those with an excess of the secretion
have shorter and thicker bones. The earlier the onset of menstruation,
which means puberty, the shorter the extremities, as the action of the
internal secretion of the ovaries closes the story of the growth of
the long bones.

The ovaries are a most important factor in the regulation of the power
of the organism to keep lime in the bones. If they over-secrete in an
excess which cannot be taken care of by the other glands of internal
secretion, the body loses lime, a softening and curving of the bones
occurs, and the most horrible deformities and tortures for the
sufferer. Taking out the ovaries has cured some of the afflicted.
Administration of the antagonizing gland extracts has helped others.
An Italian, Bossi, in 1907, used adrenal gland curatively. More
recently, a British student of the subject, Blair Bell, was given the
direction of the treatment, at long range, of a number of cases in
India, the land of chronic pregnancy with insufficient food, and
consequent oversecretion of the ovaries, with the typical softening of
the bones. At his suggestion pituitary was used successfully.

Some of the glands of internal secretion act as accelerators to the
sex glands. Others act as retarding antagonists. Among the most
important of the latter is

THE THYMUS

The thymus is the gland which dominates childhood. It appears to do so
by inhibiting the activity of the testes or ovaries. Castration causes
a persistent growth and retarded atrophy of the thymus. Removal of the
thymus hastens the development of the gonads.

Situated in the chest, astride the windpipe, it descends and covers
over the upper portion of the heart, overlapping the great vessels
at the base of the heart. It is a brownish red mass, which when cut
presents the spongy effect of a sweetbread. The more intimate view
of detail revealed by the higher powers of the microscope shows
conglomerations of the white cells of the blood known as lymphocytes.
But scattered through the substance of the gland, between these
lymphocytes, like the interstitial cells of the sex glands placed
between the sex cells, are peculiarly staining cells in whorls.
Of which there are many more in the thymus of embryonic and early
postnatal life, known after their discoverer as Hassal's Corpuscles.
They are believed by some to elaborate the specific internal secretion
of the thymus. Present in all vertebrates, there seems to be more of
it in the carnivora than in the herbivora, like the thyroid.

Concerning the exact function of the thymus, we are a good deal at
sea. The latest opinion about the results of extirpation even in young
and growing animals is that they are nil. Yet there is a certain
justification for proclaiming the thymus the gland of childhood, the
gland which keeps children childish and sometimes makes children out
of grown-ups. There is a quantity of data for that proposition. In
the first place, the curve of rise of growth of the gland seems to
coincide with the period of childhood, the curve of its decline with
the period of adolescence and the rise of the sex glands. In the
past, it was accepted, that with puberty the thymus atrophied and
was replaced by some sort of fatty tissue. Nowadays, it is held that
secretion cells persist throughout life. When the extent of this
persistence is too great, the gland being from five to ten times as
large as the normal, a number of other features become prominent to
make the extraordinary individual, the status lymphaticus, who amid
the hazards of life will react in an extraordinary way. He will be
taken up in the consideration of internal secretion personalities.

Then there are the varied and remarkable phenomena of thymus
enlargement and hyperactivity in childhood itself. When an enlarged
thymus is present in an infant, the initiation of breathing in the
new-born, the introduction of the newcomer to the oxygen of the air,
may be an exceedingly prolonged, difficult, matter. Such a baby is
said to be born blue, and the breathing may be stridorous for days,
becoming normal for a time, to be followed later by spells of trouble
in breathing, breathlessness or breathlessness with blueness, and
threatened extinction. Sometimes these spells come out of a clear
sky in an apparently healthy child. That some poison, probably an
oversecretion of the thymus, is responsible is shown by the relief
obtainable by X-ray shrinkage of the gland, or the surgical removal of
a part of it.

Moreover, the gland is influenced by and influences the factors
of body weight and growth with an extreme readiness and lability.
Deficient general undernutrition leads to rapid decline in its weight.
Back in 1858, the pioneer student of the thymus, Friedleben, declared
that the size and condition of the thymus is an index to be the state
of nutrition of the body. Underfeeding for four weeks will reduce it
to one thirtieth the normal. It seems to act as a storage and reserve
organ, affording some protection against the limitation of growth by
lack of food material. In exhausting or wasting disease, the weight
of the gland sinks much more quickly than other glands. Scattered
instances have been reported of children growing, putting on inches in
height and expanding mentally, when thymus was fed to them, in whom
every other measure previously tried had failed. A French study of
over four hundred idiotic children with normal thyroids reported that
over three fourths had no thymus at all. Everything points to the most
direct and close relation between the gland and nutrition and growth,
but with nothing tangibly definite like our knowledge of the thyroid
and the pituitary.

There is evidence that the thymus is involved in the health and
efficiency of muscle cells and muscularity. Certain tumors of the
thymus, presumably destructive of the gland substance proper, and
thus cutting off its secretion, are accompanied by a singular muscle
weakness and atrophy of the muscle cells, entirely out of proportion
to the general damage suffered by the other cells of the body when
affected by the poison of a malignant growth. Also, the thymus has
been discovered diseased in certain mysterious progressive muscular
wastings. A remarkable fatigability of muscles, which appears after
the slightest exertion, is a feature. The feeding of thymus has caused
muscle cramps which apparently depends upon an increased excitability
of the muscle nerve endings.

Feeding of thymus to some of the lower creatures of the animal kingdom
will completely hold up differentiation. Take the unfolding of the
specialized tissues and organs which transform the tadpole into the
frog and the chrysalis into the butterfly. A tadpole kept supplied
with enough thymus in a nutrient medium will swell into an
extraordinary giant tadpole, but will not change into a frog.
Recently, this experiment has been contradicted. Yet this effect
corresponds to the conception of its importance in childhood as a
retardant of precocity, physical and mental. Clinical observations
emphasize that in childhood it is the chief brake upon the other
glands of internal secretion which would hasten development and
differentiation, checking them perhaps for a given time and so
profoundly influencing growth.

THE PINEAL

The pineal is another gland which has been credited with similar
abilities and a like holding-the-reins-tight-in-childhood function
among the cells. Like the thymus, it has been supposed one of the
distinctive organs of childhood and to die with it. Generations of
anatomists solemnly asserted, repeating each other's mistakes with the
aplomb of the historians who declare that history repeats itself, that
the pineal body was a useless, wastefully space consuming vestige of a
once important structure. That was the view in that century of grandly
inaccurate assertions, the nineteenth. Not that they relegated it with
that statement to the limbo of the dull and the uninteresting. Quite
the contrary. They conferred upon it a distinguished romance and
mystery by identifying it as the last heir and vestigial remnant of
a third eye, situated in the back of the head, which may still be
observed in certain reptiles. Imagine it! Somewhere, stuck away in a
cranny of the floor of your head and mine, is this descendant of an
organ that once sparkled and shone, wept and glared, took in the stars
and hawks and eagles, and now is condemned to eternal darkness and an
ineffectual sandiness. Today, we have not discarded that view of its
history, but we know a little more regarding its composition and
function.

What and where is the romantic object? It is a cone-shaped bit of
tissue hidden away at the base of the brain in a tiny cave behind
and above its larger colleague, the pituitary. Microscopic scrutiny
reveals that it is made up in part of nerve cells containing a pigment
similar to that present in the cells of the retina, thus clinching the
argument for its ancient function as an eye. But the outstanding and
specifically glandular cells are large secreting affairs, which too
reach back to the tidewater days of our vertebrate ancestors, when
Eurypterus and other Crustaceans were engrossed with the fundamental
problems of brain versus belly. Besides these, there are the singular
masses upon which has been fastened the unnecessarily opprobious
epithet of brain sand. These, noted and commented upon from the
earliest times, consist of collections of crystals of lime salts,
sometimes small, lying about in discrete irregular masses, and
sometimes grouped into larger mulberry-like concretions, varying
much in size. These brain sand particles have become of practical
importance in the detection of pineal disease because they, like all
lime salts, will stop the X-rays, and so can be photographed.

For a long time, indeed up to scarcely more than a few decades or so
ago, the pineal was believed to have no present function at all, or at
least no ascertainable or accessible duty in the body economy. That
it might perhaps be, in a sense, a gland of internal secretion was
a despised theory. Then a classic case, the most extraordinary and
curiosity-piquing sort of case, with symptoms involving the pineal
gland, in a boy, was reported by the German neurologist, Von Hochwart.
That boy provoked a little army of researches. He came to the clinic
complaining about his eyes and other troubles which pointed pretty
definitely to a brain tumor as the diagnosis to pigeon-hole him.
Nothing extraordinary about him in that respect. But the story told by
his parents was quite extraordinary, even to the jaded palate of the
clinic professor and his assistants. They said that he was a little
over five years old, a statement conclusively proved correct at his
death. Up to the time at which his illness began, he had been quite
normal in size, intelligence and interests. But with the onset of his
misfortune, he had begun to grow, and rapidly until now he looked
and corresponded in all measurements to a normal boy of twelve or
thirteen. Hair developed all over his skin, most prominently and
abundantly in the typically hairy places of adults. His voice became
low-pitched, and most remarkable of all, his sexuality and mentality
precocious. He became capable of true sexual life and is said to have
asked many questions about the fate and condition of the soul after
death. On one occasion he remarked reflectively: "It is odd how much
better I feel when I let other children play with my toys than when I
play with them myself." Other statements attributed to him imply the
most astounding maturity of thought and mental process. Headaches
finally came, and he died about four weeks later. The cause of the
whole bizarre tragedy was found to be a tumor of the pineal gland.

As has happened before in medical history, no sooner was the one
prodigy reported, than a score of others of the same ilk sprang into
the limelight. Cases of precocious genital development, especially,
some of them occurring as early as the second year of life, were
linked with them. It is an interesting point to be noted that in
these, as in those started by an overaction of the adrenal cortex, it
is premature masculinity that is stimulated. The adrenal cortex must
be classed as a gland of masculinity. The pineal possibly acts as a
brake upon the adrenal cortex.

Very soon after the report of Von Hochwart's prodigy appeared, an
experimental research on the pineal was begun in New York. The pineal
glands of a number of young bullocks were obtained and used for
feeding, to see whether an overaction of the internal secretion
could be produced. Guinea pigs, kittens and rabbits were used. The
experiments covered about two years in time. Of a dozen small
kittens, the subjects outgrew the controls rapidly in activity, size,
intelligence, and resistance to intercurrent disease. Of ten small
rabbits, the controls weighed about a third less than the subjects,
which were strikingly clean, active, fat and salacious.

Feeding of the gland was then extended to a particular class of
defective children, children with well-shaped heads, normal eyes,
symmetrically functioning limbs, excellent digestion, strong muscles
and generally, normal, sometimes rapid growth. It is to them,
particularly when mental normality has progressed up to the eighth,
tenth or twelfth year and stopped, that the term "moron" has been
applied. They have been a hopeless lot, belonging to the limbo of the
incurables. Moreover, they, emphatically the physically normal ones,
differ from one another enormously in the extent to which mental
operations are possible. As all transitions and degrees exist, no
definite classification and subdivision of them has been made. Yet
ever since the cretin, once looked upon as an eternally damned
defective, was transformed by thyroid feeding into an apparently
normal being, there has been no dearth of effort to find the right
kind of internal secretion to fit their desperate situations, but in
vain. In defectives with definitely, organically damaged brains,
no result of course was to be expected. In those of any class over
fifteen, no response has been elicited by feeding pineal gland. In the
others the results have been contradictory.

A set of observations have related the pineal to muscle function,
inviting comparison of it with the thymus. There is a singular muscle
shrinking and deforming disease, known as progressive muscular
dystrophy, hitherto a complete and unsolved mystery. Newer studies
of the pineal in this disease during life by means of the X-ray have
shown it calcified, that is, buried in lime salts, which signifies put
out of business. Recently thus another hint as to its function has
been ferreted out.

The tadpole as a reagent to test out the growth effects of different
glands of internal secretion has also been employed for the pineal.
Ten-day-old tadpoles fed on pineal present a marked translucency of
the skin due to a retraction of the skin pigment cells. Now without a
doubt a number of as yet unknown growth and metabolic effects follow
exposure of the body to the complete gamut of light rays. The
interesting suggestion follows that the pineal influences the body by
varying the degree of light ray reaction.

The pineal, the ghost of a once important third eye at the back of
our heads, still harks back in its function to a regulation of our
susceptibility to light, and its effect upon sex and brain. So it
becomes one of the significant regulators of development, with an
indirect hastening or retardation of puberty and maturity according
as it works in excess, or too indolently. It appears thus the blood
brother of the adrenal cortex which also influences the skin pigment
and so susceptibility of the organism to light, brain growth and sex
ripening. It is interesting that Descartes, in 1628, considered the
pineal the seat of the soul.

THE PARATHYROIDS

Sometimes imbedded within the substance of the thyroid in the neck,
sometimes placed directly behind it upon the windpipe, are four tiny
glands, each about the size of a wheat seed, the parathyroids. For
long they were swamped in the nearness of their great neighbor, and
considered merely a variable part of it. There are some who contend
that even today. But it has been proven that they are separate,
individual glands, with a structure and function of their own, and a
definite importance to the body economy.

On the animal family tree they appear early, contemporaneously with
the thyroids. In the embryo they develop from about the same sites.
And very often they look very much alike under the microscope,
especially when the cells are in certain quiescent stage of secretion.
Yet they are wholly independent in nature, activity and business.

First experimenters upon the effects of removal of the thyroid were
confused by contradictory findings with different animals because in
some they would take out the parathyroids at the same time without
knowing it, and in others they would not. That possibility suggested,
more careful dissectors accomplished the job of extirpating the
thyroid while leaving the parathyroids intact and vice versa. In
consequence some definite information about the parathyroids is
available, even though their internal secretion has never been
isolated, or its existence established as more than an inference.

When the parathyroids are removed, an astounding increase in the
excitability of the nerves follow. It is as if the animal were
thoroughly poisoned with strychnine. The slightest stimulus will make
him jump, or throw him into a spasm. When the excitability of the
nerves is measured by an electrical instrument it is found augmented
by from five hundred to one thousand per cent. The reflexes, those
automatic responses of brain and spinal cord to certain stimuli and
situations, become enormously sensitive, so that merely letting the
light into a darkened room will make the subject of the experiment go
into a series of convulsions.

On the chemical side, an explanation for these nervous phenomena has
been advanced. Lime in the blood and cells appears to be necessary in
a number of ways. In the making of bone and teeth, in the coagulation
of the blood, in the keeping of fluid within the blood vessels, and
in maintaining the tone of the nerves, it plays a major role. Now the
parathyroids, among all the glands of internal secretion, seem to act
as the prime regulators of the amount of lime held within the blood
and cells. For when the parathyroids have been completely and
aseptically excised, without injuring any other organ, immediately the
body begins to lose lime. Something has gone out of it that helped
it to bind lime, and without that essential something, the internal
secretion presumably of the parathyroids, the lime departs. As
a conspicuous consequence the teeth fail to develop properly,
particularly as to their enamel, for which lime is an essential
constituent. Hair is lost, there is a general wasting, the nails get
brittle, and the bones soften, and the animal dies. Supplying lime
directly, particularly by direct injection into the blood, will
relieve the symptoms.

In man, a condition of nervous over-excitability has been described
as tetany. It occurs most often in the young, the pregnant, or in
vomiting after operations. All sorts of tests have related the malady
to the phenomena succeeding parathyroid deprivation, and they are now
looked upon as aspects of it. Individuals have been reported suffering
from an insufficiency of the internal secretion of parathyroids,
with a sudden extreme depression, nervousness and restlessness, an
inability to sleep or sit still, and a tremulous handwriting. Such
reports round out the evidence for the importance of the parathyroids
in an understanding of the factors which control growth, especially
as regards lime utilization, for without lime properly handled no
building of cells is possible. Also the parathyroids are necessary to
a steadiness of muscle and nerve.

THE PANCREAS

The business of the parathyroids concerns the keeping of lime in the
body. Another gland, the pancreas or sweetbreads, this time within the
abdomen, a close neighbor of the solar plexus, alias the abdominal
brain, is occupied with holding and hoarding sugar in the body,
particularly in the liver, the great sugar warehouse. This matter
of retaining sugar and controlling its output is one of the utmost
significance for growth and metabolism, the resistance to infections,
the response to emergency situations, and in general to the
mobilization of energy for physical and mental purposes. For without
sugar sufficiently at hand for the cells, no muscle work or nerve
work, the essentials of the struggle for existence, are possible.

The pancreas is an organ with both an internal and external secretion.
The external secretion, long known, evolved by the major portion of
the gland, is poured into the small intestine to play the star in
digestion. Scattered here and there among the definitely glandular
cell groups creating the external secretion are smaller collections of
cells, called the islets of Langerhans, which have been demonstrated
to elaborate the internal secretion. There are about a million of
these islands in each gland. The hormone has been called insuline.
Unlike most of the glands with a double secretion in which the
internal is absolutely independent, and so to speak, unconscious of
the external, these two of the pancreas are often disturbed together,
perhaps because trouble easily hits them both together.

Quite the most well-known disease due to disturbed internal secretory
function of the pancreas is diabetes. An enormous amount of work has
been spent upon the various aspects of it as a mystery. Hundreds of
papers in a dozen languages upon the subject are in existence. In a
nutshell, they have established pretty well that diabetes is a disease
in which there is an excess of sugar in the blood and urine because of
an insufficient amount of the secretion of the islands of Langerhans
in the pancreas. Removal of the pancreas makes the body, essentially
the liver, unable to retain sugar, as well as unable to burn up sugar
for energy. The situation is comparable to a locomotive with its coal
bins leaking, and the coal itself acting as if made of slate or some
equally uncombustible or only partially combustible material.

The control of sugar mobilization from the liver, where it is stored
as glycogen or animal starch, is divided between the pancreas and
the adrenals, the pancreas acting as the brake, the adrenals as the
accelerator of the mechanism. Adrenal and pancreas are therefore
direct antagonists, the pans of the scale which represents sugar
equilibrium in the organism. Diabetes may be regarded as a disturbance
of the adrenal-pancreas balance, assisted by events which produce
adrenal overwork like great or prolonged emotion, or by strain of the
pancreas, effected by over-eating for example.

There are other minor glands of internal secretions. But those
considered are by far the most important and the most recently
explored. In a summary, one would classify them as follows:

   _Name        Secretion            Function_
  1. Thyroid       Thyroxin          Gland of energy production
                                     Controller of growth
                                       of specialized organs
                                       and tissues--brain
                                       and sex

  2. Pituitary--                     Gland of energy consumption
                                       and utilization--continued
                                       effort
       anterior    Unknown           Growth of skeleton and
                                       supporting tissues
       posterior   Pituitrin         Nerve cell and involuntary
                                       muscle cell, brain and sex tone

  3. Adrenals                        The Gland of Combat
       cortex      Unknown            a. Brain growth--tone
                                         development of
                                         sex glands
       medulla     Adrenalin          b. Energy for emergency
                                         situations

  4. Pineal        Unknown            a. Brain and sex development
                                      b. Adolescence and puberty
                                      c. Light and maturity

  5. Thymus        Unknown            Gland of Childhood

  6. Interstitial  Testes in male     Glands of secondary
       glands of   Ovaries in female   Sex traits

  7. Parathyroids  Unknown            a. Controllers of lime
                                         metabolism
                                      b. Excitability of
                                         muscle and nerve

  8. Pancreas      Insuline           Controller of sugar
                                         metabolism




CHAPTER IV

THE GLANDS AS AN INTERLOCKING DIRECTORATE


Now in considering each gland of internal secretion as a separate
entity, and labelling it with certain properties and actions, we of
course commit the usual sin of the intellect: the sin of abstraction
and isolation of its material. This crime of analysis the intellect
commits every day in the search for truth. Before its dissection, it
seems to have to dip the elusive article in a fixative, and bottle it
in a vacuum.

Yet nothing in reality is more of a changing flux than the body in all
of its parts and tissues and organs. And of all these, the glands of
internal secretion stand out as the most susceptible to change. Made
to react to stimuli of offense and defense, instantaneously responsive
to situations involving energy exchanges and protective reflexes,
they are never for any minute the same or alone. They never function
separately. Each influences the other in a communicating chain. Let
one be disturbed, and all the others will feel the impact of the
disturbance and vibrate with it.

Any break in the somatic or psychic equilibrium, a blow or an
infection, or a startling thing seen, or a worrisome thought felt,
will start a process going. This will only wind up when every gland
has been somehow touched, and a final equilibrium reestablished. The
thyroid, maybe, was first excited, and then in turn the adrenals, with
a boomerang reinforcing effect upon the thyroid, and at the same time
a stimulating effect upon the pituitary. Each gland is thus influenced
and influencing, agent and reagent in the complex adjustments of the
organism.

ENDOCRINE CO-OPERATIONS

The body-mind is a perfect corporation. Not quite perfect, for
continually there arise little insurgencies, inadequacies and
frictions to which in time it will succumb. Yet, in the efficiency of
its co-operations, and in the co-ordination of the needs and supplies
of producer, middle man, and consumer, there is no one of the great
organizations of the captains of industry which can for a moment
approach it.

Of this corporation the glands of internal secretion are the
directors. But the huge corporation, not to topple over with its own
unwieldy size, must be composed of smaller units, each within itself
a corporation, and governed by a directorate. There are, in the
corporation-organism, different departments and bureaus, subdivisions
of function, which constitute the smaller corporations within the
larger corporation. These subsidiary companies have their own glands
of internal secretion as their directors.

Thus, the growth of the brain is presided over by the adrenal cortex,
the thyroid, the thymus and the pituitary. They determine the size of
the brain, the number of its cells, the complexity of its convolutions
and the speed of its chemistry, which means the speed of thought and
memory and imagination. As its directorate, therefore, they may be
entitled. The disturbance of one of them means the disturbance of all
of them, and a consequent deleterious effect upon the brain. Now take
the burning up of sugar in the organism, the great material source
of energy, which is controlled by the pancreas, the adrenals and
the liver, the thyroid and the pituitary. Together they form the
directorate of sugar metabolism. But, as is evident from a glance at
the membership of the growth directorate, and comparing it with the
directorate of sugar metabolism, there are some members who are
present on both boards. An infection, an illness, an ailment, an
exaltation or intoxication of such members will produce reverberations
in both directorates. A disturbance of sugar metabolism might then
cause a disturbance of growth. The advantages and disadvantages
are before us of having, in the glands of internal secretion, an
interlocking directorate, rulers over all the varied and manifold
activities of the organism.

Behind the body, and behind the mind is this board of governors.
Indeed, from the administrative and legislative points of view, the
body-mind may be said to be governed by the House of Glands. It is the
invisible committee behind the throne. Upon the throne is what? Man,
the most baffling of complexities. Man who is not a mind, but owns a
mind--Man who is not a body, but possesses a body, just as he might
have a motor car, a fortune or a calamity. Back of all his daily
activities, behind the life of body-mind is the mysterious unique
individuality, the Ego, the Psyche or the Soul. Lately, a competitor
with these ancient and honorable terms has come upon the scene as the
Subconscious. In that darkened No Man's Land is determined a man's
destiny. The endocrine association stands out as at least the most
important physical determinant of the states and processes of the
subconscious.

ANTAGONISMS AND CO-OPERATIONS

As within a corporation there are factions and cliques, influences
that always work together, and forces that are always pulling in
opposite directions, so within the interlocking directorate of the
ductless glands there are antagonisms and inhibitions, co-operations
and compensations. One gland will assist the action of another's
secretion with its own, or will in turn be stimulated to secrete by
it. Another will throw out its secretion in order to neutralize the
effects produced. Or its own activity will be depressed or completely
inhibited by it. Thus the pituitary arouses the interstitial glands
and vice versa, whereas the pancreas and the thyroid are mutually
inhibitory. Indeed, whole systems of glands may work in unison, or be
pitted against each other in certain situations, especially when
the organism is subjected to conflicting impulses with the clash
of opposing instincts, like fear and anger. In general there is
reciprocity and team work among the internal secretions.

A certain minimum amount of each must be present if life is to
continue along the normal lines. Whether there is to be an excess
of any one secretion above this minimum, or a deficiency below it,
decides the fate of the individual. If there is deficiency of one, the
other members of the directorate attempt to make up for what has been
lost, and to carry on its work by an extra effort, to substitute. Or,
released from the discipline of the deficient member, or the necessity
for antagonizing it, they may be released from its stimulus to
secrete, and produce less of their own specific secretion. A general
reaction all along the line will accompany overaction, oversecretion,
of one gland. Due to consequent stimulations and depressions of
other glands, some may be excited by the event to overwork--some to
assist--others, to act as antidote for--the excess secretion, while
still others, relieved of a burden, do not have to supply as much of
their quota under the circumstances and so shut down, or limit their
output.

It is important to get clearly in mind these subtle inter-reactions of
the different ductless glands. They may be antagonistic in their end
effects because of the opposed functions of the nerves or organs
stimulated. There are inhibitions and restraints produced when a gland
will send out its secretions to stop another gland secreting. There
are compensations resulting when because of insufficiency of a gland,
others will endeavour, by manufacturing more of their own secretion,
to compensate for the loss. There are mutual co-operations,
partnerships, when a gland will oversecrete to assist another, or in
response to another which is also oversecreting. There are losses
of balance, so that when one gland ceases secreting, another will
simultaneously or soon after. Normal secretion, oversecretion or
undersecretion are thus adjusted, but leave a train of after effects.

So with loss or insufficiency of the thyroid, there may be pituitary
overgrowth, because the pituitary may act as vicar for the thyroid.
The thyroid and thymus are antagonistic, for the thyroid hastens
differentiation, puberty and the coming of sexual maturity, while the
thymus delays and retards them and prolongs the period of childhood.
The thyroid and the pancreas are antagonists, for when the thyroid
has been excised, the pancreas appear no longer necessary to act as a
break upon the mechanism of sugar liberation into the blood from
the liver. The thyroid stimulates the interstitial glands, for
menstruation and pregnancy are impossible with no thyroid or an
insufficient thyroid. Removal of the pituitary makes the thymus shrink
because the restraining influence of the latter is no longer needed.
But there is an enlargement of the thyroid to compensate. In castrates
there is an increase in the size and number of the cells of the
anterior pituitary, again a compensation or substitution effect. The
pituitary and the adrenal cortex are mutually assistant, alike in
their influence upon the tone of the brain and sex cells.

THE KINETIC SYSTEM

So there are combinations of glands to assist or restrain others, or
to control a body function, or to determine the domination or abeyance
of an instinct. One such has been named the kinetic system because it
comes into play in situations which demand prompt adaptation without
hesitancy, and a consequent immediate transformation of static or
stored energy into kinetic or active energy. According to this
conception the brain, the adrenals, the liver, the thyroid and the
muscles together constitute a machine very much like an automobile.
The self-starter of the machine is the brain, with storage battery
(composed of stored past memories) and ignition combined. The thing
seen without, or the idea felt within, act as the initial sparks,
while the adrenals, as the carburetors, permit the freer flow of fuel,
sugar, from the liver. The thyroid works as the accelerator, the
original impulse finally landing upon muscles keyed up and supplied
with food to meet the situation, be it that of removing a poison,
removing an aggressor (attack) or removing the individual himself
(running away). When one is exhausted by exertion and emotion, injury,
intoxication or infection, it is these members of the kinetic system,
the brain, the adrenals, thyroid and liver, which are exhausted.
Exhaustion diminishes when the activity of the brain is diminished by
anesthetics, and cured when it is abolished by sleep.

If the adrenal gland may be called the Gland of Emergency energy, the
Kinetic System is entitled to the name of Council of Emergency Defense
for the organism. The Kinetic Drive is the name that has been given to
the whole system at work. It is one of the best examples we have of
inter-glandular co-operations and reactions in reply to the threat of
danger or the hint of pleasure.

THE CHECK AND DRIVE SYSTEM

Another instance of the complexity of these inter-glandular reactions
is furnished by the thyroid and the adrenals. The thyroid and the
adrenals are mutually stimulating--when the thyroid oversecretes, the
adrenal dittos, and vice versa. Yet they have directly opposed effects
upon the economy--because they act upon antagonistic portions of
the involuntary or vegetative nervous system, the system which is
independent of the will. Before proceeding further, it is worth while
sketching this division of the nervous system.

In the construction of a motor car from the point of view of absolute
control of it at every moment, the first thought of the mechanic is an
adequate _brake_ and an efficient _regulator_ of speed, instruments
antagonistic, but necessary to work simultaneously or alternately.
The involuntary or vegetative nervous system is built upon the same
principle. It supplies every organ in the body beyond the control of
the will (that is to say, the brain) with two sets of filaments which
have opposing functions. One group of filaments in general increases
or activates the function of the organ to which it is distributed. The
other group of filaments, when tingling, inhibits or prohibits that
function. They are like the two buttons on the wall which regulate
the supply of electricity to incandescent bulbs, one switching on the
current, the other switching it off. It has been agreed to call the
stimulative or activating portion the autonomic or drive system. To
its antagonist has been left the older name of the sympathetic or
check system. It is because they do not both act upon these two
components of the vegetative nervous system, but only upon one, that
the thyroid and adrenal though in themselves complementary, come to
exert opposite effects. For the internal secretion of the thyroid has
a selective affinity for the autonomic or activating system, while
that of the adrenals has a selective affinity for the sympathetic or
inhibiting system.

In the stomach, for instance, extracts of the adrenal glands have been
proved to intensify the function of the sympathetic or check system
in different degrees, so that there is a lessening of the amount and
acidity of the gastric fluid. On the other hand, thyroid extracts will
intensify the action of the autonomic or drive system, so that the
amount and acidity of the digestive juice is increased.

The stomach cell may, therefore, be regarded as a test-reagent for
the different internal secretions, as they affect the check and drive
systems.

These constitute an automatic device for regulating the activities of
every organ. Three factors enter into the mechanism. One is the amount
of the circulating internal secretions. Another is the organic and
functional integrity of the nerve filaments comprising the check and
drive systems. The third consists of the number and vitality and
limitations of the terminal receiving cells acted upon by the nerve
filaments, which in their turn have been acted upon by the internal
secretions. Upon every organ, including the mind, through the brain, a
stimulus from without or within will act according to its ability to
influence one or others of these factors.

Normally, the check and drive systems are properly balanced. But under
stress and strain the balance is upset. Indeed, the Kinetic Drive may
be defined as a mechanism contrived in the course of evolution as the
normal, healthy mode for meeting stress and strain. The Kinetic chain
of organs, brain, adrenals, liver, thyroid and muscles, began working
together in desperate situations for their possessor ages ago.
Successful in helping him to survive, they have survived as a
functional unit.

It was probably evolved in the Post-Tertiary Era, about twenty million
years ago, when the coming of the carnivores introduced direct
body-to-body conflicts, and their concomitants, a quick and versatile
nervous system. During the Tertiary epoch the earth basked in the heat
of a tropical sun nearly everywhere on its surface. The luxuriant
vegetation of the torrid zone flourished and swarmed, for the
temperature all over was what it is today at the equator. Gigantic
vegetarians were the animals, creatures like the dinosaurs, enormous,
gargoylean monsters, of an incredible size and strength, but clumsy
and grotesque, with small brains and little intelligence. For what
need was there for brain and intelligence when food lay about so
abundantly at hand for them to gorge themselves. As there was no
competition for food, there were no enemies.

Then as the earth evolved and grew cooler, vegetation failed, the
ancestors of the present carnivora appeared, the fathers of the
wolf and tiger, light, lithe and pugnacious, with senses acute and
ferocious weapons of attack, who set out to destroy everybody. They
destroyed pretty nearly all of the huge leaf-eating species, and only
the more plastic and smaller ones, who were more keen-sensed and
swift-footed (of whom the deer and antelope, horse and ox are the
descendants), escaped. The smallest either took to the air to become
the bat, or, like the forerunners of the squirrel and ape, took to the
trees.

It was the coming of the carnivores, therefore, that accelerated the
development of brain matter, and started the process which created
man. But in the millions and millions of years of conflicts, instincts
grew into being that sank deep into bone and marrow. The most
fundamental reflexes, those immediate responses to irritation or
danger, were laid down, and among them the drive and check system.
When the animal had decided to fight its enemy or was forced to fight,
or determined to prey, then was the time for the drive system to do
its utmost to speed up everything that would help in the fight, while
the check system came into play to hinder whatever would interfere or
burden in the fray. First the drive mechanism must have been hit upon,
and then the value of the check devices must have been found in fear
and flight, and especially in hiding and simulation of death, when
even breathing had to be inhibited. Until finally there developed, for
everyday use, a complete check and drive nerve machinery for every
organ, to be used according to the exigencies of the moment, with the
thyroid as the primary stimulant and controller of the drive system
and the adrenal as the primary dictator over the check system.

THE HARMONY OF THE HORMONES

All the glands, in fact, work in unison, with a distribution of the
balance of power that diplomatists might envy. In the co-ordinating
synchronism, the vegetative nervous system plays the part of an agent
that acts as well as is acted upon. The chemical interaction of the
internal secretions is not the only way in which they influence each
other. For, as the case of the thyroid and the adrenal so well shows,
secretions which, when directly interacting, are mutually reinforcing,
when affecting nerves, may become clashing opponents.

The Kinetic Chain is about as good a case as there is of the glands of
internal secretion co-operating. The Check and Drive systems, with the
adrenals and thyroid opposed, are one of the best instances of their
antagonisms. Besides, there are a number of other relationships
between them that might be cited. They all bear with more or less
pressure, positive or negative, upon the sex glands which will be
considered in its place. If one wished to consider all the glands in
their pro and anti relations, a separate volume would be required.

THE VEGETATIVE APPARATUS

The combination of the internal secretions and the vegetative system
has been spoken of as the vegetative or autonomic apparatus. The
vegetative apparatus is the oldest part of the nervous system.
And some acquaintance with its constitution is necessary to any
understanding of the possibilities of control of human nature.

For modern thought does not regard the brain as the organ of mind at
all, but as one unit of a complex synthesis, of which mind is the
product, and the vegetative apparatus is the major component. That
involves the blasting of the last current superstition of the
traditional psychology, the dogma that the brain is the exclusive seat
of mind.

That an animal is a vast concourse of cells is one of the accepted
fundamentals of biology. What is not so generally taken into
consideration is that the assemblage is formed by the agglutinations
of millions of years, and that it is hence composed of parts of
different ages and pedigrees, some exceedingly ancient and hoary, some
middle-aged, and some relatively new and recent. In the invertebrates,
who date further back in the history of the planet than any
vertebrate, the nervous system consists of discrete patches of nerve
cells, the ganglions composing the ganglionic system of which the
vegetative or autonomic nervous system of man is the direct descendant
and representative. The brain and central nervous system are
definitely later acquisitions, imposed upon the original stratum of
the check and drive machine.

The primitive chassis of the mechanism, so to speak, is the so-called
vegetative nervous system. Grouped with that system are the primeval
breathing, feeding and reproducing inventions, the viscera boxed up
in the chest and abdomen. The third partner is the glands of internal
secretion, which act upon the viscera both directly and indirectly
through the check and drive effect upon the vegetative nerves.
The glands are like tuning keys, by which certain strings in the
instrument may be tightened, so that its vibratory activity is
increased, or they may be loosened, the vibrations decreased, the
activity lessened. Tuning up the motors is a constant process in the
organism. Finally, there are the large nerve masses at the base of the
brain known as the basal ganglia, which contain the nerve centers for
the co-ordination of the other three. All these together constitute
the oldest family of the corporate organism. Beside them, the brain
and the face and the prehensile organs are mere parvenus.

THE OLDEST PART OF THE MIND

Granted, then, that this vegetative apparatus is the most deeply
rooted core of our being. What warrant is there for the grandiloquence
of the phrase: the Oldest part of the Mind? There is, indeed, room for
rhetoric, even poetry, here. For all the evidence points to it as the
rightful occupant of the throne upon which Shelley placed his Brownie
as the Soul of the Soul. Or to put it in another way, we think and
feel primarily with the vegetative apparatus, with our muscles,
especially the involuntary, with our viscera, and particularly with
our internal secretions. Whenever there is thought and feeling, there
is movement, commotion, precedent and concomitant, among these. They
are the oldest seats of feeling, thought and will and continue to
function as such.

Just what evidence is there for this conception? In the first place,
there is the fascinating story of the origin of vertebrates from
invertebrates of the sea scorpion or spider type. Then there is a
whole group of data which demonstrate that the primitive wishes which
make up the content of a baby consciousness are determined, settled by
states of relaxation or tension in different segments or areas of the
vegetative apparatus. According to this, the brain enters as only one
of the characters in the play of consciousness. It is just the organ
of awareness by the organism of itself as an integer which must adjust
itself to the specific condition within the disturbed vegetative
apparatus. Consequently the brain emerges not as the master tissue,
but as merely the servant of the vegetative apparatus.

Consciousness is a circuit. Swinging around in it are the
wish-feelings generated by the vegetative dynamo. From each viscus,
from the stomach and intestine, from the kidneys and bladder, from
the liver and spleen, from the blood-vessels, from all the glands
of external and internal secretion, there flow along the vegetative
nerves, to and from the brain, energies of various qualities and
intensities. All the members of the vegetative apparatus are more or
less active, and so all our wishes are all more or less active. All
our working hours we are aware of hunger, satiety or indifference, of
a desire to empty the intestine or bladder, or of a lack of necessity
of doing so, of a state of tranquillity of the blood-vessels and sweat
glands, or of a perturbation of them, of a varying tensity of even the
muscles that are, as we say, under the control of the will, of the
state, in fact, of all the elements of the vegetative complex. The
stream of feeling which constitutes the undertow of consciousness
originates outside of the brain altogether, and is composed of
currents arising from viscera, muscles, blood-vessels and glands.

Now the component currents are of different sizes and positions and
variable degrees of warmth. That is another way of saying that whether
or not a current is to become the center of the stream, or to approach
it, or whether it is to be hot, cold, or tepid, depends upon the
degree of activity of the various parts of the vegetative apparatus.
A convenient name for this is _tonus_. Tonus can be experimentally
watched and measured. Thus hunger, the most primitive of the
wish-feelings, has been found to be simultaneous with certain
characteristic contractions of the stomach. Stop those contractions,
and you stop the hunger. The contractions begin slowly and weakly,
and no awareness of them occurs in the mind. As they grow stronger,
consciousness becomes a sensation rather like an itch somewhere in
the upper abdomen, and accompanied sometimes by a sense of general
weakness. The vegetative activity going on as a current almost on the
outside of the stream of feeling has swelled and warmed, and so forced
itself, in a manner of speaking, into the center of the stream. Or if
you will, the rest of the stream has to arrange itself around it as
the center. A similar mechanism for the tonus of the other members
of the vegetative system, and how they determine consciousness and
behaviour is understandable. It has been shown that when the bladder
tone and the intestinal tone are of a definitely measurable size, one
has the desire to empty them. The same applies to the sex glands.
The pressure within a viscus is dependent upon the ratio between the
amount of contraction of the involuntary muscle in its walls, the
external pressure, and the quantity of its distending contents, the
internal pressure. The resultant quotient, the internal pressure
divided by the external pressure, measures the intravisceral pressure.
The primitive wish-feelings are the direct expressions of the various
intravisceral pressures, or tones. The primitive soul is an awareness
of the fused primitive wish-feelings of themselves as a whole, and of
the struggle between them for recognition, isolation, and, as we say,
satisfaction. This satisfaction consists in a degradation of the
highest intravisceral pressure to a point at which some other
intravisceral pressure becomes higher and therefore predominant.

PHYSICS OF THE WISH

Mind, consciousness, may then be portrayed as an ocean comprised of
mobile current layers, complexes built up around the awareness of
different intravisceral pressures. A shifting hierarchy of such
pressures form the points of focusing of consciousness that result in
conduct. Behaviour may be defined as the resultant of the organism's
pressure against the environment's counter pressure until there is
a sufficient reduction of the specifically exciting intravisceral
pressure. Just as water flows to its own level, so will conduct flow
to reduce intravisceral pressure to its own level. A physics of the
soul comes into prospect, in which a mathematical analysis will state
the process quantitatively in terms of some common unit of pressure.

Not only conduct, but also character, because it is past conduct
repeated, associated, and fixed, will be so statable. For
intravisceral tonus or pressure is not simply or only an acute or
passing affair. There is for it a persistent or average figure,
the so-called normal for it, below which or above which the acute
situation will bring it. _Character_ is a _matter then of standards
in the vegetative system_. Character, indeed, is an alloy of the
different standard intravisceral pressures of the organism, a fusion
created by the resistance or counter pressure of the obstacles in the
environment. Character, in short, is the grand intravisceral barometer
of a personality.

Thus the comfortable, healthy, happy, well-balanced, progressive,
constructive, virile personality is one in whom there is a
continuously harmonious reduction of the intravisceral pressures in
the environment called society. For in a gregarious creature, like
man, fellow beings are the most powerful determinants of negative and
positive vegetative pressures. Not so well rounded are other types
existing because of inferiorities or excesses of the standard visceral
tone. There is, for instance, the sexually cold type, comfortable by
creating for itself an anaphrodisiac environment composed of pressures
that can be fitted into its own. Or there may be an insufficiency of
standard pressure in the alimentary tract, and we have the ascetic,
mal-nourished, striving, uplifting type. Different types will be made
by the permutations and combinations of factors that determine the
intravisceral pressure and the environmental, i.e., social resistances
or counter pressures.

INTERNAL SECRETIONS DETERMINANTS OF VEGETATIVE PRESSURES

Now of all the different factors which determine the tones, that is to
say, the internal pressures, of the various parts of the vegetative
apparatus (including all structures not controlled by the will in
the term), the internal secretions or hormones are by far the most
important. This significance is conferred upon them because it is
by their activities primarily that these pressures are produced,
regulated, lowered and heightened; in short, controlled. We have seen
how the thyroid and adrenal hold the reins of the drive or check
systems in the vegetative apparatus. Together with the other ductless
glands, they decide the advance or halt, forward or retreat, tension
or relaxation, charge and discharge, of the visceral--involuntary
muscle--blood vessel combination which is at the core of life. Here
again they emerge as the directorate.

Carlson, the Chicago physiologist, who probably knows more about being
hungry than any other man on the planet, once demonstrated that the
injection of an ounce or two of the blood, which means the internal
secretion mixture, of a starving animal, into one not starving
increased the signs of hunger and the accompanying hunger contractions
of the stomach. There can be no doubt that hunger is the expression of
a certain specific concentration of internal secretion or secretions
in the blood. When the quantity, in the cycles of metabolism, becomes
sufficiently great, it stimulates the stomach to contract in a way
which augments the pressure within it to a point at which the feeling
of hungriness, and the wish to satisfy it, or to get rid of it,
becomes imperative, and the dominant of consciousness.

Without doubt the sexual cravings are likewise so determined. Sex
libido is an expression of a certain concentration, a definite amount
peculiar to the individual, of the substance manufactured by the
interstitial cells, circulating in the blood. It arouses its effects
probably by (1) increasing the amount of reproductive material in
the sex glands in a direct chemically stimulating effect upon the
germinative cells, and so raising the internal pressure within them,
(2) stimulating the involuntary muscles within the walls and the
canals of the sex glands, and so, by augmenting the tenseness of the
muscles, elevating the total intravisceral pressure, (3) by a direct
chemical and indirect nervous effect upon the brain, the muscles, the
heart, as well as the other glands of internal secretion stimulating
the organism as a whole. Though the isolation in pure form of the
substance or substances involved has never been scientifically
achieved, their inference is entirely justified. It is indeed the only
comprehensible mechanism conceivable that will fit all the known facts
about the matter. And even though the assertions of Brown-Sequard were
only the exaggerations of a semi-charlatan, it is certain that some
day in the near future the particular substance, that he claimed he
had discovered, will be handed about in bottles for the inspection of
the curious.

Besides thyroxin, adrenalin, and the libido-producing secretion of the
interstitial cells, the substance produced by the paired glandlets,
situated behind the thyroid, the parathyroids, have a profound
influence upon the vegetative apparatus and the vegetative nervous
system. These direct the lime exchanges within the cells of the
organisms, including the nerve cells. It has been shown that lime is,
relatively, a sedative to cells. It raises the threshold or strength
of stimulus necessary to evoke a reaction. Removing the parathyroids
means removing the lime barrier, for with their deficiency there is a
change in, and then an escape, from the blood, of the lime, by way
of the kidneys. The result is sometimes an enormous increase in the
excitability of all the cells, and especially of the vegetative
apparatus. What that means for the individual whose comfort depends
upon a stability of the intravisceral tones and pressures may be
readily imagined.

The pancreas likewise acts as a sedative to the vegetative apparatus.
In particular, this applies to the sugar mechanism in the liver under
the discipline of the check and drive organization. The adrenal and
the pancreas are the direct antagonists in the struggle for control of
sugar. Removal of the adrenals will cause a decrease in the amount
of sugar in the blood, while removal of the pancreas will produce an
increase. Excess of sugar in the blood may thus be concomitant with
changes of character considered incorrigible.

In different locales of the vegetative apparatus, as indeed of
the body in general, the directorate seems to be handed over to a
committee of control, generally made up of two members working
in opposing directions. Such a division of power in the general
directorate is analogous to the small holding corporations which
divide functions in, for example, the United States Steel Corporation.
The relative ratios of tonus in these smaller internal secretion
balances are of the utmost significance as causes of differences
in the vegetative apparatus, which are the basis of differences in
structure, power, and character between individuals.

THE GENERAL LAWS OF THE DIRECTORATE

Our knowledge of the glands of internal secretions as an interlocking
directorate presiding over all the functions of the organism is still
exceedingly meagre. As yet, we seem to be knocking at the portals
of the chemistry of the imponderable. There are holes in the bronze
doors, and we glimpse the unfathomable distances of unexplored
regions. But we do see something, and we do glimpse a beginning.
Already the outlines of a differential anatomy, and a different
physiology and a differential psychology, which will explain to us
the unique in the constitution, the temperament and character of
an individual, emerge. It is worth while, before proceeding to the
details, so valuable to a society which would become rational, to
summarize the general principles emerging, expressing the directing
powers of the ductless glands over the individual. _They may be
regarded as the present postulates of a new science of the whys and
wherefores separating and setting apart, as so recognizably distinct,
those peregrinating chemical mixtures: men and women_.

1. The life of every individual, in every stage, is dominated largely
by his glands of internal secretion. That is, they, as a complex
internal messenger and director system, control organ and function,
conduct and character. The orderliness of human life, in the
sequential march of its episodes, crises, successes and failures,
depends, to a large extent, upon their interactions with each other
and with the environment.

2. One or several of the glands possesses a controlling or superior
influence above that of the others in the physiology of the individual
and so becomes the central gland of his life, its dominant, indeed, so
far as it casts a deciding vote or veto, in its everyday existence and
incidents as well as in its high points, the climaxes and emergencies.

3. These glandular preponderances are at the basis of personality,
creating genius and dullard, weakling and giant, Cavalier and Puritan.
All human traits may be analyzed in terms of them because they are
expressions of them.

4. Specific types of personality may be directly associated with
particular glandular prominences, so that we have the thyroid-centered
types, the pituitary-centered types, the adrenal-centered types, etc.
These are the classic Three, the prototypes in their purity most
easily described and recognized.

5. Combinations of these, as well as of other glands--with joint
predominance--occur and indeed form the majority of populations. The
phenomena of varieties in species are thus explained.

6. Internal secretion traits are inherited, and variations in heredity
are essentially the structural representation of the resultant of a
parallelogram of forces exerted by each of the parental prepotent
glands. If they are of the same type, they may reinforce each other:
if not, inhibitions and compensations will come into play. Mendelian
laws may apply.

7. The process of evolution, as the play of natural selection upon
these variations, becomes comprehensible from a new standpoint.

8. Certain diseases, and disease tendencies, both acute and
constitutional, as well as traits of temperament and character, and
predetermined reactions to certain recurring situations in life,
are rooted in the glandular soils that compose the stuff of the
individual.

9. The subconscious, of which the vegetative apparatus is the physical
basis, leads back to the internal secretions for the profoundest
springs of its secrets. We shall see how and why.

10. Given the internal secretory composition, so to speak, of an
individual--his endocrine formula--and so his intravisceral pressures,
one may predict, within limits, his physical and psychic make-up,
the general lines of his life, diseases, tastes, idiosyncrasies and
habits.

11. Within limits, if the previous history of an individual is known,
his physical appearance may be approximately described, and his future
outlined.

12. Conversely, given the physical and psychic composition of an
individual, and his past history, one may deduce the internal
secretion type to which he belongs.

Examples:

  A. One Thyroid-centered Type has
    Bright eyes
    Good clean teeth
    Symmetrical features
    Moist flushed skin
    Temperamental attitude toward life
    Tendency to heart, intestinal and nervous disease

  B. One Pituitary-centered Type
    Abnormally large or small size
    Musical--acute sense of rhythm
    Asymmetrical features
    Tendency to cyclic or periodic diseases

  C. One Adrenal-centered Type
    Hairy
    Dark
    Masculinity marked
    Tendency to diphtheria and hernia

These are some of the master types. They have their variants depending
upon the influences of the other glands, especially the interstitial
cells of the sex glands.

ANTE-NATAL DEVELOPMENT

In their ensemble, the glands of internal secretion wield a
determining influence upon the development of the individual from
his very inception. If his various powers may be conceived of as an
orchestra, they may be said to conduct it from the very beginning of
its movements, and to cease only with its termination. From the moment
when the spermatozoon penetrates and fecundates the ovum, the fate
of the future being is settled by their disposition. The seal of his
destiny is soaked with their substance.

POST-NATAL DEVELOPMENT

Every particle of protoplasm, every granule of the impregnated ovum
carries the representatives of the parental ductless glands. As a
consequence, they transmit chemically, with no figure of speech
involved, the peculiar familial, racial and national characters from
progenitors to offspring. They confer upon the child a number of the
properties commonly recognized as inherited. All those features which
distinguish Caucasian from Mongolian, Scandinavian from Italian,
Italian from Jew are determined by them.

In short, at every step of his life, in every relation and
association, in every expression of the inner forces that control his
being, the normal individual is influenced by his internal secretions.
Let us now see how.




CHAPTER V

HOW THE GLANDS INFLUENCE THE NORMAL BODY


The origin of the remarkable differences between individuals that
distinguish species, varieties and families, has long been one of the
chief puzzles of biology. It may indeed be called the leading puzzle,
which led Darwin on to the collection of the data that culminated in
the "Origin of Species." The why of the Unique is the fundamental
problem of those who would understand life.

An explanation is an attempt at a consistent and persistent, sometimes
an obstinate clarity of mind. A vast number of observations gathered
by laboratory experimentalists as well as by those naturalists of the
abnormal, physicians in active practice, prove that the construction
of the individual both during development before maturity, and
maintenance during maturity, his constitution, in short, is directed
by the endocrine glands. It is possible now to present an explanation
of the individuality of the individual.

To assert that variation is responsible for the individual, that it
is the mechanism which isolates him as a being like none other of his
fellows, not even his parents, brothers, and sisters, is merely to beg
the question. What is variation? The internal secretion theory of the
process offers, for the first time, an explanation that is coherent
and comprehensive, based upon concrete and detailed observations.
It provides an adequate interpretation of the numberless hereditary
gradations and transitions, blendings and mixtures. It suggests a
control of heredity in the future.

THE PURE TYPES

In the pure types, only one gland, either by being present in great
excess above the average, or by being pretty well below the average,
comes to exercise the dominating influence upon the traits of the
organism. As the strongest link in the chain, or as the weakest, it
rules. The others must accommodate themselves to it. Among them as
commanders of growth, development and normal function, it holds the
balance of power. In every emergency it stands out by its strength or
by its weakness. It thus creates its own type of man or woman, with
attributes and characteristics peculiar to itself. These pure types,
as we have seen, are mainly the thyroid, the pituitary, and the
adrenal-centered.

Each with the signs peculiar to it can be identified among the faces
that pass one in the street. And they differ so markedly among
themselves that they provide a new and accurate means of classifying
varieties among the races of the species: man. The thyroid type
differs as much from the adrenal type as does a greyhound from a
bull-dog. The greyhound has a certain size, form, character and
capacity. The bull-dog has similar qualities which are yet quite
different. Each is built for a particular career. Among human beings,
the pure thyroid type is easily distinguished from the pure adrenal
type, and both of these from the pure pituitary type. Each is stamped
with a significant figure, height, skin, hair, temperament, ambition,
social reactions and predisposition to certain diseases.

THE MIXED TYPES

Among the mixed types, the lines of distinction are less clear, and so
they are more difficult to classify. The mixed types may be said to
be hyphenated. In them, two or even three of the internal secretory
glands conflict for predominance. The combined action makes for a
resultant modification in the primary glandular markings and effects.
A hyphenated classification thus becomes inevitable. Especially is
this so if the two glands are mutually antagonistic and inhibitory.
A compromise effect is then necessitated. Or an individual may be
dominated by one gland at one period of his life and by another at a
later period. One of the glands, the thyroid, for example, will show,
by the traces it has left upon the earliest developing features, that
it was in control at the very earliest dates of his history, while
other signs will disclose the more recent influence of the adrenal
or of the pituitary. The combination becomes classifiable as the
thyroid-pituitary type, or as the thyroid-adrenal type.

That the external features as well as the chronic diseases of human
beings are controlled by some common factor has long been suspected.
Inquiries into morbid phenomena with a hereditary trend yielded
information that has paved the way for the internal secretion theory.
It has long been known that certain diseases effect only certain
individuals of a definite constitution. Apoplexy, diabetes,
arteriosclerosis, Bright's disease, are met with almost exclusively in
what the older clinicians talked about as the apopleptic type. On the
other hand, they said, anemias, tuberculosis, hemophilias, scrofulas
occurred more among the lymphatic type. But they had no idea whatever
of the true functional basis of the two different types. The truth
as we of today view it is that these two types represent different
textures of human beings, fabricated of different internal secretions.
They are really two different breeds of the species Homo Sapiens. The
materials being different, the color and feel of them is different,
and the resistance to wear and tear is different.

ENDOCRINE ANALYSIS

The modes of classification glimpsed at are certainly exceedingly
broad and sweeping. It is well enough to establish types and classes.
But beneath them are sheltered the infinite possibilities of
permutations and combinations, which explain the countless variety
and complexity of form and function. Every individual born among the
vertebrates, for example, must have a certain definite amount and
percentage of pituitary gland, anterior and posterior, pineal,
thyroid, parathyroid, thymus, adrenal, pancreas, interstitial and
so on. Now if, to state it in terms of percentages, for the sake of
argument, the pituitary is 25, the pineal 10, the thyroid 36, the
parathyroids 15, the thymus 29, the adrenals 60, the pancreas 49, the
interstitials 72 (the gland when acting maximally to be graded as
100), we see at once how different such an individual must be from one
who has, say, pituitary 84, pineal 39, thyroid 26, parathyroid 42,
adrenals 96, pancreas 22 and interstitials 89. One obtains at once
from the contrasts of such figures some idea of the possibilities. As
each point plus or minus must count to produce some difference in the
individual, the results are manifest. Varying within the numerical
limits imposed by genus, species, variety and family (which limits
are probably responsible for the persistence of the particular genus,
species, variety, or family) the individual becomes an individual
because of the relative values of the percentages in his blood and
tissues of these different internal secretions. We thus begin to gain
an insight into the patterns according to which men, women and animals
are woven.

We are, as yet, far from an exact endocrine analysis of the
individual. But we know that the endocrines rule over growth and
nutrition, a vast dominion which incorporates every organ and every
tissue. By enhancing or retarding the nutritional changes, the growth
of the organ or tissue is favored or restricted. The size and shape of
an individual, as a whole, as well as of the specialized cell masses
composing him, as hands and feet, the nose and ears, and so on, are
therefore controlled by them. Whether an organism is to be tall or
short, lean or corpulent, graceful or awkward, is decided by their
interactions. These, like human covenants, vary with the different
reactions of the parties to the contract. And so a great deal depends
upon whether they work harmoniously or discordantly, and upon which
does the most work and which the least.

Undersecretion and Oversecretion

It is when a gland, either in the course of development, or because of
the influence of starvation, shock, injury, poisoning or infection,
begins to undersecrete or oversecrete that its effects upon growth and
nutrition become grossly manifest. A veritable transfiguration of the
individual may occur, the black magic of which may perplex him for
a lifetime. A man, made eunuchoid by an accident or by mumps, will
observe in himself astonishing changes in his constitutional make-up,
mentality and sexuality. He would be more astounded to learn that
beneath the appearances, the changes, so alarming him, there are
profound alterations in the rate at which he is taking in oxygen,
burning up sugar, accumulating carbon dioxide and excreting waste
byproducts through the kidneys, which are responsible for them.

The differences between the normal and abnormal are only a matter of
degree. And so, to be sure, are differences between types. But it is
hard to realize that the striking distinctions between the thyroid
type and the pituitary, comparable, as said, to the differences
between a greyhound and a bull-dog, are dependent solely upon
quantitative variations in the general and local speeds of metabolism,
among the cells.

DIVISION OF LABOR

Besides the antagonisms and co-operations between them, there are
certain lines along which the glands, in their effects, specialize.
The thyroid, for instance, is concerned specially with the regulation
of the shape, form and finish of an organ. The pituitary shines at the
periods of developmental crises, determining them and modifying them.
It exerts the greatest influence upon the time of eruption of the
teeth, both the temporary and the permanent, the onset of puberty, the
recurrence of menstruation in women, and the time of occurrence of
labor. The interstitial glands distribute the basis of the powers and
limitations of masculinity and femininity. Abnormalities of these
glands also affect the individual all along the line, in all of his
aspects. So affected he may apparently change into a wholly different
being. He may change in size, in the shape of his head, feet and
hands, as well as in his habits, aptitudes and dispositions. So he may
find it necessary to purchase an entirely different size of hat, more
commodious clothes, and newly fitting gloves and shoes. At the same
time, his family, relatives and friends, discover that the erstwhile
generous, frank, neat and punctual and liked, has become stingy and
suspicious and slovenly and hated. And all because a gland has begun
to undersecrete or to oversecrete. The transformation will be slight
or marked, depending entirely upon the extent of impairment, positive
or negative, of the gland involved.

But it is not only in the shaping of the normal individual's
architecture that the internal secretions dominate. Over that subtle
something known in all languages as vitality, expressive of the
intensity of feeling, thought and reactions in cells, they rule
supreme. Gay vivacity and grim determination, the temperament of a
Louis XIV, and the soul of a Cromwell, are the crystallizations of
these chemical substances acting upon the brain.

INTERNAL SECRETION VARIETIES

There is no better way of illustrating the influence of the internal
secretions upon the normal than the analysis of the variation of
traits with variations in glandular predominances. The general build
of an individual, his skeletal type, the proportion between the size
of his arms and that of his legs, as well as that between his trunk
and his lower extremities, whether he is to be tall, lanky and
loutish, or short, squat and dumpy, are to be considered. Different
facial types are the expressions of underlying endocrine differences.
The head and skull offer a number of clues to the controlling
secretions in the blood and tissues. Whether the forehead is to be
broad or narrow, the distance between the eyes, the character of the
eyebrows, the shape and size and appearance of the eyes themselves,
the mould of the nose and jaws and the peculiarities of the teeth, are
all so determined. The skin, in its color, texture, the quantity
and distribution of its fatty and other constituents, eruptions and
weather reactions, is influenced. Also the mucous membranes, the
color and lustre and structure of the hair, as well as its general
distribution and development, are hieroglyphics of the endocrine
processes below the surface. Whether the muscles are massive or
sparse, atrophied or hypertrophied, soft or hard, easily fatigable
or not, bespeak conditions in the glandular chain. In short, we must
regard the individual as an immensely complicated pattern of designs
traced by the hormones as the primary etchers of his development.
Though it must be admitted that the number of unknown and unsolved
relations in the pattern are still enormously great, enough has
been established to make possible a rough working analysis of the
particular, unique organism placed before us for examination as Mr.
Smith, Mrs. Jones, or Miss Smith-Jones.

WHAT IS THE NORMAL?

Anthropologists, from the beginning of anthropology, have battled
in vain for a satisfactory inclusive definition, or, at least,
description of the normal. With the introduction of the biometric
method, the goal at last appeared within sight. A cocked hat curve
expressing the distribution and range of the normal looks formidable.
The attainable turned out a mirage, for the curves constructable by
the measurement of traits of a population only proved the truth of the
old axiom that all transitions and variations between extremes exist.
The Problem of the Normal seemed more elusive than ever. And the best
that could be done for the elucidation of its mystery, was to apply
and observe the law of averages.

From the endocrine standpoint, the reason for this becomes clear. The
biometric method concerned itself with externals, with, as it were,
symptoms. Since these external signs are but manifestations of the
inner chemical reactions, of which the internal secretions are the
determining reagents, or factors, with permutations and combinations
possible in all directions, the diversity and variability of each
individual and his traits stands explained and understandable. The
normal, as the perfect or nearly perfect balance of forces in the
organism, at any given moment, emerges as a more definite and real
concept than that which would abstract it from a curve of variations.
Moreover, since the directive forces within the organism are
pre-eminently the internal secretions, the normal becomes definable as
their harmonious balancing or equilibrium, a state which tends not to
undo (as the abnormal does) but to prolong itself.

The potential combinations and compensations, antagonisms and
counteractions, attainable within the endocrine glands as an
interlocking directorate, point the cause for the elusive quality of
the normal. Tall men and short men, blonde women and dumpy women,
lanky hatchet-faced people, stout moon-faced people, Falstaff and
Queen Elizabeth, George Washington and Abraham Lincoln, Disraeli and
Walt Whitman, Caesar and Alexander, as well as Mr. Smith and Miss
Jones come within the range of the normal. There are all kinds and
conditions and sorts of men and women, and all kinds and sorts and
conditions of the normal, because an incalculable number of harmonious
relations and interactions between the endocrines are possible, and
do actually occur. The standard of the normal must obviously not be
a single standard, but a series of standards, depending upon which
glands predominate, and how the others adapt themselves to its
predominance. Adrenal-centered types, thyroid-centered types,
pituitary-centered types, thymus-centered types, as well as hyphenated
compounds of these, such as the pituitary-adrenal types, exist as
normals. They can be conceived of as normal types because they exist
as normal types.

THE SKELETAL TYPES

Now men, for as long as we have any knowledge of their thoughts and
classifications and attitudes, have been accustomed to first think
of one another, to classify and size one another as tall or short,
slender or broad, thin or corpulent. The biological necessity, indeed,
instinct of the one animal to relate the other animal to aggressive or
harmless agencies in his surroundings, accounts for this. Relatively,
of course, for all these modes of description imply offensive or
defensive possibilities of the stimulus for the recorder in relation
to himself. The interest in stature is fundamental, and has persisted
in the most civilized, nations. The relationship of height and weight,
as well as of length and breadth, to other physical traits, have
formed the subject of scientific study. There is, for instance, the
classification of Bean, who divided mankind generally into two types,
those of a medium size, stocky long legs and arms, large hands and
feet, short trunk, and face large in comparison to the head (the
meso-onto-morphs) and those who were either tall and slender, or small
and delicate, with the smaller face, eyes close together, long, high,
narrow nose, and trunk longer as compared with the extremities (the
hyper-onto-morphs). Bean showed, too, that the hypers (to use a short
word to contrast with the mesos) were present to the extent of almost
a hundred per cent in a series of tuberculosis, and about ninety per
cent in a series of central nervous system disease. All of which is
exceedingly interesting and suggestive, but throws no light upon the
underlying mechanisms of statures.

STATURE AND GROWTH

Stature is essentially determined by the growth of the long bones.
They are the pace-makers, and the muscles and soft tissues follow the
pace they set. Now the primary determinant, catalyst or sensitizer of
the growth of the long bones is the anterior pituitary. All statures
should therefore be first scrutinized from the point of view of the
pituitary. Individuals over six feet tall or under five feet five
inches should be looked upon as having a pituitary trend. This
pituitary trend may be primary, due to its own undergrowth or
overgrowth, or it may be due to lack of inhibition from the sex glands
such as occurs in eunuchs and eunuchoids, or excessive or premature
inhibition from them as happens in certain salacious dwarfs.

The long bones grow at a point of junction between the bone proper
and an overlying layer of gristle or cartilage, known as the zone of
ossification. It is upon this zone of ossification that the various
growth influences appear to focus and concentrate their efforts, among
them the internal secretions. After growth has been finished, that is,
after adolescence, these zones of ossification close, so that growth
is no longer possible unless they become reactivated. Upon the zone of
ossification must act the pituitary, and indirectly the thyroid, the
interstitial cells, the thymus and the adrenals. Individuals oversized
or undersized either belong to the pituitary type, or if hyphenated,
have the pituitary as one of the dominants in their composition. The
necessities of child-bearing determine a greater angle between trunk
and lower extremities in the female. Underactivity of the pituitary,
for instance, will prevent the development of the normal angle. The
ratio in length of the upper limbs to the lower is a fairly constant
relationship for each sex normally Deviations occur with a break
somewhere in the chain of cooperation of the internal secretions
controlling the growth of bone.

HANDS, FINGERS AND TOES

The size and shape and general configuration of the hands, fingers
and toes are details that tell an endocrine tale. Students of hands
naturally have grouped them as the long slender and the short, broad,
the bony and the well-filled out, the tapering fingers and the stumpy.
The character of a hand is determined anatomically by the length and
breadth of the bones, the amount and distribution of fat, and the
thickness and elasticity of the skin. Over these, the essential
control lies in the pituitary and the thyroid. So we find that
pituitary types have, when there is oversecretion, large bony, gross
hands, spade-shaped, or when there is undersecretion, hands that are
plump, with peculiarly tapering fleshy fingers. The hyperthyroid has
long slender fingers, the subthyroid pudgy, coarse, ugly foreshortened
hands, often cold, and bluish.

FACIAL TYPES

An artist will see in a face the past history of generations, a
narrative of the adventures of the blood, a record of tears and
smiles, wrinkles and dimples, the victories and defeats of buried
drudgery and romance. These signatures which the Faculty of Life have
scribbled or engraved over it as upon a diploma, bespeak for him
spiritual moments. To the student of the internal secretions the
lines, expressions, attitudes are important for they tell of the state
of tensions and strains in the vegetative apparatus with which they
are inseparably connected. It is when one comes to the consideration
of the face as a complex of brows, eyes, nose, lips and jaws that he
becomes most interested. For in the modeling and tone of every one of
the features each of the endocrine glands has something to say. In
consequence there has been described the hyperpituitary face, and the
hyperthyroid face, the subthyroid face and the subpituitary face, the
adrenal face, the eunuchoid face and the ovarian face and also the
thymic.

To bring to mind an immediate complete image of the hyperthyroid face,
one should think of Shelley. The oval shape of it, with the delicate
modeling of all the features, the wide, high brow, the large,
vivacious, prominent eyes with the glint of a divine fire in them and
the sensitive lips all belong to the classical picture. Generally
flushed over the cheek-bones, there is undoubtedly a certain
effeminate effect associated with it. At least, it is the least animal
and brutish of the faces of man.

On the other hand, the subthyroid face is that of the cretin and
cretinoid idiot, in a mild degree. So characteristic that we recognize
the portrait in the descriptions of Pliny in early Roman tunes and of
Marco Polo in his Asiatic travels. Coarseness, dullness, pudginess are
its keynotes. Irregular features, tendency to wide separation of the
eyes and pug nose, sallow, puffy complexion, waxy thickened nose and
eyelids, deep-set, listless, lacklustre eyebrows, and thick prominent
lips comprise the catalogue of the physiognomy. On the whole, the sort
of face one passes in the street as stupid and common. But there are
a number of fascinating and marvelous varieties of the stupid and
common.

The adrenal face is most often dark or freckled. It tends to be
irregularly broadish. It is hairy, one is struck forcibly. There is a
low hair line, which makes the brow appear rather low, and there is
a good deal of hair over the cheek bones. The adrenal type is round
headed.

The face of the hyperpituitary is striking and pretty sharply defined.
It is long and narrow, with a tendency to prominence of the bony
parts. Square, protruding jaw, high, thin, straight nose, emphasized
eyebrows, and marked cheek-bones, comprise the leading points in its
composition. On the other hand, the subpituitary is more rounded and
trends toward the full moon effect, the chin recedes, the cheek-bones
are buried under fat, the nose spreads more and is flatter. In its
general expression, there is a complacence and tranquillity which is
often mistaken for sleepiness, and often actually is dullness.

The eunuchoid face is usually fat with puffy eyelids. The skin is
smooth and cool, marble-like often, poor in pigment and color.
Sometimes it is sallow, wrinkled and senile in a man in his early
twenties. At others, it is distinctly feminine in its hairlessness,
and the delicate texture of the skin, as well as in the clean-cut
patterning of the features. Every gradient between premature senility
and sex inversion is encountered.

The thymic face frequently stamps its possessor at sight. Its owner
has a smooth, soft skin, with little or no hair, and a dead white or
"peaches-and-cream" complexion. One wonders, when unacquainted with
the type, who the man's barber is, or where he learned to shave
himself so well. It may be curiously velvety to the touch and swept by
a faint sheen. Among children occur the most exquisite samples of the
kind designated as the angelic child. The face is finely moulded and
beautifully proportioned, features artistically chiselled, eyes blue
or brown with long lashes, cheeks transparent with rapid, fleeting
variations in coloring, thin lips, and oval chin. In the adult, the
chin is receding, and the mouth seems underdeveloped in one variety.

THE TEETH

As closely connected with the internal secretions as are the bones of
the face and the skull are the teeth. Tooth formation is essentially a
modified bone formation. And as the bones of the face are influenced,
so are the teeth influenced. But as each tooth is a miniature organ,
inspectable by the eye as a unit, the action of the ductless glands
is more obviously reflected for the observer to read. By their teeth
shall ye know them. Upon the whole history of the evolution of each
tooth, in the growth of the dental follicle and its walls, the
fruition of the dentinal germ, the making of the enamel organ, the
dental pulp, the cementum and the peridental membrane, the endocrines
leave their mark.

There are certain general statements about the teeth and the internal
secretions that can be made. The teeth of the thyroid types are
pearly, glistening, small and regular; in other words, the teeth to
which poets have devoted sonnets. The pituitary types have teeth that
are large and square and irregular, with prominence of the middle
incisors, and a marked separation or crowding of them. The
interstitial types have small irregular upper teeth, with turned,
stumpy or missing lateral incisors. The thymus types have youthful,
milky white teeth that are thin and translucent, and scalloped or
crescentic at the grinding edge. The teeth of the adrenal type are all
well-developed, tend to have a yellowish color, with a reddish tinge
to the grinding surfaces.

The degree and regularity of development of the middle upper cutting,
biting teeth, as distinguished from the grinding molars, the middle
and lateral incisors, and the canines offer further guides to the
endocrine constitution analysis. The size of the central incisors
seems to be directly proportional to the degree of pituitary
predominance. On the other hand, the size and regularity of
the lateral incisors seem proportional to the influence of the
interstitial cells. When these are inferior in the make-up of an
individual, the lateral incisors are nearly always distorted. The
size of the canines appears to be a measure of adrenal activity. Long
sharply pointed canines mean well-functioning adrenal gland equipment
to start in with, inherited from a bellicose progenitor.

No individual peculiarities of the teeth are accidental. Just as the
absence of hair on the face in a man or a moustache effect in a
woman stand for some definite stress or strain in the mechanics of
interaction of the internal secretions, so likewise do variations in
dentition, as to the time of eruption of the teeth, their position and
quality, and their resistance to decay.

Proper balance between the thymus and pituitary will permit the
eruption of the teeth within the normal time limits, both the milk
teeth and the permanent teeth. When there is equilibrium between the
pituitary and the gonads, the teeth will be regular in shape and
position. Carious teeth, in children and adults, sometimes indicate
endocrine imbalance. Thyroid and adrenal balance determines the
resistance to decay of the molars. Early decay of the molars in
children is significant of insufficiency of the thyroid. When the
first permanent molar, which should appear in the upper arch in its
usual position between the sixth or eighth years, does not, there has
been a prenatal disturbance of the pituitary, according to Chayes
and others. Rapid decay of the teeth in childhood should always call
attention to the parathyroids.

In pregnancy, the teeth suffer particularly because of disturbances of
the endocrines. The saying, "A tooth for every child," is said to have
its equivalent in every language. The bicuspids and second permanent
molars erupt around puberty, when profound readjustments are going on
among the glands of internal secretion. They consequently suffer with
their abnormalities or divergences from type. The teeth thus furnish a
good deal of information concerning the distribution of the balance of
power among the hormones.

THE SKIN

The skin is influenced in its color, moisture, hairiness, texture, fat
content and disease vulnerability by the endocrines. The question of
color is very interesting, for it is probably the expression of the
blending action of the different internal secretions. Davenport, the
American student of heredity and eugenics, has shown that neither
white nor black skins are either perfectly white or perfectly black,
but are mixtures in various proportions of black, yellow, red and
white. The exact percentages of the pigments in each particular skin,
can be determined by means of a rotating disc. Thus a white person's
skin may have the following composition:

Black 8% Red 50%

Yellow 9% White 33%

The composition of the skin of a very black negro may be:

Black 68% Red 26%

Yellow 2% White 7%

Now the fact that in Addison's disease in which the adrenals are
destroyed there occurs a coincident increase in the black in the
skin, and other evidence pointing to adrenal implication in dark
complexioned white people, as well as in those possessing pigmented
spots, seems to indicate the adrenals as controllers of the black
and white factors. Davenport has concluded that there are two double
factors for black pigmentation in the full-blooded negro which are
separately inheritable. The determinants of the red and yellow have
still to be worked out.

The moistness of the skin, as perspiration, depends upon the number
and activity of the sweat glands. It varies with the water content of
the body, the state of the vegetative nervous system, and the body
temperature. Thus the skin of the hyperthyroid and the subadrenal
is soft and moist, because of their antagonistic effects upon the
sympathetic system. The subthyroid and the hyperadrenal have dry
and harsh skins for the same reason, if no other glands intervene.
However, in both of the latter, if there is a persistent thymus, the
skin will retain the bland quality of adolescence.

There is a curious variation among the different internal secretion
types in the reaction of the skin to stroking. When the skin,
especially the skin over the shoulders, the breasts and the abdomen,
is stroked with some blunt object, the blood vessels react either by a
greater filling up or emptying of themselves. The latter occurs most
regularly in the subadrenal types, the former in the hyperthyroid.
Both forms of reaction run parallel to the different check or drive
effects of the vegetative apparatus. With too much drive, that is, too
much thyroid, there is the flushing reaction; with too little check,
that is, with too little adrenal, there is the whitening. These
differences probably explain the emotional reactions of the face. In
anger, for example, some people become a dead white, others a fiery
red. Whether one will do one or the other may depend upon the relative
predominance of the thyroid or of adrenal in the individual.

In the distribution of fat beneath and throughout the skin all of the
endocrine glands appear to have a voice. The typically hyperthyroid
and hyperpituitary individuals tend to be thin, as well also as those
who have well-functioning or excessively functional interstitial
cells. In all of these the administration of the respective internal
secretions increases the burning up of material in the body, and all
of them have a higher rate of tissue combustion than their confreres,
with a subthyroid or subpituitary keynote in their cell chemistry, or
with insufficient interstitial cell action. Generally the latter have
a very dry skin, the former a moist skin. With delayed involution of
the pineal, obesity results.

The elasticity of the skin is another quality that varies with the
concentration in the blood of the internal secretions. Elasticity of
the skin, its recoil upon being stretched like a rubber band, may be
taken as a measure of the activity of all the endocrine glands. For,
as can be noticed especially upon the back of the hand, the older a
man grows, the less elastic becomes the skin. In older people, raising
the skin upon the back of the hand will cause it to stand up as a
ridge for a few seconds and then slowly to return to the level of the
surrounding skin. Whereas in a youthful person it will quickly snap
back into place. This quality of elasticity of the skin is due to the
presence in it of the so-called yellow elastic fibres, cell products,
with a resilience greater than anything devised by man. The
preservation of the resilience is a function of the internal
secretions. Thus, after loss of the thyroid, the ridging effect
characteristic of senility can be produced in one young as measured by
his years. It has been said that a man is as old as his arteries, and
also that as he is as old as his skin. It might better be said that he
is as old as his elastic tissue, young when he is rich in it, old when
poor and losing it. And as elastic tissue and internal secretions
stand in the relation of created and creators, or at least preserved
and preservers, a man may be said to be as old, that is as young,
fresh and active as his ductless glands.

THE HAIR

There is no characteristic of the human body, except perhaps
the teeth, more influenced in its quality, texture, amount and
distribution than the hair. And again, each of the glands of internal
secretion plays a part, but most importantly the thyroid, the
suprarenal cortex and the interstitial sex glands. All contribute
their specific effect, and the blend, the sum of the additions and
subtractions constituting their influences, appears as a specific
trait of the individual, a trait so significant as to be used by the
professionals absorbed in the study of man, the anthropologists, as a
criterion of racial classifications.

Some acquaintance with the history of the normal growth of hair is
necessary to its understanding. There develops during the life of the
fetus within the womb a curious sort of wooly hair everywhere over
the entire body (excepting the palms and soles which remain hairless
throughout life), remarkably soft and fluttery--the lanugo. At about
the eighth month of intra-uterine existence, a good deal of this
lanugo is lost, to be replaced on the head and eyebrows by a crop of
thick, coarse, pigmented real hair. So it happens that at birth the
infant's hair is a queerly irregular growth, a mixture of what is left
of the general lanugo development, and the localized patches of the
more human hair. Until puberty this children's hair remains the same,
although at times, particularly after dentition, and after infectious
diseases which undoubtedly alter the relations of the internal
secretions, changes of color and texture occur. Then, with sexual
ripening, there appear in males the so-called terminal hairs, over the
cheeks and lips and chin, and, in both sexes, in the folds under
the shoulders and over the lower abdomen, the hair which might be
distinguished as the sex hair in contradistinction to the juvenile
hair of the head, the extremities and the back.

Now the smoothness of the face in children is connected with the
activity of the thymus and pineal glands. Among individuals in whom
the juvenile thymus persists after puberty, no growth of hair occurs
on the face, and in precocious involution or destruction of the
pineal, hair appears on the face and in other terminal regions in
children of six or less, a symptom classical in the child who suffered
from a tumor of the pineal, and discussed immortality with his
physicians. It is probable that these thymus and pineal effects are
indirect through their action upon the sex glands. For in the types
with persistent juvenile thymus there occurs a maldevelopment of the
sex glands, while in those with early pineal recession the sex glands
bloom simultanously with the appearance of adolescent hair and mental
traits. The hastening of sexual hair by tumors of the adrenal gland
may also be put down to a release from restraint of the interstitial
sex cells.

There are certain spheres in the hair geography of the body, over
which particular glands may be said to rule or to possess a mandate.
The hair of the head seems to be primarily under the control of
the thyroid. Thus in cretins reconstructed by thyroid feeding, the
straight, rather animal hair becomes lustrous and fine, silken and
curly. In the thyroid deficiency of adults, a prominent phenomenon
often is the falling out of the hair in handfuls. Baldness is
frequently associated with a progressive decrease of the concentration
of thyroid in the blood. At the same time, there tends to be a
thinning of the eyebrows, especially of the outer third.

The hair of the face in males, and the other terminal hairs in both
males and females, is regulated by the sex glands primarily. In the
female, the ovary, that is to say, the interstitial cells of the
ovary, inhibit the growth of hair upon the face. In destructive
disease of the ovaries, as well as in other affections of it, hair in
the form of moustache, beard and whiskers may appear in female. That
is why in women after the grand sex change of life, the menopause,
hair often grows in the typically male regions because of loss of the
inhibiting influence of the ovarian internal secretion upon them.
After castration of the ovaries, the same may result. Removal of the
male sex glands, or disturbances of them, will interfere with the
proper development of the normal facial hair. Of the hair of the
chest, the abdomen and the back, the adrenals seem to be the
controllers. Adrenal types have hairy chests in males, and hair on the
back in females. They have also a good deal of hair upon the abdomen.
The hair on the extremities varies a good deal with the pituitary.
People with hair upon hands, arms and legs, alone, are generally
pituitary, or have a striking pituitary streak in their make-up.

When the adrenals increase in size in childhood, a remarkable triad
follows--general hairiness, adiposity and sexual precocity. One fact
should be noted. When the adrenals evoke precocity, and an early
awakening of the secondary sex characteristics, it is a masculine
precocity, and an approximation to the masculine even in females.
There is a definite trend toward an increase of the male in the
individual's composition at the expense of the female. We shall have
to consider this in greater detail when we analyze the internal
secretion basis of masculinity and femininity. In general, the degree
of general hairiness is an index to the amount of adrenal influence
upon the organism. All the endocrines which affect the hair growth
also act upon the sebaceous glands which oil the skin.

THE EYES

Eyes present clues to internal secretion constitutions dependent upon
influences of architecture and function. The thyroid eye is typical.
It is large, brilliant and protruding. The individual is "pop-eyed."
On the other hand, subthyroidized eyes tend to be sunken and
lustreless. The eyes of a pituitary type are either set markedly
apart, or close together, with the hair at the root of the nose so
prominent as to constitute a separate bridge known as the nasal brow.
The size of the pupil, and its humidity, which have so much to do with
the expression of the eye, vary directly with the activities of the
driving and checking divisions of the vegetative system, and are
a pretty good index as to which, at the time of observation, is
predominant. When the check system is in control, the pupils are large
and dilated. When its antagonist and rival, the drive system, is on
top, the pupils are small and contracted. The reactions of the pupils
when charged by strong emotion, like fear or anger, likewise turn upon
the status of check or drive internal secretions in the economy of the
organism at the time the exciting agent presents itself.

MUSCLES

It would seem, at first sight, that organs like muscles, mechanical
instruments for the manipulation of the organism in space, would
be more or less independent of the subtler processes of internal
chemistry of the blood and tissues. But no assumption would be more
beside the mark. Just as much as the bones and viscera, the teeth and
the hair, they show grossly how they are being influenced by all the
endocrine glands. So thyroid types generally have a skeleton
sparsely covered with a muscular mantle. Pituitary types have large
well-developed muscles. The pineal gland has some definite relation to
muscle chemistry not yet probed. Thus, it has been shown that when the
pineal has been completely destroyed prematurely by lime deposits in
it, there is concomitant a wasting of muscles in places. This waste is
sometimes replaced by fat. Pictures and images in wood and stone
of these muscle freaks dating from the fifteenth, sixteenth, and
seventeenth century are in existence. Then there is the extraordinary
fatigability of the muscles which occurs in the thymus types,
who nevertheless have large well-rounded muscles, a paradox of
contradiction between anatomy and physiology. Such a type, for
instance, may be picked out by a football coach for an important
position in a line-up, simply on the tremendous impressiveness of
the muscle make-up, only to see him bowled over and out in the first
scrimmage. The tone of muscles, the quality of resisting firmness or
yielding softness, is essentially determined by the adrenal glands,
especially in time of stress and strain.

Brown-Sequard was the first to show that extracts of sex glands could
increase the capacity for muscular work. Whether this was a direct
effect upon the muscles, or indirect through the nerves or other
endocrines, no one can say. Certainly the carriage of an individual,
outer symptom of the inner tonus among his muscles and tendons, may be
said to be as distinctively an endocrine affair as the color of his
skin. And like its variations, variations of their tone, development,
reactivity, fatigability, and endurance may be traced to corresponding
states of overaction, or underaction, and odd combinations of the
different hormones. Much remains to be learned about them and the
manner of their control. Such an affliction as flatfoot, dependent
upon a laxity of the ligaments in one who seems perfectly healthy and
strong, may lead the analyst back to a thymus-centered personality.
That is but one example.

Since, too, muscle attitudes, muscle tensions and muscle relaxations
play so large a part in the production of fundamental mental states:
the attitudes, moods, memories and will reactions, the vegetative
apparatus enters, to play its part as a determinant.

SEX

Over no domain of the body have the endocrines a more absolute
mandatory than over that of the whole complex of sex. Both as regards
the primary reproductive organs, their size and shape, and the
character of their implantation, malformations and anomalies, as well
as the physical and mental traits lumped as the secondary sexual,
puberty, maturity, and senility, voice changes and erotic trends,
virility and femininity, the internal secretions are dictators at
every step. So significant are these, that even a rough summary of the
discoveries and the outlook in the field involves some consideration
of the details.



CHAPTER VI

THE MECHANICS OF THE MASCULINE AND THE FEMININE


It needs a poet to chant the epic of sex. The mystery of it puzzled
the minds of the earliest Sumerian thinkers. As a source of deepest
excitement, it generated the most revolting ceremonies, bizarre
customs, astounding cruelties and incomprehensible stupidities of
the race. Men and women, as soon as they have done with their usual
business of keeping themselves free of disagreeable sensations,
hunger, cold, fear of enemies, betake themselves to it as a primary
interest all over the world. The most advanced psychologists of the
day link the sex impulse with the windings and twistings of all human
activity.

Yet the Homer of sex through the ages is still to come. But at all
times the mystery evoked speculation and attempt at explanation.
Acting upon their theories as to the nature and function of sex, men
have, ever since the passing of the primeval matriarchates, segregated
women, equalized them, worshipped them, or enslaved them. Opinions
have varied from ancient national aphorisms to the effect that
women have no souls to the most ultramodern utterances of
biologist-publicists that the differences between men and women are
the differences between two species. There are other epigrams, vast
sweeping generalities, extant concerning the nature of sex, and women
particularly. All partake of the complexity of truth and therefore own
a certain validity. Still, since as a matter of fact, these items have
been based upon superficial observations colored by the tradition and
verbiage of the milieu, they are valuable more as human documents, as
material for the psychologist, than as scientifically obtained data,
able to stand unblinking before the rays of the critical searchlights.

SCIENCE VS. ART

Not that all the vast accumulation needs to be thrown pell-mell,
higgledy-piggledy into the discard. The love lyrics of the poet, the
magic of the emotions of Shelley and Poe, for instance, with their
marvelous music and exquisite intonings of feeling, furnish us with
important information. They are the facts of the sex life, as much as
the song of the nightingale, or the mocking laughter of the cuckoo
pursued by its mate. So Sappho and Elizabeth Browning, to take only
two samples, have contributed some of the feminine reaction. The
erotic motive in literature has but paralleled the erotic motive in
life, with all of its vagaries, delusions, confusions, ecstasies and
suffering.

We have had concerning sex not knowledge, but a series of attitudes,
the attitude of virtue, the attitude of pruriency, the attitude of
good taste, the attitude of the theoretic libertine, the attitude of
the satyr's vulgarity. All these poses, of course, have supplied not
an iota to an understanding of the foundations of the problems of sex,
biologically considered. Thus, a masculine master has coined that
immortal phrase, the Eternal Feminine. And in a matriarchate we
should undoubtedly hear of the Eternal Masculine. Each leaves one as
unenlightened as the other. A rough and ready code of life attributes
certain grossly characteristic qualities of mind and body to each
sex. This is supposed to be enough for common sense. Beyond that the
mystery has been wrapped in cotton wool. That perhaps explains the
enormous popularity of contemporary pornographic and so-called sex
literature.

There are bound up with sex feeling and sex knowledge many customs,
beliefs and habits, many legal statutes and social institutions, in
the complex that is called sentiment, to which science looms as the
sacrilegious ogre who devours romance. Without spending space upon the
ravages of the sentimental idealist, certainly responsible for as much
human disaster as the brutal realist, it is manifest that a revolution
in sex standards and relations is inevitable as soon as the new
doctrines filter down as matters of fact to the levels of the common
intelligence. And surely, nothing else could be wished for in the
world desired by all of us, the world ruled by intelligence, and
intelligent good will.

SEX CHEMISTRY

A few general statements may be put down outright as material to go
upon before we proceed to details.

1. Femininity and masculinity have a definite chemical basis in the
reactions of the internal secretions of which they are the expression.
That is to say, that just as a precipitate of chalk is formed when one
throws some carbonate of soda into lime water, so the masculine
and the feminine are to be looked upon as precipitates and
crystallizations of a long series of linked chemical reactions in
the fluids of the body, in which the internal secretions play a
determining part.

2. Femininity and masculinity are expressions of the interplay of all
the internal secretions. It used to be said by smart cats and accepted
by the tabby cats, that a woman was a woman because of her ovaries
alone. It is being said by some great discoverers of the day that man
is a man because of his testes alone. Neither of these dogmas is true.
There are individuals with ovaries who show every deviation from the
feminine and there are individuals with testes who exhibit every
variation from the masculine. The other endocrine glands are of equal
importance.

3. There is no absolute masculine or absolute feminine. The ideals
of the Manly Man and the Womanly Woman were erected by the blind
ignorance of the nineteenth century illusionists, and a line drawn to
cleave them. But indeed biologically there exists every transition
between the masculine and the feminine. The explanation of these
different sex types consists in the different admixtures of the
internal secretions possible and actual. When we speak of the feminine
we really mean the predominantly feminine. And when we speak of
the masculine, we mean the mainly masculine. Between, all sorts of
transitions are possible and occur.

Man in relation to the internal secretions we have considered in
reviewing the interstitial cells. To him, we shall return later. Let
us turn now to that fascinating subject of the ages, Woman. What
produces and maintains the Feminine?

THE CAUSE OF SEX

To all appearances, that inscrutable simplest of living things, the
fertilized ovum, beginning of the human, starts bisexual, double
sexed, both masculine and feminine, or perhaps neither masculine nor
feminine. Then a form develops. Then within that form a patch of cells
arise which the microscopist recognizes as the forerunners of the male
or the female reproductive cells. Then some more development. And at
birth, sex is definitely settled, as far as the reproductive organs
are concerned.

Our knowledge here, as everywhere, is still fragmentary. Statistical
reviews seem to show that in times of stress, war, famine, pestilence,
more boys are born than girls. But that is neither here nor there. It
sheds no further light on the subject. Monosexuality is a distinction
of the human species: the sexes are pretty clearly differentiated.
In some animals, such as some worms, there is a bisexuality of the
individual. There are present the reproductive organs of both sexes,
capable of impregnating other individuals as well as of being
impregnated. In some of these, even self-impregnation may occur. This
is the condition of hermaphroditism.

But the higher up one goes in the scale of evolution, the greater
becomes the distinction between the sexes. Anatomic hermaphroditism
becomes a rare anomaly. Life appears to have perfected this trick of
separate sexes, sex specialization, in short, for the sake of the
efficiency which goes with specialization.

When a germ cell divides, its nuclear material breaks up into segments
known as chromosomes. Now it has been found, for example in the case
of the common squash bug, anasa tristis, that there are 22 chromosomes
in the female, and 21 in the male. In the female two of these are
visibly different from the rest, while in the male there is one odd
one, the remaining 20 being like the corresponding 20 of the female.
Before the germ cell becomes fit to mix with a germ cell of opposite
sex, in the process of fertilization, it must lose one half of these.
So the number of chromosomes for the species is kept the same or
constant. This is the process of maturation. In the process, when the
chromosome number is halved among the females, 11 go into each mature
egg. But among the males, the odd chromosome, also known as the
X-chromosome, can perforce go only into half of the sperm cells,
leaving the others without it. So the sperm are formed in equal
numbers of 10 and 11 chromosomes respectively.

When fertilization occurs, and the sperm cell fuses with the egg, the
following may take place: (1) a ten chromosome sperm may unite with
the eleven chromosome egg, and produce a twenty-one chromosome
individual or (2) an eleven chromosome sperm may unite with an eleven
chromosome egg producing a twenty-two chromosome individual. It has
been found that the twenty-two chromosome individual invariably
develops into a female, and the twenty-one into a male. Therefore,
femaleness is a positive quality, dependent upon the action of the
X-chromosome, and maleness an absence of femaleness, due to lack
of the extra, odd chromosome. In man, two X-chromosomes have been
discovered, half the sperm containing 12, and the other half
containing only 10 chromosomes. The number of chromosomes in human
cells consequently is 22 in the male and 24 in the female.

The X-chromosome is the bearer of sex destiny. There still remains the
work to be done on the actual control of sex by man, apart from its
natural determination. For the time being, let the feminists glory in
the fact that they have two more chromosomes to each cell than
their opponents. Certainly there can be no talk here of a natural
inferiority of women.

THE SECONDARY OR ENDOCRINE SEX TRAITS

Yet the matter is after all not so simple as this would make it out
to be. All that can be safely laid down is that the character of the
reproductive organs is determined by the extra chromosomes. And though
these reproductive organs have a good deal to do with the masculine or
feminine quality of the organism as a whole, through their internal
secretions, they are not alone. All the other internal secretions have
their say in the final outcome, determining what may be called the
dominant sex quality, but leaving inherent the latent soil of the
other sex. This may become active and dominant in its turn, under
certain conditions of stimulation, abnormality, or disease, dependent
upon a rearrangement of status and influence among the ductless
glands. Bisexuality preceded monosexuality in the animal pedigree, and
co-exists with it even at the highest points of the genealogical tree.

While from the standpoint of the species, the criterion of the sex
classification of its members will depend upon their capacity to
fertilize or to be fertilized, a quality that may, therefore, be
spoken of as the primary sex character, a number of other traits have
been evolved by sexual selection, the secondary sex traits. They have
come to be just as important, to the individual, as far as his or her
consciousness of sex attitudes and reactions to it are concerned. The
terms primary and secondary sex characteristics, though inapt, must be
allowed to stand.

These accessory sex-serving traits undoubtedly survived because of
their usefulness in external adornment for attracting attention in
courtship, in the metabolic requirements of sex combat and the sex
act, and in the necessities of caring for the young, until well-grown.
The rooster's comb and spurs, the male frog's claspers, the stag's
antlers, and so on, are familiarly and obviously so useful. Besides
there are fundamental differences in inner physiology. The human male
consumes more oxygen than the female per minute, since he has more red
corpuscles in his blood. In some caterpillars the blood is yellow in
the males and green in the females. W.I. Thomas has devoted an essay
of some fifty pages to a review of the organic differences between man
and woman. The ordinary criteria, employed every day by the man in the
street to distinguish man from woman may be arranged as follows:

     _Man_                      _Woman_

  Hair on face                Hairless face
  Skin coarse and lean        Skin fine and plump
  Muscles powerful            Relatively weak
  Bones heavy                 Bones light
  Aggressive--bass voice      Reserved--treble voice

THE ROLE OF THE OVARIES

While the primary sex characters, as such, are present and
distinguishable from birth, quite the opposite holds for the secondary
sex traits. During childhood they are in abeyance or at least pretty
sharply suppressed. Girls and boys who are permitted to dress alike,
to play the same games and among whom no consciousness of sex is
encouraged are often difficult to tell apart. The boys will be boys,
and most of the girls tom-boys.

With puberty comes a marked change of attitude toward the other sex.
Puberty is the time of ripening of the specific germ cells. It is
then the ovaries begin to secrete ova ripe for fertilization, and the
testes begin to secrete sperm ready to fertilize. Before this can
happen an event announced in the female by the onset of menstruation,
two conditions must be fulfilled in the endocrine history of the
individual. There must be a certain atrophy and retrogression of
the thymus gland, and there must likewise be a similar atrophy and
retirement of the pineal gland. Both of these involutions of the
glands of childhood must occur before the normal hypertrophy and
development of the sex glands and their secretions can start. Besides,
there must be a minimum activity of the thyroid, adrenal and pituitary
glands. Without them, below a certain minimum, the reproductive organs
and their secretions will remain infantile, causing a persistent
infantilism or delay of puberty.

Formerly there was ascribed to the ovaries, in a lump and without
qualification, an absolute despotism over the specifically feminine
functions of menstruation, gestation, parturition, and lactation.
Nowadays, we see its domain as a limited monarchy, if not indeed as
one sovereign state of a republic, a member equal but not superior to
the others of a board of directors. Its true business comes down to
two particular roles: first, the production of ova, and, second, the
secretion of a hormone or hormones. Over the other functions once
supposed its monopoly, all the ductless glands rule.

What concerns us now is its internal secretion or secretions. One of
them is known as lutein and it has never been chemically isolated
in its pure form. The existence of lutein, like the existence of
electricity, is an inference, something we are sure is there because
of its effects. It originates in a remarkable part of the ovary, the
corpus luteum. Besides, there are the products of the interstitial
cells, the creations of a special layer of cells around the ovum, the
membrana granulosa. They produce a substance tonic to the uterus.

When the ovaries are removed, there occurs an atrophy of the womb
muscle, due to loss of this tonic substance. This atrophy, accompanied
by an abolition of the normal periodic uterine contraction, makes
conditions unfavorable to pregnancy. It has been claimed that the
secretion of the corpus luteum is necessary for the complete progress
of a pregnancy. Cases are on record, however, of ovaries taken out
soon after the onset of pregnancy, without interference with the
gestation.

Castration is comparable in every way with the menopause or the
time of cessation of sexual life, a process that might be called
self-castration. It produces certain general constitutional effects.
Adiposity often develops, undoubtedly associated with underfunction of
the thyroid and pituitary glands. The woman breathes less oxygen per
minute and burns up less food and tissue. There is some disturbance
of the lime balance with an increased excitability of the vegetative
nervous system. Concomitant is the release of some brake upon the
blood pressure mechanisms, so that a family tendency to high blood
pressure will flare up. Some women are rendered unstable by the
process, others are completely transformed, and still others adapt
themselves, with little or no discomfort, to the new situation. The
response to the revolution in the cell-republic of the castrate by
the other endocrines, the thyroid, the pituitary, and the adrenals,
determines which it is to be.

For normally, with feminine puberty, there is an increased activity of
the thyroid, the posterior pituitary and the adrenal medulla. These
changes indeed constitute the formula of normal feminization. In the
male, the ripening of the testes is accompanied or perhaps preceded by
augmented function of the adrenal cortex and the anterior pituitary.
This difference in biochemistry accounts for the contrast between the
sexes in the skin, hair, fat, cartilage (voice) and bone changes.
Ovary and adrenal medulla and posterior pituitary and thyroid
predominance constitute the feminine formula. Testis and adrenal
cortex and anterior pituitary predominance comprise the masculine
endocrine directorate.

THE REACTIONS OF THE OTHER GLANDS

As in so many other aspects, the facts about the various influences
exerted by the endocrine glands upon the reproductive system are
complicated and disjointed. A chink of light has been let in upon a
dark cave, and slowly the chink will widen. But the gross effects are
clear.

Around the ovary and the uterus, the endocrines gyrate as the planets
around the sun. The ovary is the organ for the preservation and
maturation of the germ plasm, that treasure which the body is built
but to cherish and hand on as a sacred heirloom. The ova, the female
egg cells, are the fundamental concern of the ovary. Secondarily, it
secretes its messengers to keep the rest of the body, and particularly
the other endocrines, in touch with the necessities of the adventures
of these ova. It is thus enabled to bend every force and power at its
command to the service of the reproductive instinct.

In learning their role so well in the course of evolution, the
thyroid, the pituitary and the suprarenal have become indispensable
stimulants (in various degrees peculiar to the individual), to the
primary function of the ovary. As a consequence, to hold the sex
stimulating glands in check, there had to appear others, restraining
them and so preventing sex precocity. These are the thymus and pineal.
So closely are they all related that insufficient action of the
thyroid, pituitary or adrenals may cause atrophy of the ovaries
and uterus, with abolition of genital function. If the sex glands
themselves fail, as occurs usually in most women sometime in the
forties, the thyroid-pituitary-adrenal association must readjust
itself to the new development. The adaptation evokes the phenomena of
the transition to a new life, the climacteric.

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF PUBERTY

Tracing the development of sex life there is a certain order of events
in a normal history. Before puberty, the ova have lain asleep, as it
were, in a cocoon state. Now with puberty they awaken. And with them
all those profound mechanisms and inventions that have to do with
their nutrition up to ripening. Then revolve the cycles that are
translated as menstruation, the propulsion, fertilization and
implantation of the ova in the uterus,--the full development of the
fetus,--its birth, and feeding after birth--all of which are ductless
gland controlled.

Samuel Butler once noted that:

"All our limbs and sensual organs, in fact, our whole body and life,
are but an accretion round and a fostering of the spermatozoa. They
are the real "He." A man's eyes, ears, tongue, nose, legs and arms
are but so many organs and tools that minister to the protection,
education, increased intelligence and multiplication of the
spermatozoa, so that our whole life is in reality a series of complex
efforts in respect of these, conscious or unconscious according
to their comparative commonness. They are the central fact in our
existence, the point towards which all effort is directed."

Nothing could be said more truly of Woman, and the ova she carries.
All that transpires during pubescence is symptomatic of the underlying
tidal stir in the cells. The uterus becomes gorged with blood
periodically, to provide an enriched soil for the perhaps to be
fertilized ovum to plant itself. The breasts grow, and fat is
deposited in particular places as reserve material for the making of
milk. The qualities which are to appeal to the eye and ear and even
nostrils of the male appear. Instincts dawn, an independence of spirit
germinates, emulsified with a curious shyness and coyness and a
desperate loneliness and secrecy. And all because there have been let
loose in the blood from the glands of internal secretion the chemical
substances that set going the clockwork of sequential incidents
elaborated and repeated through countless aeons of time.

FEMININE PRECOCITY

Ordinarily, in the north temperate climate, puberty begins about
the fourteenth year, but may begin anywhere from the tenth to the
sixteenth. Feeding and environment indirectly, the state of the
internal secretions as a whole directly, determine this. In girls,
those definite signs, menstruation and the growth of the breasts,
before the age of ten, mean premature awakening of the ovaries and a
concomitant co-reaction of the other endocrines, creating the ensemble
of maturity.

In females, the primary stimulus, the initial spark of femininity,
must originate in the ovary. There are other forms of precocity in the
female, dependent upon stimulations of other glands, but these forms
are masculinisms, a masculinization of the personality, and not a
true awakening of the feminine constitution. So one must distinguish
sharply between a precocity by masculinization and precocity of
premature feminization. The latter always implies the touch of the
fairy's wand upon the sleeping ovaries. Sexual precocity in boys may
be produced by a premature overactivity not only of the specific
reproductive organs: the testes, but also by an early excess of
secretion on the part of the cortex of the adrenal gland or the
pituitary gland, or by a too early involution of the pineal or thymus.
When such abnormalities of adrenal, pituitary, thymus or pineal occur
in girls, it is the masculine streak in the hastening of growth that
is made manifest. All this emphasizes the relative bisexuality of
every normal, no matter how pronounced, when superficially viewed, his
or her form of predominating sex may be. Under the right conditions
recession of the most marked virility or femininity becomes
conceivable, and occurs.

THE SECRET OF THE MASCULINE

Masculinization having entered upon the scene, one may well ask: what
truly (which means chemically) lies behind all these differences
and divergences between male and female? What is the secret of the
variable internal secretion admixtures? You can tell us that the
recipes are different, the ingredients different, the results
different as a Nesselrode pudding is from, say, a rice pudding. But
what is the inner mechanism of the process? Since the masculine and
the feminine are but expressions of certain relative capacities and
potentialities, some single principle must run through the making of
both.

Recognizing of course the qualifications inherent in so broad a
statement the answer is: the handling of the lime salts. Life
originated, or at least lived and worked for long ages in sea water.
During these eras the salts of the sea have come to play a dominant
role in its being. The lime salts, because of their peculiar
properties of dissolving or precipitating themselves according to
electrical conditions in their medium, have come to occupy a
central position in all the processes of growth, metabolism and sex
differentiation. So it is that masculinity may be described as a
stable, constant state in the organism of lime salts, and the feminine
as an unstable, variable state of lime salts. The male skeleton
contrasts with the female as the stronger, larger, heavier and
straighter because it is an expression of a greater capacity to
utilize, store and keep lime in the system. Women throughout their
reproductive period are liable to rapid and pendulum-like fluctuations
of their lime content.

Menstruation, pregnancy, lactation, all draw upon the stores of lime,
sometimes depleting them to the point of softening of the bones and
wrecking the whole skeleton. The endocrines control the transport,
and course, combinations and permutations in the history of lime's
progress among the cells, and are in turn themselves affected by it.
Man is relatively free of these liabilities, and so remains man by
his freedom from the recurrent crises involving the lime salt reserve
which constitute the essence of the life story of woman.

THE SEX INDEX

It follows from these considerations that when it becomes necessary
to size the sex composition of a man or woman, a measurement becomes
establishable which may be spoken of as the sex index. To be able to
say of Mr. Llewylln Jones that he is sixty per cent masculine and
forty per cent feminine, or of Mrs. Worthington that she is seventy
per cent feminine and thirty per cent masculine would be of the utmost
value under all kinds of circumstances. Unfortunately, lacking as we
do the exact figures of an advanced blood chemistry (yet in its most
infantile infancy) a direct indexing of the sort is impossible. But it
is certainly conceivable, along the lines of measurement suggested
by the Binet tests and others, that a scale of evaluation of the
secondary sex traits may be elaborated, which would turn out as
valuable in understanding the frictions of the individual, and more
concretely, that aspect of it to which pathologists of the mind are
tracing so much needless misery and suffering: maladjusted sexuality,
expressed and suppressed. Nothing will contribute more to harmonious
adjustment for these sufferers than recognition of the fact that we
are all, more or less, partial hermaphrodites.

THE FUNCTIONAL HERMAPHRODITE

The complete or total hermaphrodite we define as the individual who
possesses the reproductive organs of the male and the female, both
testes and ovaries. So rare is such a combination in man that for a
long time its occurrence was doubted, descriptions of it regarded as
myth. However, undoubted cases are on record, examined by the most
careful of observers, of ovo-testis or mixed reproductive organs.
Strangely enough, the history of these cases, shows that at one time
the masculine set, and at another the feminine set, will hold sway
over the sex traits and functions. Blending does not happen.

Rare though the true hermaphrodite may be, the partial hermaphrodite
is relatively frequent. The mixed ensemble of the directly contrasting
type, such as the concomitance of testes with feminine secondary sex
traits, or of ovaries with masculine sex traits, have been described
from time immemorial as freaks. Occurring even more frequently is the
mixed sex ensemble, in which the type of reproductive organs and of
secondary sex traits run roughly parallel, emulsified with certain
traits of the opposite sex. Physical features of one sex, instincts
and mental attitudes of the other co-exist in the same individual by
reason of an excess in one direction or a deficiency in another of the
internal secretions. The degree of masculine trend in a woman is a
crude measure of adrenal domination, the degree of feminine deviation
in a man is roughly proportional to the amount of pituitary influences
in his make-up.

Whether one or the other sex tendency will dominate depends upon the
quantity of sex hormone divergence from the ideal normal. But also
determinant are the environment stimuli provoking excessive or
deficient secretory reactions from the other endocrines involved,
through the vegetative nervous system. Such especially are the
associates of the mixed sex individual. Ordinarily the combative male
and the submissive female are differentiated by contrasts of skin
and hair, fat and bone structure. The combative male is built as a
fighting machine, the submissive female as an organism of attractive
grace and beauty for impregnation and parturition. When one sees the
fragile woman aggressive, the masculinoid woman submissive, one
may infer an education of experience that has brought the usually
recessive glands into the foreground, and by their hyperactivity
imposed a bisexuality of function upon a unisexual anatomic structure.
A man apparently as formidable as a tyrannosaurus, may be ruled by
his wife for the same reason. These combinations of a single organic
sexuality with a functional bisexuality, based upon internal secretion
disturbances, are frequent, and merit the name of functional
hermaphrodites or mixed sex types.

MIXED SEX AND THE FAMILY

The psychology of the family in its relation to the endocrine traits
of its members is something that still remains to be thoroughly worked
out as a problem of tremendous importance. Particularly are the
reactions of the mixed sex types to be carefully considered. For,
since the family is fundamentally a sex institution, devised to
satisfy the sex needs, all the way from companionship to parenthood,
it is apparent that the mixed sex types will be tried the hardest by
its inexorable conditions. It is in relation to the mother (or nurse)
first, the father next, and other associates in proportion to their
proximity, that the primary endocrine-vegetative mechanisms, the germs
of the growing soul, become established. These are superimposed upon
the hereditary instinct apparatus.

Fear, rage and love reactions develop first in association with the
suckling reflex, and the accompaniments, the mother's smile and voice,
the color of her hair, eyes and skin, her breasts and odors. Each time
the babe reacts to a pleasant or unpleasant stimulus, there is an
outpouring of certain internal secretions, a cessation of others, a
tingling of certain vegetative nerves and organs, a hushing of others.
The ensemble of reactions tends to be repeated around the same
stimulus, until the whole becomes automatic. One may observe the same
process in the lower animals. Offer a piece of meat to a dog and his
mouth waters. Ring a bell before offering the meat. Repeat this a
number of times, and after a while the mere ringing of the bell,
without the presence of the meat, will cause his mouth to water. This
associated vegetative secretion reflex is the most fundamental to
grasp in an understanding of the deepest strata of personality.

Now there are, besides the associated vegetative-endocrine reactions,
certain inborn automatic processes in the vegetative system and in
the internal secretion system, which work automatically to produce
increased intravisceral pressures. The reduction of these pressures
below the point of their intrusion upon consciousness, their relief,
as we say, also form the centers of constellations around feelings
of satisfaction or love. Such, for example, are the voiding of
excretions. Sooner or later, these automatic reactions, and the
associated reflexes formed around the mother, father and other
associates, come into conflict. Inhibitions or prohibitions of the
automatic act at certain times or moments are imposed by somebody.
And so there occurs a pitting of the automatic mechanism against the
associated reflex. Conflict with adjustment by suppression must occur.
Thus a sense of self as active wisher (for the automatically pleasant
experience), and punishable suppressor (of the same in favor of the
acquired associated reflex) develops.

So far, so good. Compromise by regulation from above, from the
brain, of the automatic reactions follows, as training. No absolute
repression is forced, no absolute encouragement is indorsed.
Harmonious equilibrium, or normality, continues. But now there come
upon the scene the unconscious fears.

In the paleontology of character, these fears are the deepest strata,
the eocene era, so to speak, of the soul. They are the hardest to get
at and the most silent, as well as the most dominant of the influences
which guide conduct. In Sir Walter Raleigh's words:

  "Passions are best likened to streams and floods.
  The shallows murmur, the deeps are dumb."

During the first period of childhood, up to five or six, the primary
fears group themselves around the taboos and secrets of its life.

Though we have every reason for believing that the sex glands are
acting in some way upon the organism during this time, nothing
definite is known. Yet, as the numerous studies of the subconscious
recently made prove, sex curiosity like the other curiosities,
flowers. More than about the automatic visceral reactions, these
curiosities evoke the repressive imperatives of the associates, the
mother and father especially. These repressive influences may be
and often are the effects of ignorance, prudishness, vulgarity, or
homosexuality, or the sex perversions that are known as sadism and
masochism. But by the necessities of the case, the sex wishes become
overlayed by reflexes associated with the mother and father and close
associates as love. This might be termed the oligocene. As the circle
of acquaintance widens, other loved objects usher in the miocene
phases of the development. With these become interspersed various
hates and detestations, deliberately cultivated and accepted by the
consciousness. So we have a cross-slice of the personality in the
first five or six years of childhood.

But now, with the onset of the second dentition, a subtle change
begins in the endocrine equations of the body. The second dentition
itself is an expression of a certain internal secretion wave passing
through the cells, an increase of action of some hormones, a decrease
of others. And a consciousness of physical sexuality appears, while
the outlines of character, hitherto mere tracings, become firmer,
heavier, quasi-indelible lines. That there is some activity on the
part of the internal secretions of the sex glands, the ovaries and
testes, can be demonstrated by accurately charting the behaviour of a
boy or girl after this time. It will be found that there is a cyclic
variation of health and conduct, more or less marked of course in each
case. A cold may appear periodically at the end of each month, an
increase of irritability and waywardness may be observed, or, on the
contrary, a decrease of the regular restless playfulness. The ghost of
sex begins to haunt the scene.

Now all kinds of possibilities of conflict emerge. The child is still
a bisexual, growing into a mixed sex type, depending upon the nature
and amount of its internal secretions. The influencing adult of the
family, the most important of the external factors encouraging or
depressing the tendencies of the child, possesses a fairly fixed ideal
of monosexuality which he or she, generally quite unconsciously, seeks
to impose upon it. A doting feminine mother will make her son as much
as possible like her husband: if she dislikes her husband, as much as
possible like her father or grandfather. A masculinized mother will
tend to make a sex object out of the son, however, which means his
feminization. But, on the internal secretion side, the boy may be
definitely masculine. That is, after adolescence he would be strongly
masculine, _if the vegetative-endocrine mechanisms created by the
mother's personality had not slipped into the inside track_, so to
speak. As a consequence, continual subconscious conflict between the
two sets of sex reaction will, sooner or later, disturb, perhaps
disrupt and ruin his life.

So an infant may start life with a fairly balanced endocrine
equipment, with its wake of a normal life (barring accidents and
infections), and yet he may end as an inferior, insane, criminal, or
failure directly because of establishment of conflict between himself
as one sort of sex type, and his obligatory associates of another
sort of mixed sex type. This applies also to the mother-daughter, the
father-son, and the father-daughter relationship.

Male and female created He them, is a bald misstatement of the facts.
Male and female emerge as final by-products of endocrine heredity,
environmental treatment and adaptation. Often the male-female,
the female-male, persist anatomically, or are forced to persist
functionally. Society, constructed upon the Biblical dogmas of man as
a fallen angel, and absolute sex, is responsible for much misery and
suffering meted out to the functional hermaphrodite, as we shall see
later in an analysis of the endocrine character of Oscar Wilde. The
privileges and powers of sex relationship, marriage and parenthood,
should be safeguarded for the mixed sex type, the man or woman with
the variable sex index. For there are no tragedies in life more
pitiful than those in which an aggressive masculinely built type is
forced to assume a submissive, receptive, passive, feminine role and
vice versa, the tragedy of compelled homosexuality, because of wrong
associates.

MASOCHISM AND SADISM

The functional hermaphrodite enables us, too, to understand the
phenomena of masochism and sadism, to a certain extent, on the
chemical side. The masculine personality, the combination of
masculine, e.g., adrenal cortex and gonad internal secretion
predominance, is built for aggression. The feminine personality,
the union of feminine, e.g. thyroid and ovarian superiority, is
constructed for submission. Reverse the possibilities, or confuse
them, as occurs in the functional hermaphrodite, and the attitudes
become reversed or perverted. So a masculinoid personality in woman
will make for sadism, a feminoid personality in a man for masochism.
Variants and refinements of these perversions will often be found
in the functional hermaphrodite who must satisfy two doubly flowing
streams of visceral pressure within himself. Persistence of the thymus
or pineal gland tends to a prolongation of the infantile and child
types, that will be taken advantage of.




CHAPTER VII

THE RHYTHMS OF SEX


If one permits a drop of ink to fall into a glass of water, amazing
figures and shapes, bizarre and chameleon, are born as the blue swirls
and whirls through the resisting medium. Unseen forces and currents,
tides and pressures, set up a seething and flowing, pulling and
twisting of the drop of ink until it becomes a strange wraith created
out of the molecules. A temporary individuality lives in the water.

So likewise the forces of sex, essentially the forces of the internal
secretions, mould and sculpt and mould again the woman out of
the flesh and blood. Adolescence--puberty--menstruation: the
maid,--pregnancy--labor--lactation: the matron, thirty years of ups
and downs of these processes around the idea of love or suppressed
love, against an aesthetic background of some sort--and finally the
loss of the stress and strain of sex, the menopause. All the landmarks
of the life of woman, in their entirety, are erected and dominated by
the tides and currents, the phases of concentration and dilution, of
the different internal secretions in the endocrine mixture which is
the blood.

Marvelous are all the manifestations of the reproductive necessity.
Considering that reproduction was at first merely a form of growth, a
discontinuous kind of growth, that seized upon sex as a splendid means
to escape death, the chemical methods evolved arouse a sense of awe.
A baby is born with her or his glands practically as fixed for her or
him as the color of the eyes. Thymus and pineal keep him a child, keep
him unsexed. Then at puberty, a new current is added to the calmly
flowing river, and behold! a turmoil. Ovaries or testes actively
functioning erupt upon the calm spectacle, and the girl is
transfigured into the maid, the boy into the youth. After the ovaries,
the corpus luteum: after the corpus luteum, the placenta: after the
placenta, the mammary glands: after that the cycle begins again until
the ovaries are exhausted and the chain is broken. Besides, all the
other glands of internal secretion beat in rhythm, fluctuate in their
activities, may divide prematurely the tides or dam them completely.

Innumerable varieties and combinations of interglandular action supply
us with the limitless types of adolescent girls. Some endocrine
cooperatives that make one girl stable and settled, will make others
unstable and unsettled. Alicia may be hyperthyroid, and so excitable,
nervous, restless, and subject to palpitation of heart and
sleeplessness. Bettina may have too much post-pituitary, and so will
menstruate early, tend to be short, blush easily, be sentimentally
suggestive and sexually accessible. Christina may be adrenal cortex
centred and so masculinoid: courageous, sporty, mannish in her tastes,
aggressive toward her companions. Dorothea may have a balanced thyroid
and pituitary and so lead the class as good-looking, studious, bright,
serene and mature. Florence, who has rather more thyroid than her
pituitary can balance, will be bright but flighty, gay but moody,
energetic, but not as persevering. And so on and so on.

Environment, habit-formation, training, education serve only to bring
out the internal secretion make-up of the girl, or to suppress
and distort and so spoil her. Adolescence will be peaceful, calm,
semi-conscious, or disturbing, revolutionary and obsessive according
to the reaction of the other endocrines to the rise of the ovaries.
Harmony, and so continued happiness of the mind and body, means
that they have been welcomed into the fold. Disharmony, ailments,
unhappiness, difficulties, mean that they are being treated as
intruders, or are acting as marauders. The after life, sexually the
period of maturity, barring accidents, diseases, and shocks, will bear
the same character. The kind of adolescence provides the clue to the
kind of maturity, for both are effects of the same endocrine factors.

THE SEX GLAND CHAIN

Furthermore, the activities of a normal woman involve a series of sex
glands. Since there function, in addition to the ovaries, the glands
of the uterus, the breasts or mammary glands, and the placental
gland (the secreting cells of the tissue which comes out as the
after-birth). Each of these contributes directly to the reproductive
life of the individual. To call the ova the sex glands is to confer
upon them a name which really belongs to a chain of glands.

All of the members of the sex chain, including those of the thyroid,
the adrenal and the pituitary, are necessary to the functions of
menstruation, impregnation, settlement of fertilized ovum in the wall
of the uterus, labor and lactation. A disturbance of one of them will
set up disturbances all along the line, and a resonance of distress
or compensation upon the part of all of them. As an interlocking
directorate over the sexual functions of the female, they are members
one of the other. So what helps or hurts one, helps or hurts all.

THE CYCLE OF MENSTRUATION

Essentially, the ovary is a collection of follicles, nests of
cells, acting as safe deposit vaults for the ova that are to become
candidates for fertilization. At birth, there are some 30,000 to
200,000 of these, of which a good many atrophy during childhood so
that there are no more than about 30,000 left at puberty. Of the
30,000, only an elite 400 actually mature between the ages of fifteen
and forty-five. About every twenty-eight days, one of the follicles
swells, becomes filled with liquid, pushes or is pushed to the surface
of the ovary, there to rupture and expel into the abdominal cavity the
tiny ripe ovum. The rest of the torn follicle makes itself over into
a peculiar yellowish body, the true corpus luteum, should pregnancy
occur. If pregnancy and the consequent placenta do not occur, it
shrinks and turns into a scar, the false corpus luteum. The true
corpus luteum resembles closely the adrenal cortex in make-up and
staining reactions. It seems as if, once successful impregnation has
been achieved, the feminine organism adrenalizes itself, makes itself
more masculine and less feminine, inhibiting the posterior pituitary
and the adrenal medulla, as well as the ovaries. Besides, the corpus
luteum stimulates the thyroid to prepare for the heavy demands to be
made upon it during pregnancy.

Before menstruation, there is a stage of preparation, a stir and
twittering of the endocrines, the premenstrual state. Currents of
communication flow between the different glands, messages and replies
pass to and fro. When these are properly balanced, so that all goes
well, the consciousness of the woman will be disturbed by no knowledge
of them. In some women abnormal sensations appear, a sense of fullness
in the breasts, or of weight in the back or pelvis, or pain in the
head. The last is probably due to swelling of the pituitary beyond
the capacity of its bony container. In a good many women, nervous
and mental phenomena herald the expected menstruation because of a
complete upset of the balance between the internal secretions, with
resulting disturbance of the nervous system. Irritability, depression,
excitability, melancholia, exaltations, restlessness, hysteria, loss
of self-control, or even more marked mental aberrations may appear.
Following them, and roughly paralleling them, may come various
abnormalities of menstruation itself. The character, extent and
duration of these furnish us the best clues to the endocrine stability
or instability of the particular feminine organism.

Menstruation is simply the uterus saying: well, not this time. As the
destined ovum within its nest, the follicle, grows, its fluid affects
the interstitial cells to send their specific stuff into the blood.
There it circulates, hits this gland and that, makes some more active,
others less, transforms the chemistry of the cells, and engorges the
mucous membranes, most of all those of the nose and of the uterus. It
is all to welcome the mature ovum and its possible impregnation, to
prepare a site for its landing and settlement, blood and food for its
nutrition, safety for its development. But it is not to be. No sperm
at hand, or effective enough to penetrate that wandering ovum. Love's
labour's lost. All must return to the so-called normal, really the
intermenstrual state. The womb must surrender some of that blood,
the glands return to their routine, and a sex diastole of the whole
organism succeeds. Until again, another follicle swells, another ovum
matures, and the premenstrual state of sex high tide cycles back.

Seven to ten days before menstruation we know that sex high tide is
beginning for that is when the blood pressure goes up. As this rise of
blood pressure is probably controlled by the posterior pituitary, we
have a clue to the reason for the rhythmic variations in the rate of
production of its secretion by the ovary. For, since menstruation is
so closely connected with the phases of the moon and the tides, the
rhythmicity of the posterior pituitary may be traced to the days when
the pineal was an eye at the top of the head, and in direct relation
with the pituitary.

Menstruation has been said to be a miniature labor. It is not that
as much as it is a miniature abortion. It is an effort of nature
still-born. But nature is quite used to its disappointments and
returns placidly to the daily grind. The four phases of a woman's
twenty-eight day cycle succeed each other as the premenstrual,
the menstrual, the postmenstrual and the intermenstrual, with the
precision of pistons moving in a motor, when no interfering factor
as disease, profound emotion or climate disturbances are present,
affecting the endocrines.

The sequence of events appears to be about as follows: The amount of
post-pituitary secretion reaches a certain concentration. This in turn
stimulates the thyroid and adrenal medulla. They in turn activate the
ovarian cells, which congest the uterine glands and lining membrane.
The follicle bursts, the ovum is discharged and wanders, the uterus
waits and wonders. Nothing happens, the curtain is lowered, the
scenery is removed, the actors revert to civilian clothes. That is the
story of menstruation, the central phenomenon of woman's pre-pregnancy
life. One sees it clearly as a play of an internal secretion
syndicate.

THE PREMENSTRUAL MOLIMINA

The premenstrual molimina is the traditional title accorded symptoms,
sensations, feelings, observations of women in the premenstrual phase.
In the light of endocrine analysis, they become exceedingly important
indicators of the underlying constitution of the individual concerned.
Indeed, the premenstrual period furnishes a direct clue to the
dominating internal secretion in a woman. Moreover, these premenstrual
phenomena are the shadows cast by coming events. For they mimic and
prophesy the events of the last crisis of feminine sex life,
the cessation of ovulation which goes by the name of menopause,
gonadopause, or change of sex life. The premenstrual phenomena provide
a positive film, so to speak, of the latent negative picture of the
endocrine system of the girl or woman.

Thus, there is the sub-pituitary or pituitary insufficient type, in
whom the excessive swelling of the gland causes headache, and a dull,
heavy, tired feeling, a definite depression. Drowsiness, sleepishness,
indifference to surroundings, general sluggishness of thought, feeling
and reaction, a phlegmatic frilosity, all go with it. It is due to
an overweighing of the pituitary, controller of good brain tone, and
alive wakefulness, by the demands of the organism.

On the other hand, the hyperthyroid type of woman reacts with an
exaggeration of her tendency. When the posterior pituitary begins to
secrete more in her its stimulation of the thyroid is enough to tip it
over the normal line. Such a woman in the premenstrual phase becomes
irritable and restless, does not know what to do with herself, cannot
concentrate on conversation, occupation or any single activity, may
become excited to the point of mania. Hot, tremulous, sleepless, or
sleeping badly, she has a much harder time of it than her pituitary
sister.

These samples of premenstrual internal secretion reaction are the
extremes of a vast number and variety of types. There are women in an
unstable quasi-premenstrual state for the greater part of their lives.
Sometimes an infectious disease or a psychic blow will put a woman
into this class. The significance of these cyclic changes has been
tremendously increased by the recent formal admission of women to
participation in public activities on a plane of equality with men.

Evidence exists that in man, too, there is some cyclic rhythmicity of
his endocrines, which sets up a fluctuation in his physical and mental
efficiency. The curves of these variations have still to be plotted,
and will doubtless contribute no little to our knowledge of the
control of human nature. One unexpurgated fact stands out: the
reproductive mechanism of woman has rendered her whole internal
secretion system, and so her nervous system, all her organs, her mind,
definitely and sharply more tidal in their currents, more zigzag in
their phases, more angular in their ups and downs of function, and so
less predictable, reliable and dependable.

THE MASCULINOID WOMAN

The masculinoid woman, as a functional hermaphrodite, exists first
as a congenital entity, with an inborn distribution of endocrine
predominances that make for masculinity. There are also numerous
acquired forms. The infections of childhood, measles, scarlet fever,
diphtheria, and above all mumps, may so damage the hormone system
that an inversion of sex type follows. However, the stimulative and
depressive effects of environment are even more significant. The
effects of environment in producing changes in an organism, the
changes the biologist sums up as adaptation, can be tracked in many
instances to responsive reactions of the glands of internal secretion
to demands made upon them by changed external conditions. So a cold
climate, which necessitates a more voluminous hair covering for an
animal, will evoke a hypertrophy of the adrenal cortex. Secondarily
other effects appear as by-products of the adaptation. The adrenal
cortex makes for pugnacity, temper, animal courage, irritability and
anger reactions. So a hairy animal will, in general (unless other
endocrines come in to defeat the primary effect), be more pugnacious,
courageous, irritable and combative. The same applies to woman. An
environment which tends to encourage the masculine traits in her, to
arouse repeatedly her pugnacity and combative decisions in the more
rapid give and take of the masculine world, will rouse the adrenal
cortex to greater activity, and so make her face hirsute, her
attitudes aggressive, and perhaps render her sterile. Concomitantly
there may be a disturbance of menstruation.

The presence or absence of sterility, natural or enforced, always
present, or say appearing after the birth of one child, must all be
donated a prominent place in studying the endocrine make-up of a
woman. When there is not enough ovarian secretion, the ovum may not be
able to burst through the ovary, a necessity before it may begin its
travels to the uterus. Next, the propulsive action of the genital
ducts may be insufficient because of defective corpus luteum. Or the
uterus may not have received enough posterior pituitary or thyroid to
make it fit soil for the ovum to plant itself in. Or there may be
too much of these, which cause the uterus to massage itself daily by
gentle contractions and so keep it well-toned. Excessive massage will
throw the ovum out. All these are factors in the sterility problem,
with its psychic resonances affecting the maternal instinct.

THE MATERNAL INSTINCT

There have been created high odes to an unknown god, sensuous lyrics
of love, apostrophes and addresses to every human passion. But no
poet, to my knowledge, has risen to the heights of the maternal
instinct. Some contemporary clap-trap about sentimentalism will
perhaps decry and ridicule the demand for an apotheosis of it. There
are some who deny its existence, and assert that maternity is forced
upon every woman. Reduced to its elements, such nonsense turns out the
absurd pose of the theorist desperate to epater le bourgeois or to
cover up hidden defects in his or her make-up.

Without the maternal instinct, without the hope of immortality through
somatic or spiritual posterity, we should all, who were sane enough,
have to condemn ourselves to the futilities of hedonism. So that the
criminal who was condemned to roll a huge boulder up a hill, only to
see it roll down again, would have to thank his lucky stars for his
lighter punishment. The future, tomorrow, the Kingdom of Heaven on
Earth, or if you will, the Republic of Supermen, means to all of us
what the child means to the madonna. The cynical epicurean careerists
and careeristinas, and the depraved degenerates of a comfort-lusting
civilization may have suffered an absolute atrophy and castration of
that instinct. But they are pathologic specimens, and we are not for
the moment concerned with them.

The Freudians have set up a great hullaballoo about creative
activities as sublimations of the sex instinct, or as they would have
it, the libido. That is their obsession, the confusion of the sex
instinct, the instinct for sex life and satisfaction in the relation
of the male to the female, with the maternal instinct. The paternal
instinct bears the same relation to the maternal, as the breasts of
the male do to those of the female, i.e., a functional hermaphrodite
trait. The maternal instinct is the instinct to create, provide and
care for offspring.

The mother expresses the deep craving of protoplasm for immortality.
What drives her is the instinct of Life to preserve itself unto
eternity in infinite space and time. That separates it sharply from
the temporary needs of the sex instinct. The artist, the man of
science or letters, the statesman, craftsman and maker of every
sort is instigated by the maternal instinct. He creates for his own
pleasure, to be sure. But it is in its essence the pleasure of the
bird making its nest.

It is necessary, therefore, to distinguish between the sex instinct
and the maternal instinct. For different glands of internal secretion
have been found responsible for them. A distinct difference in the
quality and amount of the two instincts may be observed in the same
person. A strong maternal instinct may be seen again and again to
dominate a woman with but little or no sex urge or passion. Numerous
physiologically frigid women have lived successful and happy married
lives because of contented maternity. Other women, with normal or
exaggerated sex instinct who welcome and stimulate the sex life, may
have no wish for children, no functioning maternal instinct at all,
and if sterile, will accept their fate with indifference or even
exultation. These variations occur because of a difference in chemical
source and determination of the two instincts. While the ovary,
stimulated by the thyroid and the adrenal medulla, is the chief
determinant of the sex instinct, to the posterior pituitary must be
credited the chief hormone of the maternal instinct. The interactions
of the two glands, the ovary and the posterior pituitary, modified
by accessory influences, determine the relative intensity of the two
instincts. In a sense, the two glands may be said to be antagonistic
and yet one stimulates and complements the other.

THE TRANSFIGURATIONS OF CHILD-BEARING

Though what happens at puberty, what happens all through life through
the agencies of the endocrines is amazing enough, what occurs during
the period of child-bearing is perhaps the most amazing of all. As
emphasized, pregnancy is the time, among the internal secretions, of a
great uprooting and stirring, of fundamental and cataclysmic changes
in the most intimate chemistry of the cells. It is as if a dictator,
inspired by his country's danger, its enemies at the gates of its
capitol, were to draft and mobilize everyone, man woman and child from
everyday activities to the necessities of defense. Or rather it is
as if there appeared within the heart of our civilization a common
purpose and intelligence, now so palpably lacking, which magnetized
and drew to itself all the streams of individual self-aggrandizing
effort. Imagine that possibility and how it would change the face of
the earth and the entire basic constitution of human life and society.
So do the profound tides of the hormones, centering around the new
creature being made in the womb, transfigure the face and constitution
of the child-bearing woman.

During pregnancy, in consequence, the integrity of every structure
of the body is tested. A stern, relentless accountant goes over the
cells, counts up their reserves, establishes a balance, credits and
debits according to the demands of the growing parasite within them.
Follow changes in the skin, the bones, the nervous system and the
mind. That is, all the glands, subtle recorders, transmitters,
producers of the vibrations of change are influenced. But the most
influential are the most affected, as the most dominant personalities
in a community are most disturbed by a revolution.

In Sinclair Lewis' "Main Street," the best novel ever made about
America as a nation of villagers, the heroine, Carol Kennicott, has
this to say to someone sentimentalizing about maternity.

"I do not look lovely, Mrs. Bogar. My complexion is rotten, and my
hair is coming out, and I look like a potato bag, and I think my
arches are falling,... and the whole business is a confounded nuisance
of a biological process."

The exploration of the internal secretions has brought us an
explanation and an understanding of why child-bearing is a nuisance.
We know now that if Carol Kennicott's complexion became rotten and
her hair fell out, it was because her thyroid was not adequate to the
demands of pregnancy, and that if her arches were falling, and her
figure acquiring a potato bag dumpiness, it was because her pituitary
was insufficient. In all probability she was a thymus-centered type,
which accounts for much of the material that goes to make up the
novel.

Different endocrine types react characteristically toward the
situations of pregnancy. The adrenal type may not be able to respond
with the necessary enlargement of its cortex which is normal for the
needs of gestation. So pigmentations, darkenings and discolorations of
the skin, especially of the face, the traditional chloasma develops.
The hyperthyroid type may become sharply exaggerated, almost to the
point of mania and psychosis. The subthyroid will suffer an emphasis
of her defect, and pass on, because of pregnancy, to the truly
diseased state of myxedema, the state of dull, slow, stupid,
semi-animal semi-idiocy. The pituitary type becomes more masculinized.
The face becomes more triangular and coarser, the chin and cheek-bones
more pronounced, and there is a growth of all the bones, so that she
is seen to grow visibly in height and breadth, and in the size of the
hands and feet. Concomitantly, there is a changed, a more matured and
steadier outlook upon life, all due to stimulation of the anterior
pituitary, controller of growth, physical and mental.

In general, the major endocrines, the pituitary, the adrenals, and the
thyroid should hypertrophy and hyperfunction during pregnancy.
Should they not, should adverse mechanical circumstances or chemical
malfunction prevent, dire effects may follow. A woman with the
closed-in type of pituitary, shut up in a small non-expansile sella
turcica, will suffer the most violent headaches, will become fat, will
frequently abort. One whose thyroid cannot rise to the demands of
gestation, because of previous disease (like typhoid or measles) which
injured her thyroid excessively, may be poisoned by the new elements
introduced into the blood by the growing fetus, as it is the job
par excellence of the thyroid to render innocuous these poisons.
Of adrenal insufficiency, failure of the adrenals to hypertrophy
sufficiently in pregnancy, little is known. Possibly the corpus
luteum, the endocrine formed of the torn egg nest in the ovary, makes
up for any deficiency in this respect. For there is the most curious
resemblance imaginable between the cells of the adrenal cortex and
those of the corpus luteum, some day to be completely explained.

THE PLACENTAL GLAND

The placenta, an organ and gland of internal secretion newly formed in
the uterus, when the fertilized ovum successfully imbeds itself within
it, must be considered in any analysis of the transfigurations of
child-bearing. Born with the pregnancy, its life is terminated with
the pregnancy, for it is expelled in labor as the after-birth. Its
importance and function as a gland of internal secretion has become
known only recently. Many still doubt and question the accordance of
that rank to it. But feeding experiments with it, in various endocrine
disturbances in human beings, have proved its right to the title.

The placenta is created by the fusion of the topmost enlarged cells
of the uterine surface and the most advanced cells constituting
the vanguard of the growing and multiplying ovum. These front line
invaders interact with the cells in contact with them to make a new
organ which serves as lung, stomach and kidney for the embryo, since
it is the medium of exchange of oxygen, foodstuffs and waste products
between the blood of the mother and the blood of the embryo.
Ultimately it acts, too, as a gland of internal secretion, influencing
the internal secretions of the mother, and also those of the embryo.

Settlement of the fertilized ovum in the womb introduces into the
system new secretions, new substances which are partly male in origin,
since the ovum contains within it the substance of the male sperm
which has penetrated it. This masculine element causes a rearrangement
of the balance of power between the endocrines towards the side of
masculinity. They push down the pan of the scale to inhibit the
post-pituitary. So menstruation, the menstrual wave which follows the
increasing tide of post-pituitary secretion, is postponed. For ten
lunar months, not another ovum breaks through the covering of the
ovary, and the uterus is left undisturbed. The placental secretion
plays a most important role as brake upon the post-pituitary, the most
active of the feminizing uterus-disturbing endocrines. Until at last
something happens that puts the placenta out of commission in this
function of restraint, and the long bottled up post-pituitary
secretion explodes the crisis apparent as the process of labor.

A condition of self-poisoning often occurs in pregnancy, with symptoms
orchestrating from mild notes like nausea and vomiting to the high
keys of convulsions and insanities. They represent what happens when
an unbalanced endocrine system is attacked by the placenta. Depending
upon where in the internal secretion chain the weak point, the
Achilles' heel spot, will be found, the nature of the reaction will
vary. And even after labor, after the explosive crisis, so much of the
reserve endocrine materials may be consumed, that an actual mania or a
chronic weakness may come in its wake.

Yet the placental secretion must not be looked upon as something
wholly evil in its potentialities. Without enough of it to hold the
uterus stimulating endocrines, particularly the post-pituitary, in
check, still-birth results. If there is enough, and not too much of
it, the woman will not feel ill at all, or perhaps only transiently,
but will be possessed of a curious feeling of drowsy content and
passive, relaxed happiness. Let there be relatively too much of it,
too little of the other glands, and the grosser transfigurations and
ailments of the child-bearing period follow.

THE MAMMARY GLANDS

Once pregnancy is terminated by labor, the placenta is expelled from
the body as the after-birth. The placenta removed, a new arrangement
of the balance of power among the endocrines becomes necessary. But a
new-comer appears upon the scene to take up the function left vacant
by the absent placenta. This new-comer is the secretion of the
activated breasts, the mammary glands. They make for a persistence
of the state of equilibrium among the endocrines attained during
pregnancy.

The mammary glands are typical glands of external secretion. They make
the milk and pour it out of the breasts through little canals into the
mouth of the suckling. Yet evidence forces us to conclude that they
are also glands of internal secretion, that their internal secretion
substitutes to a certain extent for the loss of that of the placenta
but not quite.

What seems to happen in fact, is this: the corpus luteum secretion
stimulates the dormant cells of the mammary glands, formed during
puberty, but latent until the advent of pregnancy. We know that
injection of corpus luteum will cause an hypertrophy of the breasts.
The same effect is produced regularly during the menstrual period,
with a consciousness of swelling of the breasts. Their atrophy at the
menopause coincides with the shrinkage of the ovaries that takes place
at that period. Activity of the breasts parallels indeed more or less
the activity of the corpus luteum.

With the prolonged activity of the corpus luteum during pregnancy,
prolonged stimulation of the breasts occurs. The secretion of the
post-pituitary would now cause the change from the internal cell
secretion to milk. But it is inhibited from so doing by the placenta.
When the placenta is removed, after labor, the post-pituitary can act,
and a free flow of milk is established. However, to counterbalance
this, and to prevent the post-pituitary from overacting, the breasts
secrete a hormone with an action like that of placenta, but not so
strong, which tends to inhibit the ovary. So is put off the imposition
of a pregnancy upon a period of lactation, obviously bad for mother,
infant, and embryo. We have here an exquisite sample of the checks and
compensations which make for a self-balancing of the whole endocrine
system.

CRITICAL AGES

The Dangerous Age is a phrase coined by a Scandinavian writer as a
more dramatic euphemism for the time of life when sex function ceases,
the climacteric. As a matter of fact, the age of adolescence is just
as much of a dangerous age as the age of deliquescence. The only
difference between them is that the dangers of the one have been
hushed up, the dangers of the other well boomed and advertised.
Both are dangerous to the individual, because both are periods of
instability and readjustment of the cells, particularly the brain
cells, to a deranged endocrine system and blood chemistry.

Moral attitudes differ at the two ages, not so much as an effect of
experience, as expressions of different visceral pressures produced
by newly dominant internal secretions. So in Eugene O'Neil's play,
"Diff'rent," we see the woman Emma Crosby as she is in her youth, when
her ovaries have budded and bloomed for only a few years, and her
other endocrine influences are still dormant. She breaks off her
engagement to Captain Caleb Williams on the eve of her wedding because
she is informed of the episodes of a sex affair he was involved in on
his last voyage, under circumstances not discreditable to him. The
next act shows her thirty years later when, as an elderly spinster,
she is passing through the climacteric, and is in the state of sexual
hyperesthesia some women are afflicted with before the menopause. It
is as if the ovaries and the accessory sex internal secretions erupt
into a sort of final geyser before they are exhausted. So the captain,
ever faithful, finds her, and discovers to his horror that she is a
thousand times more like other women than he has ever been like other
men. Because of his ignorance of the underlying chemical basis for
the transfiguration, tragedy follows. Critics may cackle about a sex
starved woman, who has repressed her natural desires, and hail the
play as a contribution to the Freudian clinics. As a matter of fact,
it is a study of libido variation, with endocrine variation, at two
stages of the inner chemical life of a woman.

The chain of events at the menopause, the acme and then ebb of the sex
tide, may be summed up something like this:

The ovaries cease producing their eggs and so shrivel as a storage
battery atrophies when it dries up. An important member of the
endocrine board of directors thus drops out, and so a rearrangement
of gland activities, a new regime, becomes necessary. If a balance
of power is established quickly and equitably, very little happens.
Quickly the woman passes on to the next plane of her existence. But
if some endocrine proves recalcitrant, and takes advantage of the
situation to make itself dominant, trouble and maladjustment, and
their psychic echoes, come. Anterior pituitary control will mean
a relative masculinization, with hair on the face and aggressive
attitudes. Post-pituitary most often refuses to settle down, and
expressing its ambition as headaches, flushes, obesity and hysteria,
may cause extreme misery and unhappiness to its possessor. Sooner
or later, if the harmonious equilibrium of the normal life is to be
revived, all the glands must regress, thyroid, pituitary and adrenals.

With the waning of the ovarian function, the thyroid type will also
exhibit its particular flare. If there is thyroid excess the woman
will be excitable and irritable, the thyroid deficient will be
depressed and dull, the thyroid unstable (that is swinging between
excess and deficiency) will have a cyclic up and down alternation of
mood and temperament. The adrenal centered will have a high blood
pressure and masculinoid traits, the adrenal inferior will have a low
blood pressure and suffer from a constant weakness and fatigability.
So each form of reaction to the critical ages is individualized
according to the predominating glandular influence in the constitution
of the woman. When the womb has atrophied, and the breasts have
shrunk, the typical tan complexion, and the angular masculinoid
figure, face and psyche follow, and the transfiguration has been
completed.

Man has his critical age of sex cell deterioration as well as woman.
The age period swings between forty-five and fifty-five. Here enters
upon the scene that organ of external and internal secretion, the
prostate, the most important of the accessory sex glands in the male.
Experiments with its extract upon growing tadpoles have demonstrated
it to have the same differentiating effects as thyroid, but without
the poisoning effects. Furthermore, the microscope reveals cyclic
changes in its cells comparable to the menstrual phenomena of the
uterus. Indeed it is accepted as the homologue or male representative
of the uterus. Small and undeveloped during childhood, its growth at
puberty parallels that of the other reproductive organs. Its secretion
has been shown to be necessary to the vitality of the sperm cells.
The regression of the prostate, its retirement from the field of
sex competition, is the central episode of the male climacteric.
Accompanying its shrinking are prominent an irritable weakness,
despondency, and melancholia, which may emerge at any time if there is
disease or disturbance of it. The influence of the prostate upon man's
mental condition, and its contribution to the sex index, still remains
to be investigated in detail.

SEX CRISES

At the periods of interstitial cell hyperactivity, when a wave
of radicalism in the blood sweeps through the tissues, the other
endocrines are tested, and their latent stability or instability is
made manifest. Even before puberty, cyclic variations of health and
conduct may be observed in boys and girls which undoubtedly depend
upon currents among the internal secretions. Children, who, in the
best of circumstances, habitually are attacked by a wanderlust and run
away from home, or suffer from fits of naughtiness, are samples of
such endocrine lability. Children specialists have found that at about
the end of the second year their charges begin to individuate. In a
certain percentage, sex traits appear pretty early. But the fact
of the matter is that it is rather the minority of girls who
spontaneously exhibit the traditional stigmata of the natural girl.
The doll-cherishing, housekeeping imitator of mother is another story.

At puberty arise the most exquisite cases of life crisis dependent
upon hormonic crisis. The boy becomes restless, irritable and
quick-tempered when his thyroid and adrenals respond to the call of
the interstitial cells. If they do not, he will become dull, heavy,
lazy and listless. The girl correspondingly is transformed into a
vivacious, gay, nervous and apprehensive butterfly, or a sedate,
dreamy, bashful, or even morose moth. It is interesting to note that
poise, mental equilibrium, is not established until physical growth
ceases, marked by a cessation of growth of the long bones known as
ossification of the epiphyses. Poise seems to be controlled by the
ante-pituitary. The growth of the long bones is also dominated by the
ante-pituitary. It would seem as if, its secretion dedicated to the
one function, could not be available for the other. So it happens that
those in whom growth ceases early (probably because of an earlier
and more vigorous invasion of the internal secretion system by the
interstitial cell product), develop mental maturity more rapidly and
possess more of it than those in whom growth continues. The acumen and
salacity of certain dwarfs is proverbial. The puberty phenomena
teach that sex crises of every sort are dependent fundamentally upon
fluctuations, periodic or aperiodic, of the sex index, as we have
defined it.

THE DETERMINING FACTORS OF SEX LIFE

The material summarized in the preceding paragraphs furnish some
slight inkling of the vast dominion of Sex, in all its relations,
somatic and spiritual, over which the glands of internal secretions
rule. The founder of modern pathology, Virchow, said that woman is
woman because of her ovaries. He meant that woman is a woman, the sort
of woman she specifically is, because of her internal secretions. But
no divine decree has laid down a line of cleavage between man and
woman. There are fundamental constitutional differences between man
and woman. But it is just as true that man is man because of _his_
internal secretions.

We have seen that the concepts of Man and Woman are the end-points of
a curve including variations of every possible combination that are
embraced in the construction of a sex index. This sex index is not an
absolute constant, although its range of fluctuation is pretty well
fixed at birth. It varies from day to day, year to year, depending
upon the influences that have been brought to bear upon it. But it
determines the character of the three planes of sex: the endocrine,
the vegetative, and the psychic. The endocrine is concerned with the
fundamental chemistry of sex, the internal secretions, which determine
the chemical reactions that provide the free energy for the sex
process. Upon the vegetative plane occur those transformations,
tensions, and relaxations, in the viscera, which are controlled
in part by the endocrines and in part by the experiences of the
individual as registered in his subconscious. Upon the psychic,
conscious planes appear the echoes and reflections of the occurrences
upon the other two planes, as well as reactions arising in the brain
from the necessity of the organism reacting as a whole to isolated
episodes. Accompanying is a self-awareness of the organism as a unit.
The three planes are not like separate plates of glass one raised
above the other, the usual idea picture of planes. They are
nebulae, swirling into each other, influencing and being influenced
continually. The reactions among these three complexes of sex create
the milieu for the variations and aberrations of tendency, character
and conduct which stamp his unique quality upon the individual. Sex
morale is likewise so influenced. The fundamentals of sex ethics will,
in due time, be revised in accordance with these conceptions.




CHAPTER VIII

HOW THE GLANDS INFLUENCE THE MIND


It is impossible to review here in detail all the facts accumulated
concerning the influence of the internal secretions upon all the
processes of mind, intellectual and emotional. A volume would not
suffice for their adequate consideration. Reflexes, instincts,
habits, tendencies and emotions are involved in their machinery. The
development and normal functioning of the intellect, the pure reason
as Kant called it, are controlled by them. Brain, without them in
solution, without enough of them in that wonderful solution, the
blood, sleeps or remains dormant like the butterfly in the cocoon.
The cretin, who has not enough thyroid or no thyroid, is an imbecile
because of his deficiency. Supply him with thyroid from outside
sources, feed him animal thyroid, be it of the sheep, the pig, or the
goat, and behold a miracle! he is restored to the level of at least
the relatively normal intelligence.

Acuteness of perception, memory, logical thought, imagination,
conception, emotional expression or inhibition and the entire content
of consciousness are influenced by the internal secretions. The most
ultramicroscopic activities of the molecules and atoms in the highest
nerve cells and nerve tissues are dominated. The speed of their
chemistry and their associations, and thus the speed of thought, are
regulated. Iodine has been shown to increase the electric conductivity
of the brain that is, the rate at which electrons will fly through it.
The thyroid may then be regarded as manipulating the amount of iodine
brought to play upon the brain cells at a particular moment of danger
or exaltation. Adrenalin increases the electric conductivity of the
brain. Nerve impulses, and with them sensations and ideas, travel
faster or flow more quickly through iodinized or adrenalinized brain
cells. In dangerous situations we think more rapidly and keenly, for
in emergencies the blood floods the brain with extra thyroid and
adrenal secretions.

THE BODY-MIND COMPLEX

Mind, still regarded by most of mankind as something distinct and
apart from the body, is thus exhibited as but part and parcel of it. A
deaf, dumb, and blind animal, deprived of tongue, and olfactory mucous
membrane, without sensations from the outside world can grow no mind,
in the sense of intelligence. The sense organs of the body mediate
the primary mind stuff. Without internal secretions and a vegetative
system there could be no soul, in the sense of complex emotion. Nor
those combinations of thought and emotion which synthesize attitudes,
sentiments and character. The internal secretions and the vegetative
system mediate the primary soul stuff. Mind is thus emulsified with
body as a matter of cold literal fact. The soul was once a subtlety
of metaphysics. Now when mind appears soaked in matter saturated with
chemicals like the hormones, therefore woven out of material threads,
the independent entity created out of intangible spirit flies like a
ghost at dawn.

View the outlook. Mind, the slippery phantom, now becomes controllable
for the purposes of everyday life, because we can put our fingers
upon, touch, handle and change these material factors, the internal
secretions and the vegetative system. Through them we may affect the
very quality of the nerve tissue. The future of the race, the future
of human nature, depends upon the knowledge to be born of the
researches into the vast possibilities of this idea. Man, the
Adventurer, the prey of Chance and Luck, will then become, indeed now
becomes, the Captain of Fate and Destiny.

It is, of itself, a revolution in the intellect, to conceive of
instincts and emotions, suggestibility and contra-suggestibility,
initiative and imitation, volitions and inhibitions as chemical
matters. In all their relations, mutually reacting effects and
defects, excesses and deficiencies, the internal secretions set up
psychic echoes and reflections. When morbid and their equilibrium
dislocated, we may even have phobias and neuroses.

A man's nature is essentially his endocrine nature. Primarily, when he
is born, he represents a particular inherited combination of different
glands of internal secretion. They, constituting the inventory of his
vital stock in trade, start him in life. Afterwards, food, the routine
of his existence, the accidents of experience, education, disease and
misfortune, in short, environment, modify him because they modify his
ductless glands and his vegetative apparatus, as well as his brain,
depressing some parts, and stimulating others, and so rearranging the
system. In particular will he be transformed as the gland is affected
which is the centre of the system to which the others adapt and
accommodate themselves. The inertia of the system is very great,
almost absolute, and always tends to return. If he has children, he
hands on his constellation of endocrines, in spite of mishaps, not at
all or only slightly transformed. Sometimes, however, the experiential
transformation has been sufficiently deep, and shaken the very
constitution of his germ-plasm. So family dispositions and traits,
national and racial temperaments, are propagated, maintained and
varied.

THE SEX INSTINCTS

Hormone reactions, as we have seen, initiate the complicated forces,
processes and expressions of sex. The dictum of the founder of modern
pathology, Virchow, that Woman was in effect an appendix to the
ovaries, has long been taken to apply to her psychic traits as well
as somatic. Her mind, like her skin, her hair and her pelvis, is a
product of the ovarian endocrines. But these determinations are by no
means her monopoly. Man is likewise a creation of the chemical wheels
within wheels and springs within springs that are his glands of
internal secretion. That he is not so obviously an appendix to his
testes is due to two reasons. First, the male sex hormones have not
the instability nor cyclic rhythmicity of the female. Secondly, and
perhaps consequently, his sex instincts have become overlayered with
other more labile instincts, with habits and customs and necessities
that appear to oust the sex instinct into an altogether decentralized
position. Moreover, it is the function of the female to be the excitor
in the sex process: her subconscious, thoroughly aware of the fact,
sees to it that the sex instinct stands starkly central and dominating
in her life.

The moods of love, like the more stereotyped manifestations of sex,
are dependent upon a proper supply to the blood of the internal
secretions of the reproductive organs, the gonadal endocrines. If the
testes are removed from frogs, it is found that the clasp-reflex,
symptom of sex desire, is abolished. If, after an interval of several
days, the testes' extract is injected into the frog, the reflex
reappears for a few days. The hormone provoking this sex reflex is
present in the testes only during the breeding season. In birds,
the seasonal nesting and migrating instincts may be eliminated by
interfering with their ovaries. At the same tine there is a change in
their plumage toward the male type. Similarly, the males, when their
sex endocrines are cut off, will change their psychic nature as well
as physically. Besides owning his flag-waving comb, his spurs and
brighter feathers, the rooster struts to attract the female, and
fights aggressively with his sex competitors. When he is made a capon,
he loses his spurs and comb and distinctive plumage, and in addition
becomes retiring and submissive, in short, a pseudo-hen in his
instincts as well as in appearance. If the genital glands are
extirpated from a male before puberty, the wattles remain small, pale
and bloodless, no active, amorous or combative instinct emerges. The
creature maintains a demure silence, and may even be sought by a
virile male. So we may see homosexuality of a kind in the lowest
animals. On the other hand, hens deprived of ovaries tend to
metamorphose in the male direction, even to acquire the male spurs,
and to display the male attitudes.

All through the animal world, in the springtime, when the pituitary
awakens or increases its secretion, and so stimulates the sex glands
to augmented activity, emotions of sex and their expression are
provoked by the inner stirring. When the nightingale warbles
passionately and the mocking bird gurgles provokingly, when the robin
fills its scarlet breast and the starling floats in ecstasy through
the perfumed air, when the pigeon coyly woos its mate, and the
butterfly flirts with the dazzling multicolors of its wings, when
all the marvelous devices of sex attraction in nature, selection and
courting, mating and reproducing are pondered, who but must wonder at
the infinite possibilities of reaction of the sex hormones? All is for
love, and all is because of the love in the blood that is manufactured
unconsciously by a few hidden cells.

EXPRESSIONISM AND EXHIBITIONISM

We need a detailed examination of the various forms of expression
art has differentiated into, in its relation to exhibitionism and as
effects of the circulating libido-producing substance of the gonads.
Sex exhibition differs in man and woman because of the differently
combined internal secretions that are their substrates. The male's
attitude, aggressive pursuit, is instigated by the compound adrenal
and gonad endocrines. The female's various emulsions of coyness and
display are motivated by posterior pituitary and gonad hormones in
alliance.

It is a dogma to state that the internal secretions of sex do not
begin to function until after puberty. Some children manifest
exhibitionism with a certain independence of environment.
Before adolescence a good many girls act like tom-boys, and are
distinguishable externally from boys only by their clothes. But others
display signs of sex differentiation that are to be traced back to
an awakening interstitial gonad action. Some boys have no interest
whatever in sex. Others will show an intense curiosity spontaneously,
a curiosity which perhaps may be explained as a larval precocity,
dependent upon the minimum of sex hormone production by the gonads.
Close observation of the correlation of somatic and psychic
development in extreme examples of these children corroborates this
view. Jonathan Hutchinson has described full-busted children of
London already boasting of their affairs. Indeed, as education and
environment affect the body (in so far as they influence it as a
whole) by exciting or inhibiting the glands of internal secretion,
sex-arousing stimuli from without must be considered to evoke their
effects as stimulants of the latent puberty glands.

At puberty, when the sex glands bloom, and the complex of the sex
instincts is activated, exhibitionism manifests itself in a host of
guises and disguises. Femininity in a woman, the womanly woman, or the
eternal feminine, may indeed be defined by the degree of somatic and
psychic exhibitionism she presents. A woman who has a delicate skin,
lovely complexion, well-formed breasts and menstruates freely will be
found to have the typical feminine outlook on life, aspirations
and reactions to stimuli, which, in spite of the protests of our
feminists, do constitute the biologic feminine mind. Large, vascular,
balanced ovaries are the well-springs of her life and personality.
On the other hand, the woman who menstruates poorly or not at all
is coarse-featured, flat-breasted, heavily built, angular in her
outlines, will also be often aggressive, dominating, even enterprising
and pioneering, in short, masculinoid. She is what she is because she
possesses small, shrivelled, poorly functioning ovaries. Between these
two types all sorts of transitions exist, according as the other
endocrines participate in the constitutional make-up. But no better
examples could be given, off-hand, of the determining stamp of the
internal secretions upon mind, character and conduct.

INSTINCT AND BEHAVIOUR

The sex instinct, analyzed as an endocrine mechanism, provides the
clue to the understanding of all instinct and behaviour. If the
post-pituitary regulates the maternal instinct, then its correlates:
sympathy, social impulses, and religious feeling, must be also
influenced, and so is furnished another example of a chemical control
of instinctive behaviour. McDougall, once of Oxford, now of Harvard,
introduced into psychology the idea of the simple instinct as a unit
of behaviour, regarding the most complex conduct as a compounding of
instincts. The instinct itself he analyzed into three elements: a
specific stimulus-sensation, an emotion following, all ending in a
particular course of muscular reaction. Translated into endocrine
terms, what happens may be pictured as a series of chemical events.

When the activity of a ductless gland rises above a certain minimum,
its hormones in the blood sensitize, as a photographic plate is
sensitized, a group of brain cells, to respond to a message from
the outside world, with a definite line of conduct. There is a
registration by the brain cells of the presence of the specific
stimulus. Then there is communication by them with the endocrine
organs. As a result, some of them are moved to further secretion,
and others are paralyzed or weakened. In consequence of changes
of concentration in the blood of the various internal secretions,
tensions, movements and tumescences, as well as relaxations,
inhibitions and detumescences, occur throughout the vegetative
system--the blood vessels, the viscera, the nerves and the muscles.
Each wires to the brain news of the change in it. In addition, the
brain cells themselves are excited or depressed by the new hormones
bathing them. In their final fusion, the commingling vegetative
sensations constitute the emotion evolved in the functioning of the
instinct.

To lower the new tensions throughout the vegetative system to
the normal range, the instinctive action is carried out. This
superficially is regarded as the essence of the instinct. As a matter
of fact, it is only the endpoint of a process, the resultant of a
drive to restore equilibrium within the organism. It may all happen in
less time than it takes to tell about it.

The play of an instinct may therefore be analyzed into four processes.
They succeed one another as sensation--endocrine stimulation--tension
within the vegetative system--conduct to relieve tension. The dash is
the symbol of a cause and effect relationship.

This equation for an instinct, based upon an analysis of the working
of the sex instinct, is the model for the analysis of all instincts,
and therefore of all the compounded instincts that all human behaviour
may be resolved into. Conduct, that fascinator of the common gossip
and the great novelist alike, normal and abnormal, social and asocial,
in all their complexities, even unto the third and fourth generation,
the Freudian complexes, is governed therefore by the same laws that
determine the movements of the stars and the eruptions of volcanoes.
The most interesting factor in the instinct equation is the endocrine,
because that is the one that is most purely chemical.

ENDOCRINE CHARGING OF WISHES

It is _the_ distinction of modern psychology that it has established
the wish (craving, need, desire, libido) as the moving force in any
psychic process. The position of the wish in psychology as the force
within and behind the instinct may be compared to that of energy in
physics, when it was elevated to a central position in the explanation
of physical processes in the nineteenth century. The concept of the
_charged_ wish has illuminated all the hidden recesses and rendered
audible all the subdued murmurings of the mind. The truly novel in the
content of the idea is the recognition of the fact that the wish is
charged. Now it could never be charged in a vacuum. That means that
a wish could never be born in the brain alone. For the brain has no
power to charge itself with energy--it can only store and transmit. If
a wish is potential energy that must be transformed into kinetic, it
must have a source. That source is the vegetative system. Without the
vegetative system, the great complex of viscera in the abdomen and
chest, blood and its vessels, endocrines, muscles and nerves, the
brain would remain but an intricate cold storage plant of memories,
associations of past experiences. It would need no change and initiate
no effort. But when the wish enters upon the scene, it is as if a dead
storage battery has been refreshed with new current. Enriched with
billions of electrons there is a stir and a movement, dynamic mind.
But the dynamo is the more ancient possession of the animal, the
vegetative apparatus. In short, what must always be remembered is that
a wish is never cerebral, but always sub-cerebral, visceral, in its
origins.

The sub-cerebral makes the cerebral. Activities in the nervous system
below the brain and especially the vegetative system, force upon it
its function of the active verb. It has to be, to do, and to suffer,
and then to manipulate the environment to satiate the insatiable
viscera, insatiable because the local chemistry is continually raising
the tension of one or the other of them. A physics of human behaviour
becomes possible with the aid of these concepts of endocrine
regulation of intravisceral pressure, and intervisceral equilibrium,
an intramuscular pressure and an intermuscular equilibrium, with the
brain as the shifting fulcrum of the system.

The sensation of hunger, as we have seen, serves as good an exemplar
as any of this mechanism of the wish. Hunger is preceded and
accompanied by contractions of the stomach of increasing intensity.
Those contractions must be brought about by a substance acting upon
the nerve endings in the wall of the stomach. As it closes down upon
itself, waves pass up and down. With each wave, the pressure within it
rises. The exact amount of the pressure may be accurately measured
by means of a small balloon swallowed and then inflated. When the
pressure rises above a certain figure, the sensation of hunger breaks
into the consciousness of the individual. We infer that certain
sensory impulses sent up to the brain attain a strength that finally
forces itself into the conscious field of feeling. The sensation of
hunger varies from individual to individual because of variation in
the reaction throughout the vegetative system. Most often it is a
sense of movement or even an itch in the upper abdomen. Let some cause
produce a weakening or cessation of the movements of the stomach--as
fear and anger--and the sensation of hunger disappears coincidently
with the drop in the pressure within it. As the mathematicians
would say, the wish is a function of the pressure, and so of the
concentration of substance behind the pressure.

We have in hunger the wish reduced to the lowest terms, the most
primitive form of it. Yet we may resolve all wishes, even the most
idealistic, into the same terms. As the vegetative system becomes
habituated by repeated experience to react in the same way to the same
stimulus, permutations and combinations of wishes become possible
until at length the inscrutable complexities of the behaviour of
civilized man are evolved. We have to thank Von Bechterew, the
greatest of Russian physiologists, for these fundamental principles,
so important for the understanding of the control of human life and
conduct.

The associated reflex, aboriginal ancestor of the involved train
of associations that constitute the highest thought, conduct and
character, is the unit of the system. Recall the classic example
cited. If a piece of meat is shown to a dog, his mouth waters. If now
you proceed to ring a bell before offering the meat, his mouth will
water only when he sees or smells the meat. If, however, the ringing
of the bell precedes the meat a sufficient number of reactions, a time
comes when merely the sound of the bell will cause salivation, without
the presence of the meat. So it is with the associated reactions of
the internal secretions. A stimulus originally indifferent to the
endocrines may, by association, the laws of which are many, come to
act like a spark to the endocrine-instinct mechanism. Hence we can
account for the subtle play of instinct throughout all thinking.

Even objects resembling the specific excitant of an instinct only
remotely, or in some one quality, may start its mechanism and a host
of associations bound up with it. Thus the maternal instinct may
be excited by the sight of a baby. But because a baby is small and
delicate, anything small and fine, a tiny book, a toy, a miniature,
may arouse it. The object is then said to be appealing. The doctrine
of association of instinctive and so of endocrine reactions enables
us to understand the feeling--tone that at any moment pervades
consciousness as well as its content.

Choices, the psychology of selection of food, color, friends, mates,
amusements also become explicable rationally. For conflicts among
the different components of the vegetative system are continuous and
inevitable. If the pressure within a viscus has been heightened, and
persists, that is, is not disturbed by some other associated factor or
instinct, conduct results to lower the pressure to what it was before
the instigator of the tension appeared. But if another instinct is
sparked, or another associated factor comes into play, another focus
of increased pressure within the vegetative system is created, with
another stream of energy flowing to the brain and demanding an outlet.
This clash of instincts, the struggle between different foci of the
vegetative system competing for the possession of the brain, is a
common everyday process in conduct. Which will win means which will
will. And so we have an energetic basis for volition.

Which will win appears to depend primarily upon the kind of endocrines
that predominate in the make-up of the individual, secondarily with
his education. For it is the endocrines that are really in conflict
when there is a struggle between two instincts. And if one endocrine
system conquers, it must be either because it is inherently stronger,
its secretion potential, that is, the amount of secretion it can put
forth as a maximum, is greater (so explaining the term dominant)--or
because a past experience has conditioned it to respond, although the
opposing endocrine system does not. Fear and anger, respectively bound
up with the activities of the adrenal medulla and cortex, we shall
see, provide as good exemplars as any of this process.

The response of the ductless glands to situations varies with their
congenital _capacity_, and acquired _susceptibility_. Capacity is
a question of internal chemistry, modifiable by injury, disease,
accident, shock, exhaustion. Susceptibility depends upon the play of
the forces focusing upon them that may be summed up as associations.
In the ability of one endocrine system to inhibit another we have the
germ of the unconscious. Hence the modus operandi of the repressions
and suppressions, compensations and dissociations, which may unite to
integrate or refuse to integrate, and so disintegrate and deteriorate
a personality.

As the personality develops, the vegetative system becomes susceptible
to the manifold associates of family, school, church and society, art,
science and religion, and last but not least sex. All the different
nuances of personality are expressions of a particular relationship,
transitory or permanent, between the endocrines and the viscera
and muscles. Conversely, behaviour shows what a person actually is
chemically; that is, what endocrine and vegetative factors predominate
in his make-up.

FEAR, ANGER, AND COURAGE

Fear and anger are the oldest and so the most deep-rooted of the
instincts. An ameba, contracting at the touch of some unpleasant
object, feels fear in its most primitive form. And anger, the
destructive passion, must have appeared early upon the scene of life.
Certainly these two instincts were definitely developed and fixed in
the cells before sex differentiation and the sex instincts were born
at all. It is interesting to note this for our rabid Freudians.

Fear and anger involve the adrenal gland. How comes it that two states
of mind so contrasted should involve the same area? The answer lies in
the bipartite construction of the adrenal. All the evidence points
to its medulla as the secretor of the substance which makes for the
phenomena of fear, and to its cortex as dominant in the reactions of
anger.

When adrenalin is injected under the skin in sufficient quantity, it
will produce paleness, trembling, erection of the hair, twitching of
the limbs, quick or gasping breathing, twitching of the lips--all the
classic manifestations of fear. These are the immediate effects of
fear because they are the immediate effects of excess adrenalin in the
blood upon the vegetative viscera and the muscles. The perception
by associative memory of these effects of adrenalin, the sensations
arising from the organs affected, constitute the emotion of fear.
Flight follows by muscle prepared for flight, for the disturbance of
the inter-muscular equilibrium tenses the flexor muscles, the muscles
of flight, and relaxes the extensor muscles, the muscles of attack.

If, it would seem, the cortex secretion now pours into the blood,
enough to more than overcome the effects of the medulla secretion, the
inter-muscular equilibrium is disturbed in the opposite direction,
for fight rather than flight, and anger results. Or if the cortical
secretion pours in an overwhelming amount of its secretion from the
first into the blood there will be no fear, but anger immediately.
Habitually charging and fearless animals like the bison, bull, tiger,
or lion have a relatively larger cortex in their adrenals. Habitually
fleeing and fearful animals, like the rabbit, have a small cortex
and a wide medulla in their adrenals. The reinforcing action of the
thyroid is important. The adrenal medulla reinforced by the thyroid
makes for terror, the adrenal cortex reinforced by the thyroid makes
for fury.

Some people are not easily frightened, others are more readily
frightened, and still others are of an extremely fearful nature. It
depends upon the proportion of adrenal cortex to medulla secretion in
them. And their reaction to fear stimuli is a pretty good measure
of the ratio. These formulations apply more particularly to fear in
general and anger in general. But even in the least fearsome, i.e.,
an individual in whom cortex dominates medulla, there may be
fear--complexes, dating back to events and times when medulla
overtopped cortex, especially childhood. So in the coolest people,
certain persons, objects, episodes, may send a wave along an old line
of nerve cells and paths which lead to the adrenal medulla, and so
flood him with fear, terror or even panic before his usual cortex
response occurs. Impressions during the early years of childhood,
probing of the unconscious by various methods, have been shown to be
the most potent in this respect. Sometimes the episode goes further
back than childhood, and one must assume an inherited conditioning
of the vegetative and endocrine systems. An animal leaping upon an
ancestor in a forest during the night might account for the panic fear
some people experience when alone in the dark, that nothing of their
childhood history may account for.

In women, the adrenal medulla naturally tends to overtop the cortex,
because the latter makes for masculinity. Besides, the recurring
cycle in the ovary, making the corpus luteum, evolves an additional
stimulant to the medulla, through its irritating influence upon the
thyroid. Then the influence of the post-pituitary is anti-adrenal
cortex. So that, on the whole, a number of endocrines work to render
woman naturally fearful, as we say.

Courage is so closely related to fear and anger that all are always
associated in any discussion. Courage is commonly thought of as the
emotion that is the opposite of fear. It would follow that courage
meant simply inhibition of the adrenal medulla. As a matter of fact,
the mechanism of courage is more complex. One must distinguish animal
courage and deliberate courage. Animal courage is literally the
courage of the beast. As noted, animals with the largest amounts of
adrenal cortex are the pugnacious, aggressive, charging kings of the
fields and forests. The emotion experienced by them is probably anger
with a sort of blood-lust, and no consideration of the consequences.
The object attacked acted like the red rag waved at a bull--it had
stimulated a flow of the secretion of the adrenal cortex, and the
instinct of anger became sparked, as it were, by the new condition
of the blood. In courage, deliberate courage, there is more than
instinct. There is an act of volition, a display of will. Admitting
that without the adrenal cortex such courage would be impossible, the
chief credit for courage must be ascribed to the ante-pituitary. It is
the proper conjunction of its secretion and that of the adrenal cortex
that makes for true courage. So it is we find that acts of courage
have been recorded most often of individuals of the ante-pituitary
type. Photographs are obtainable of thirty-four winners of the
Congressional Medal of Honor for extraordinary bravery in the War
with Germany. Of these twenty-three exhibited the somatic criteria or
hormonic signs of the ante-pituitary type. A prerequisite for adequate
ante-pituitary function is a normal secretion of the interstitial
cells of the reproductive glands. Cowardice is said to be a feature of
eunuchs.

THE PITUITARY AND INSTINCT

We have seen that, more than any other gland or tissue of the body,
the post-pituitary governs the maternal-sexual instincts and their
sublimations, the social and creative instincts. A great deal of
evidence is in our possession concerning the disturbances of emotion
accompanying disturbances of this gland, and controllable by its
control. It might be said to energize deeply the tender emotions, and
instead of saying soft-hearted we should say much-pituitarized.
For all the basic sentiments (as opposed to the intellectualized
self-protective sentimentalism), tender-heartedness, sympathy and
suggestibility are interlocked with its functions. Its secretion must
act upon the great basal ganglia, at the base of the brain, which
contain the nerve cells and fibres that are the centers of emotional
control and co-ordination.

The ante-pituitary has been depicted as the gland of intellectuality
(to use that term for lack of better). By intellectuality we mean
the capacity of the mind to control its environment by concepts and
abstract ideas. The frontal lobes of the brain are the central offices
for higher thought. Their cells are the most complex, have the most
numerous branches and association fibres. They store the fruits of
abstract thinking, mathematics, for example. The anterior pituitary is
in the closest relation and contact with them. Its secretion is tonic
to them. Now the instinct that is the forerunner of intellectuality
is the instinct of curiosity, with its emotion of wonder, and its
expression in the various constructive and acquisitive tendencies.
Studies of intellectual men, and of those with a keen instinct of
curiosity and a constructive-acquisitive trend prove them to be
ante-pituitary dominant in their make-up. The administration of
ante-pituitary extract to some defectives increases intellectual
activity and self-control. The future of intelligence may expect
a great deal from the newer chemistry of the secretions of the
ante-pituitary.

Two most important instincts, therefore, which in the complexity of
their sublimations have created most of the institutions of society,
the maternal and the intellectual, are connected directly with a
proper function of the pituitary endocrines. So it happens that
disturbances of these instincts, reaching far into the normal and
intellectual spheres of the mind, are definitely connected with
disturbances of the pituitary. As we shall note in reviewing the
essentials of the pituitary-centered or pituito-centric personality,
the personality governed by the fluctuations of activity within the
pituitary, people with injured, diseased or mechanically limited
pituitaries (because of the smallness of the bony case enclosing them)
exhibit defects and perversions of conduct and intelligence directly
attributable to affections of the very instincts and functions
the pituitary governs. Children with small, mechanically cramped
pituitaries lie and steal, are bed-wetters, have poor control over
themselves, and a low learning capacity.

THE THYROID AND INSTINCT

The chemical mechanism of the instincts described: sex libido, passion
and jealousy in relation to the ovaries and testes, fear and anger in
relation to the adrenals, sympathy and curiosity in relation to the
pituitaries, suggests that a similar explanation will hold for the
dynamics of the other instincts. In the closest relation to the
thyroid appear the instincts first isolated, so to speak, by McDougall
as the instincts of self-display and self-effacement, accompanied
by emotions of pride and shame respectively. In certain states of
excessive thyroid activity there is an extra stimulation of the
instinctive display of the person which may go on to boasting,
mania and exhibitionism. On the other hand, in states of thyroid
insufficiency, depression is produced, which may go on to melancholia,
a desire to be alone, to hide, to sit apart and even a tendency to
accuse the self of various uncommitted crimes and sins. In the form
of cyclic insanity known as the manic-depressive psychosis, mania
alternates with depression, as if the personality were dominated
wholly in turn by one or the other of these two instincts of the ego.
There is a good deal of evidence that behind them is a corresponding
fluctuation in the amount the thyroid secretes into the blood. Among
the thyroid-centered attitudes toward the self gyrate more than in
any other type. Egomania and megalomania occur most often in thyroid
unstable individuals.

ENERGY AND SENSITIVITY

In his classic Inquiries into Human Faculty, Francis Galton laid down
some fundamental considerations concerning energy and sensitivity
as mental traits. Energy he defined as the capacity for labor, and
declared it to be the measure of the fullness of life or vitality.
Statistical study by him of men of genius and their ancestors showed
them to be endowed with a large amount of energy. It has been said to
be the absolute prerequisite of genius. Now if there is a single fact
that has been well established by investigations of the internal
secretions, it is that the energy quantum of an individual is a
function of and determined by his thyroid. The more thyroid he has,
the more energetic will he be--the less thyroid the less energetic,
and the lazier. The thyroid-centered individual, of the excess thyroid
type, actually burns up more food and produces more heat than the
ordinary organism. He burns himself up faster in general.

When the thyroid sends more secretion into the blood, more thyroxin,
it accelerates all the functions and activities of the organs. Tea and
coffee produce loquacity because they stimulate the thyroid. People
with thyroid dominant constitutions talk fluently, rapidly, and
continuously. Their energy makes them doers, actors rather than
spectators. They get up early in the morning, are on the go all day
without surcease or fatigue, go to bed late, and often suffer from
insomnia.

Thyroid deficients, however, are definitely the opposite. They are
quite conscious of the limited reserve of energy at their command.
Also that they need plenty of refreshing sleep. Early to bed and late
to rise remains the leading maxim of health for them. In addition they
find it necessary to sleep during the day. Forty winks or more in
the afternoon makes a good deal of difference to them. Taciturn,
inarticulate, lazy, slow, tired, are the adjectives applied to them
by their friends as well as by their enemies. All because of an
insufficient or inefficient supply of the thyroid's iodine to their
cells. The mobility of energy in an organism is a measure of the
amount of active iodine in it. The physiologic synonyms for "energetic
and lazy" are "well-iodinized" and "poorly iodinized."

Sensitivity, the ability to discriminate between grades of sensation
or acuteness of perception is another thyroid quality. Just as the
thyroid plus is more energetic, so is he more sensitive. He feels
things more, he feels pain more readily, because he arrives more
quickly at the stage when the stimulus damages his nerve apparatus.
The electric conductivity of his skin is greater, sometimes a hundred
times greater, than the average. Conversely the thyroid deficient type
has a low discriminative faculty. Galton has recorded that idiots
hardly distinguish between heat and cold and that their sense of pain
is so obtuse that some of the more idiotic seem hardly to know what it
is. Cretins may moan but never shed tears.

Energy and sensitivity in an individual should direct attention to the
thyroid element predominating in his composition. Lack of energy and
insensitivity to the degree of thyroid insufficiency in their make-up.

MEMORY, JUDGMENT, AND POISE

In between sensitivity and energy, the sensation and the reaction,
comes a passage of the stimulus through the gauntlet of the stored
past experience of the individual known as memory. Many hypotheses
have been advanced by philosophers, psychologists and physiologists to
explain the phenomenona of memory. To conceive of memory materially
at all one must admit some sort of memory trace as the basis for the
persistence of memory. This memory deposit facilitates the occurrence
of the chemical reaction constituting the memory along the same path
the next time. Forgetting then consists in a disappearance of these
memory traces or deposits. Forgetting is greatest in the first hour
after remembering, more than half of the memory trace being lost in
that time. Comparison of the curve of forgetting, and the curve
of diffusion of a colloid like gelatine from its solution, into a
surrounding medium, shows them to be exceedingly similar. Forgetting
may be explained by some such loss of the memory trace or deposit into
the blood continually flowing by it.

The internal secretions influence the amount and duration of the
memory deposits. The thyroid appears to be essential to the _laying
down_ of the memory trace. Cretins have poor memories on the retention
side and so cannot learn. The memory of thyroid insufficients is
wretched. In the extreme grades, the memory for recent occurrences
becomes completely lost. Iodine and thyroid increase the electric
conductivity of the brain, so that the memory trace must be deposited
more easily in those who have an excess of thyroid. Removal of the
thyroid produces a degeneration of nerve cells and their processes,
and associative memory becomes difficult or impossible because
conduction from cell to cell is interfered with. If sufficient thyroid
is fed in excess, brain conduction may be so facilitated that epilepsy
may result upon slight irritation.

On the other hand, the pituitary seems to be related to _preservation_
of the memory deposit. In conditions of disease of the pituitary,
loss of memory for past experiences is more marked. As regards recent
experiences, they are better held, although in a sort of subconscious
manner, recoverable when the condition improves or is cured. But the
greatest difference between the thyroid and pituitary effects upon
memory exists as regards material: the thyroid memory applies
particularly to perception and percepts, the pituitary to conception
(reading, studying, thinking) and concepts.

Judgment is another mental process that often intervenes between
sensation and the energy-reaction. It involves memory and association
of experiences. Behind it is an attitude as much as there is in an
emotion or the arousing of an instinct. Beliefs and reasonings are
complex judgments. They form the units of the intellectual process.

There is an element of speed in judgment on reasoning as in perception
and memory. And as in the latter, the thyroid determines the velocity.
Quick thinking, as we call it, means good thyroid action, and slow
thinking deficient thyroid action. The other element in judgment,
accuracy, is influenced by the ante-pituitary. During adolescence
there is physical growth which consumes most of the secretion of the
ante-pituitary. After adolescence, after the early twenties, when
physical growth has ceased, the ante-pituitary secretion sensitizes
the cells of the brain to mental growth. The reaction potential of
the ante-pituitary, that is its inherent, latent ability to supply a
maximum of its endocrine for the nerve cells of the frontal lobes, is
the best-known chemical determinant of intellectual genius. It makes
for the greatest co-ordination of experience, knowledge, information,
tastes and problems into one harmonious whole. And curiously, not only
does it cause a fusion of intellectual material: it creates a desire
for and a love of such material.

We should expect to find extraordinarily well-developed ante-pituitary
action among eminent philosophers and men of science, and we do.
Adequate action of it is present throughout the range of normals who
evidence sufficiently ripened judgment as they progress through
life. The ability to profit by experience, and to make more and more
accurate judgments as one grows older implies at least a maximum
efficiency of it. This maturation is not at all universal. Even after
middle age, after forty and fifty years of reasoning, some individuals
retain the juvenile mind of their youth. Like the Bourbons, they
have learned nothing and forgotten nothing. Their ante-pituitary
insufficiency often coupled with a post-pituitary excess, and other
instabilities and disequilibriums in the endocrine system, render them
immature morons, compared with what might be expected of them for
their years. They are the people who are old enough to know better.
For the same reasons, inhibition and emotional control are poor in
them.

Besides the ante-pituitary, in the evolution of judgment, and the
judgment faculty, due stress must be laid upon the influence of the
internal secretion of the testes or ovaries, the product of the
interstitial cells. Although the probability is that the effects
are indirect, through a stimulation of the ante-pituitary, the fact
remains that, in a child, memory may be marvelous and judgment poor
(such memory is possibly purely thyroid in its determination). With
the advent of the gonads upon the scene, judgments become the centre
of the play's plot undoubtedly. The intelligence of eunuchs and
eunuchoids is in general low. The skull and brain of castrates, animal
and human, is smaller than the average. Gall, the physiologist who
popularized ideas concerning the meaning of the protuberances and
depressions of the head in relation to faculty and character, early in
the nineteenth century, was the first to prove this. Among historic
castrates, eunuchs, not a single example of great intellect, of the
creative type, is known. On the contrary, the native gifts of the mind
were destroyed. Thus Abelard, who was punished with castration by his
uncle for his love affair with Heloeise, never composed a verse of
poetry thereafter.

IMAGINATION AS AN ENDOCRINE GIFT

That brings us to the consideration of imagination as influenced by
the endocrines. The physical conditions of exercise of the imaginative
faculty have not been sufficiently investigated. Alcohol has long been
known to act as an evocant of strange images. The hallucinations of
delirium tremens are the results obtained in extreme intoxication. A
strangely imaged flow of consciousness, the imaginative state, may
also be evoked by morphine and cannabis indica. There is no doubt
that the brain cells may be made to combine in the fresh, novel, and
unfamiliar associations that are recognized as unreal.

Francis Galton, pioneer student of the conditionings of human faculty,
left an interesting study of the visualising capacity, so far as it
could be attacked by the statistical method. Two of his conclusions
are worth repeating for our purposes. One is that the power to imagine
is poor in philosophers and men of science. The other that it is
higher in the female sex than in the male. We have seen that the
philosophic, scientific, intellectual mind, the capacity to abstract,
and think in terms of abstractions, is definitely dependent upon
proper secretion by the ante-pituitary. In woman, the post-pituitary
is generally predominant over the ante-pituitary. Though we are in
need of a series of studies of the endocrine traits and composition of
men endowed with high imaginative qualities, and so are at a loss, we
have indications of an endocrine control of the state of consciousness
we speak of as the imaginative.

Most of the evidence accumulated in the examination and treatment of
morbid conditions characterized by a restless, incoordinate activity
of the brain cells points to excess of the post-pituitary secretion as
the cause, or as one of the most important causes. The thyroid and the
adrenal medulla also exert their influence. But the strongest appears
to be the post-pituitary. Phobias, fears which obsess the mind,
anxiety neuroses, suspicions, hallucinations, delusions, nervousness,
all expressions of what we may sum up technically as the imaginative
state of mind, occur and occur frequently, associated with other
symptoms of posterior pituitary overactivity. Persons in whose make-up
it rules are more liable to imagine disturbances of their mentality,
or exhibit a well-developed imaginative streak. Normal states of
overactivity of the post-pituitary such as occur in some women during
the menstrual period and pregnancy, and in some men as part of the
endocrine cycle of their everyday lives, are accompanied by increase
in the susceptibility and vigor of the imagination. Whether the
feeding of excess post-pituitary would lead to a stimulation of the
tendency or ability to imagine is still to be decided. But it is
known that quieting the post-pituitary by various means will cause
a depression of the faculty, and eliminate its pathologic
manifestations.

Psychologists distinguish between the constructive imagination that
expresses itself in an ordered activity and the unbalanced fancies
of the fearful neurotic for example. The post-pituitary confers the
lability of the underlying state of brain in all of these imaginative
tincturings of consciousness. The constructive imagination, one of the
few truly precious gifts of a personality, is probably the expression
of a certain balanced activity of the ante-pituitary and the
post-pituitary.

MOODS AND THE ORGANIC OUTLOOK

The lability the post-pituitary confers upon the combinations of
perceptions and conceptions, grouped as the imagined, extends to
the ruling mood that may be spoken of as the organic outlook.
Post-pituitary in excess, without compensation or balancing by one or
some of the other endocrines, is associated with an instability of
mood and the organic outlook. Concomitant is a defective self-control.
Typically, one sees the effects in the mental abnormalities of women
during the premenstrual period. A number of them have their pituitary
balance upset then, with an overtopping of the ante-pituitary by the
post-pituitary. Irritability, a sub-hysteria, or an actual hysteria
may emerge in the usually most placid characters. A quiet wife and
mother may go for her husband, curse and mortify him, even strike and
beat him. She may slap her children at that time and no other. It is
well known that most of their crimes are committed by women during the
menstrual period. So are the suicides. Deterioration of mentality and
character so often observed during the menopause, with its apathies or
excitements, melancholia or mania, the fits of weeping or gaiety, the
loss of grip upon reality, the complete change in mood and temperament
that reflect the transformation of the organic outlook, demonstrate
clearly the overwhelming influence of the endocrines upon the
attitudes of the self toward the self.

It is possible to speak of thyroid moods, adrenal moods,
ante-pituitary or post-pituitary moods, gonadal moods. Each of
these is the echo in the mind of cells stimulated or depressed,
by concentration or dilution in the blood of particular internal
secretions. Restlessness and excitement can be produced experimentally
by feeding thyroid. Vague anxiety, depressive fancies and fears,
imaginative overactivity can be removed by inhibiting the
post-pituitary. Hypersecretion of the ovary will cause a sexual
susceptibility and a mood of genital obsession, capable of the most
remarkable sublimations and perversions.




CHAPTER IX

THE BACKGROUNDS OF PERSONALITY


The question of moods and sublimations once raised introduces the
problem of the relation of neuroses, nervous disorders without an
organic disease basis, and mental abnormalities, to the endocrine
system. Obviously, in view of all the influences exerted by the
ductless glands upon every organ and function of the body and mind,
and their intermediary, the vegetative nervous system, a relation must
exist. Observations accumulated, some of which have been referred to
in the preceding chapters, prove the complete, though complex, reality
of such a deduction.

The history of attitudes toward nerve and mental disorders is a
remarkable illustration of the vicissitudes of ignorance playing with
words. The Greeks, swayed and dazzled as they were by the magic of
words which they discovered, yet never permitted themselves to be
fooled by them. As an explanation for the phenomena of hysteria in
women, that benign mental disorder par excellence, they had the theory
of a wandering about of the womb in the organism as a cause. That
provided an image of something material happening as an explanation.
With the triumphs of anatomy after the Renaissance, that naive view
had to be discarded. In its place the humoral theory held sway, with
its good humors and its bad humors, and their bilious, lymphatic,
nervous and sanguine admixtures. But that, too, went the way of all
flesh. During the first half of the nineteenth century, a popular
phrase, "nerves," paraphrased by practitioners of medicine as
neuroses, then came into vogue as the efficient cause of these
troubles. "Nerves" indeed today have filtered everywhere into the
common consciousness.

Because of the irritant effects of light, food and social conditions,
America has come to swarm with neurotics of every type, especially the
sexual. A rich field was created for cults of treatment, which spring
up like weeds periodically all over the country. We have seen how the
American, Beard, was inspired by the idea that "nerves" represented a
loss of tone, a flabbiness, weakness and softness of the nerves, to
coin the word neurasthenia. Nerve exhaustion he believed was the cause
of the nerve weakness. Weir Mitchell, another American, introduced the
rest cure combined with overfeeding as a treatment for it.

An analytical French neurologist, Charcot, was not to be satisfied by
words of Latin-Greek derivation. Insisting upon the significance of
the individual mental workings of each case, he and his pupil Janet
began to unravel a tangle which has led to the present revolution in
psychology. For Freud, Jung and Adler took up the story where Janet
left off.

Janet elaborated the ideas of a subconscious and an unconscious, a
dissociation of the components of the mind, and a splitting of
the personality. Lumping the phenomena of amnesia, somnambulism,
hypnotism, anesthesia, obsession and hysteria into the grand group of
mental dissociations and disintegrations, he achieved a unification
never considered possible before him. Suggestion as a mode of cure was
also emphasized and elaborated by him to an undreamed-of degree.

Freud, in 1895, studying a case of hysteria with Breuer, had attempted
cure by the method of free association, attempting to get the hysteric
to pour out her mental life. Not succeeding, and his interest aroused
by her continual references to her dreams, he discovered that by means
of those dreams he could tap the subconscious and unconscious in
regions hitherto inaccessible. For in the dreams, ideas, persons, and
experiences appeared that never came upon the stage of the conscious.
From that finding he developed the concept of repression, i.e., the
relegation of a painful experience into the unconscious, and kept
imprisoned there by the censor. Also how there it became the complex,
which, like a stage manager, never appeared before the footlights of
the conscious, but determined its content just the same by inhibition
or stimulation of any character or scene to be enacted upon it.

A complete critique of Freudianism cannot be attempted here. But in
relation to the endocrine system as controllers of nerve function
in health and disease, a valid criticism can be made. Firstly, the
Freudian jargon, its technicalities and explanations, are metaphors.
Some may regard them as justifiable descriptions of mental processes.
But it certainly can be urged against them that they provide us with
no idea concerning what is happening in the cells of the body and
brain as explanation for the event, normal or abnormal, supposedly
explained. Words like sublimation or transference are figures of
speech and nothing else. Secondly, they ignore totally the powers of
the vegetative apparatus, the viscera, muscles and secreting glands
together, as originators and determiners of the wish and its
adventures.

How utterly different, from the point of view of the physiologist, the
two explanations are as pictures, can be seen from a single example.
The idea of repression, to the Freudian, means the pushing down
into the subconscious of some experience. Pushing down is a process
controlled by the laws of physics: it involves the concepts of matter
and force. Hence, the expression, as a description of a psychic
episode, is a metaphor pure and simple. From the standpoint of the
process of repression as pictured by the student of the vegetative
apparatus, the term signifies a real bottling up of energy. For the
repression means actual compression of muscle, the muscle contained
in the viscera. And the repression means a real interference with
the release of energy, which remains bound up, tugging for room
for expression as much as a spring tightly coiled in a box. In the
production of that tension an endocrine has often been decisive. The
endocrine nature of the individual may decide whether a subconscious,
i.e., visceral or vegetative tension, is to come into being, live
or die, in the face of a given situation. If thereby, a permanent
disturbance of the equilibrium between the components is brought
about, a neurosis, expression of an unsatisfied vegetative tension,
follows.

It has been hailed as a brand new discovery by those following the
latest in psychology that the subconscious and the unconscious
constitute a more essential component of the personality than the
conscious. As a matter of fact, common practice has recognized the
fact, if not the mechanism and its significance, for ages. It is not
what people say or do--it is how they say it: that is how the true
reactions of personality are recognized instinctively even by animals.
Tone and gesture (when not acted or posed) are accepted as symbols and
symptoms of states of the inmost sancta sanctorum that words and wit
never give entrance to, nay disguise and block. Tone and gesture as
revelations of the Inner-Me, the True-Me or Intra-Me if you will,
are so potent because they are direct expressions of the vegetative
apparatus. The curl of a lip, the flicker of an eye-lash, the twitch
of a shoulder are the overflow of energy cramped in the increased
intravisceral pressure, determined by increased outflow of endocrine
secretion. Wittingly or unwittingly we interpret the little signs as
messages from the deepest self, which they truly are.

NERVOUS BREAKDOWNS AND SHELL SHOCK

In civil life, the complex of symptoms Beard jumbled together as
neurasthenia, when associated with a loss of self-control, so that the
sufferer is incapacitated for the duties of everyday life, has become
the popular "nervous breakdown." A sanitarium appears to be one of the
necessary components of the condition. It is the last act, the climax
of "nerves."

During the War of 1914-1918, thousands of cases of functional
disorders of the nervous came to be grouped under "Shell Shock."
The psychic phenomena in the wake of concussion of the brain due to
explosives suggested the term, and its application to affections of
self-control, or dissociations of the personality, with paralysis,
blindness, speechlessness, loss of hearing and so on. The War neurosis
(including those arising in home service) is still a topical subject
because thousands of mentally disabled soldiers are alive.

In view of what has been said concerning the endocrine mechanism of
the instincts and the vegetative apparatus, it could be predicted that
a number of these nerve casualties of peace and war would be caused by
an upset of the equilibrium between the glands of internal secretion.
A study of war neuroses by the great Italian student of the
endocrines, Pende, confirms this assumption. As emphasized, the
internal secretions are like tuning keys, and tighten or loosen the
strings of the organism-instrument, the nerves. War for the soldier,
or the civilian combatant as well, sets the strings vibrating, and
with them the glands controlled by them. Excessive stimulation or
depression of an endocrine will disturb the whole chain of hormones,
and the vegetative system, and their echoes in the psyche. The nervous
disorders of war that have been lumped as shell shock or war shock may
be looked upon as uncompensated; airings of the endocrine vegetative
mechanism, as dislocations of parts and processes that are reflected
outwardly as ailment or disease.

AN ENDOCRINE NEUROSIS

An exquisite example of an endocrine neurosis, that is a disorder of
nerves and brain dependent upon an upset of the equilibrium between
the internal secretions due to a trying experience, was furnished
recently by the reactions of three naval officers lost in the snow
wilds of Canada through a balloon adventure. The cases aroused a good
deal of interest at the time, and the details were reported by the
newspapers as if they were the episodes of a serial mystery story.

The three officers started out late one fine evening from Rockaway
Air Station in a balloon for a practice trip. Atmospheric conditions
suddenly changed, they became lost in the clouds, and finally landed
somewhere in the Canadian wilderness. The commander of the balloon
crew, Lieut. A., 23 years old, was the youngest of the three; the
oldest, Lieut. B., being 45, and the third man in the thirties, Lieut.
C.

According to the testimony given at the Court of Inquiry held
afterwards, two hours after they abandoned the balloon and started
struggling through the snow, B. became tired and complained of his
fatigue. B.'s fatigue increased, and two days later became so great
that the party had to stop for an hour and build a fire in order to
permit him to rest. However, an hour proved too little: and in another
half hour he was falling and fainting.

Letters written by C. to his wife and gotten hold of by reporters
declared that B. at this juncture passed into a semi-sane state, in
which he accused himself of a number of sins, and volunteered to
commit suicide, so that the others would not be burdened by his
weakness. Also, that they might use his body to fortify themselves. A.
discussed with C. the advisability of taking B.'s knife away from
him. Living on their carrier pigeons, they continued on, moved by a
desperate hope of finding someone. B. had several fainting spells
after drinking water traced by moose tracks.

Luck favored them, and they encountered an Indian who guided them to
a place called Moose Factory. Here they wrote the letters home which
reached their wives and the daily press before they themselves
returned to civilization. A great hue and cry was raised by the
newspapers about their plight. Newspaper correspondents vied with each
other for the honor of being the first to meet them and get their
story.

They arrived at a collection of houses named Mattice. A. and C.
proceeded ahead and found instructions for them not to talk. C. went
back to B., who was in a shack with the correspondents full of the
story of the letters. B. became enraged and struck C. who retained his
self-control.

Differences were patched up, and the three returned together to New
York. There the medical examination of the three showed that the four
days in the wilderness had left its deepest effects upon the physique
and mind of B. In a few days he developed an attack of tonsillitis,
with fever, and a mental disturbance described by the medical officer
as exhaustion psychosis. He believed this condition to be the result
of severe exhaustion, prolonged anxiety, worry, and extreme exposure.
Extreme restlessness and irritability, confusion of thought and
an undefined perplexity, all the prominent symptoms of exhaustion
psychosis, making him hyperactive and inclined to acts of violence,
were in evidence.

The physique, character and reactions of Lieut. B. are what interest
us in the case. The pictures of him published, and the structure of
his skull, face and teeth, his hair and other physical traits point to
his being an adrenal-centered type, of the unstable variety, so far as
his internal secretion make-up is concerned. As we shall see in the
next chapter on the different kinds of endocrine personalities,
the unstable adrenocentric (convenient name for the class) is
characterized by rapid exhaustibility because under conditions of
stress and strain, the reserve of the gland is consumed. The adrenal
glands, we noted in a preceding chapter, are concerned with the
maintenance of muscle and nerve tone in emergencies. They are the
glands which, during crises especially, control the production and
supply of energy to the various organs and tissues called upon to
function to the utmost in emergencies. When the adrenals fail, as they
do readily in these labile adrenocentrics, it is as if the adrenals
were cut out of the body. And it has been repeatedly shown that
extirpation of the adrenals is immediately followed by degeneration
and breakdown of the brain cells.

These facts explain the reactions of Lieut. B. The acute call upon his
adrenals made by his dangerous situation probably soon exhausted them
of their content of reserve secretions. Overwhelming fatigue with loss
of muscle tone followed. The changes in the brain caused him to talk
as he did in the wilderness. Returned to safety, the news that his
reputation was under fire because of C.'s letter brought out another
adrenal characteristic: the excessive instinct of pugnacity, easily
stimulated, with its emotion of anger and the tendency to violence.
What is spoken of as a quick temper is an adrenocentric trait.
Returned to New York, an infection, tonsillitis, attacked him.
Infections in adrenocentrics use up the content of the adrenals as
rapidly as physical exhaustion or emotion. So the tonsillitis, which
in another type of individual would have been combatted continuously
by the adrenals and so passed by as a mere sore throat, presented him
with a high temperature, and the brain disturbance described by the
medical officer as exhaustion-psychosis, with again a tendency to
violence. In short, the history of his adventure is the history of his
adrenals under stress and strain. It illustrates the mechanism of a
typical endocrine neurosis.

THE UNCONSCIOUS AND THE VISCERA

In the chapter on the glands of internal secretion as an interlocking
directorate, certain generalities were stated as the laws of the
government of the organism's life by them in association with the
vegetative apparatus. It was put forward as a fundamental revision of
the theory, hitherto accepted, of the limitation of mind to the brain
cells. We think and feel not alone with the brain, but with our
muscles, our viscera, our vegetative nerves, and last but not least
our endocrine organs. In short, we think and feel with each and every
part of ourselves.

Among these pristine factors determining the content of consciousness,
the endocrines are most important, because they alone to start with,
of all the other factors, are different in each and every individual.
They are what render him unique at birth, even though he looks the
counterpart of millions of other babies born at the same time. They
constitute his inner destiny. As he grows, the external factors,
social experiences, climate, accidents, and disease modify and
condition the reactions and complexity of the endocrine system. As
these modifications and associations are of the greatest import for
the final elaboration of the personality, composing as they do the
elements of the unconscious which confers the unique stamp of normal,
abnormal, supernormal, or subnormal, it is worth while now to review
the most general of the determining laws. Man is an energy phenomenon,
both conscious and unconscious, with the energy emanating from the
endocrine-vegetative mechanisms. So it becomes possible for us,
by their aid, to analyze the conscious, the subconscious and the
unconscious with the terms long current in the analyses of physics.

1. Man is an energy machine which, though it is constantly losing
energy as a whole; consists of parts constantly accumulating energy
(as a result of inherent chemical reactions accelerated by the
absorption of food). This process of local accumulation of energy
associated with general loss of energy may be observed even in the
ameba, in the form of stored reserve food material. Evolution
created a system of organs, the viscera, as specialists in energy
conservation, utilization or transformation.

For intercommunication and interaction between the viscera two systems
were elaborated: a younger system of direct contacts, the nerves,
and nerve cells, through which influences could be conducted for the
stimulation, acceleration, retardation or inhibition of an energy
process in them; and the older, the endocrine gland association, for
the production of chemical substances to act as messengers to be sent
from one viscus to another, and also to the nerves, through the blood
or lymph which bathe all the cells. They could affect only one or
certain organs, because by selection only the chosen organ or organs
knew the code, as it were. The chemical system is much the older
system, and preceded the nerve system by aeons of time. The whole
system, viscera, visceral nerves and the endocrines gradually united
into a complete autonomous organism within the organism, and as such
functions as the vegetative apparatus.

EVOLUTION OF THE ENDOCRINES

2. In the course of evolution, variations occurred in all three
components of the apparatus, the viscera, the nerves, and the
endocrines. Now variations in the viscera and the nerves are
essentially grossly physical and quantitative. That is, there may be a
bigger stomach or a smaller stomach, larger nerve fibres or smaller.
And as Life always has worked with a large margin of safety, and
always played for safety first as regards quantity, these variations
have not become of much significance for the history and destiny of
the animal.

But variations among the endocrines made a tremendous difference. To
have very much thyroid and very little pituitary, much adrenal and not
enough parathyroid meant a great deal to the Organism as a whole,
as well as to the vegetative apparatus. For states of tension and
relaxation, activity and inactivity in the nerves and viscera would be
determined by these variations in the ratio between the variants. The
vegetative apparatus in its virginity, say in the new-born infant, may
be said to have its development primarily determined by the reaction
potentials of the endocrine part of it, that is the latent power of
each gland to secrete at a minimum or a maximum, and the balance
between them.

EDUCATION OF THE VEGETATIVE SYSTEM

3. Training or education involves, beside other effects, a training
of the endocrines, and hence of the entire vegetative apparatus, to
respond in a particular way to a particular stimulus. Experience is
like the introduction of new push-buttons, levers, and wheels into the
mechanism. All learning which calls out or arrests the functioning of
an instinct, must, from what we have learned of the chemical dynamics
of instincts as reactions between hormones, nerves and viscera, affect
the vegetative system. When there is a conflict between two or
more instincts, between pressures of energy flowing in different
directions, there may be compromise and normality, or a grinding of
the gears and abnormality.

Where does the brain come in, in all this? As the servant of the
vegetative apparatus. To call it the master tissue is manifestly
absurd, when it can only be the diplomatic constitutional monarch of
the system. It can, in fact, act only as the great central station
for associative memory, as only one of the factors implicated in
education.

The most powerful educative agents of the vegetative apparatus of a
human being are the other humans around him. And they comprise the
most powerful of the external effectors of education, for better, for
worse. The training and education of the endocrine-vegetative system
is the basis of all social rules (Habit, Custom, Convention, Law,
Conscience). An unresolved discord, a continued conflict among the
parts of the vegetative system, in spite of such education, is the
foundation of the unhappiness of the acute or chronic misfits and
maladjusted, the neurotic and the psychotic.

THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF THE UNCONSCIOUS

4. Another vastly important law that governs the content of the
conscious and the unconscious, and resultant behaviour is the fact
that the nerves and nerve cells of the vegetative apparatus, the
nerves leading to the viscera and the endocrine glands, like the solar
plexus, are affected by stimuli of lower value than those which arouse
the brain cells. In the metaphorical language of the old psychology,
the threshold value, that is the strength or loudness of stimulus
sufficient to make itself felt or heard, is less for the vegetative
apparatus than for the brain. So we begin to glimpse why an emotion
seems to be experienced before the visceral changes that really
preceded it, but pressed their way into consciousness later. This
gives us a clue to the unconscious as the more sensitive and deeper
part of the mind.

More than that, it supplies us with a physical basis for the
unconscious which will explain much of the observed laws of
its workings. It provides a reason for the apparent swiftness,
spontaneity, and unreasonableness of what is called intuition. And it
may show us a source for a good deal of the material of dreams and
dream states.

We have said that we think and we remember, not alone with the brain,
but with the muscles, the viscera and the endocrines. So do we forget
not alone with the brain, but with the muscles, the viscera, the
endocrines and their nerves. The utmost importance of muscle attitudes
in remembering has been established in the experimental laboratory.

It is one of the great services Freud rendered to psychology (and one,
by the way, largely responsible for the acceptance of his doctrines
by the disinterested intelligence) that he showed that a species
of forgetting is nothing casual, but active and purposeful, a
manifestation of the life of the unconscious. However, though his
description of the process was correct, he left it to occur in a
vacuum. As a matter of fact this forgetting consists in the inhibition
of associative memory by a process in the vegetative apparatus, so
as to maintain the equilibrium within itself which is reflected in
consciousness as comfort.

The unconscious, in short, consists of the buried associations among
the parts of the vegetative apparatus and the brain cells. We seem to
be much nearer to grasping the nature of the unconscious, when we look
upon it as a historical continuum, a compound or emulsion of different
and various states of intravisceral pressure and tone, in the
vegetative apparatus, dependent upon the balance between the
endocrines, as well as upon past experiences of the viscera in the
way of stimulation or depression. We forget that which is held down,
literally, in the vegetative apparatus. This explanation of forgetting
tells, too, why the forgotten (stored in the sub-brain, the
endocrine-vegetative system) continually projects itself into and
interferes with the regular flow of consciousness, e.g., in slips
of the tongue, mistakes of spelling, and so on: because the energy
bottled in the vegetative system tends to erupt into the consciousness
into which it would ordinarily flow.

In the evolution of the mind, there have been elaborated devices
to protect it against the vegetative apparatus. Consciousness, or
awareness, must be accepted as a fundamental, primal fact, like
protoplasm. Consciousness and protoplasm may be the complementary
sides of the same coin. Whatever the truth, the fact stands out
that the oldest, deepest, most potent consciousness is that of the
traditionally despised lowest organs, the vegetative organs, the heart
and lungs, stomach and intestines, the kidneys and the liver, and so
on, their nerves, e.g., the solar plexus, and the glands of internal
secretion. They invented and elaborated muscle, bone and brain to
carry out their will. Evolution has been in the direction of a
greater perfection of the methods of carrying out their will. Their
consciousness, working upon the growing and multiplying brain cells,
has created what we call self-conscious mind.

Mind, reacting upon its creator, has, in a sense, come to dominate
them, because it has become the meeting ground of all the
energy-influences seething and bubbling in the organism, and
so developed into the organ of handling them as a whole, their
Integrating-Executive. But just the same and all the time, the
underlying consciousness of the viscera and their accessories stand as
the powers behind the throne, but as what we have now learned to speak
of, in relation to the Mind, as the Unconscious.

PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYDAY LIFE

To sum up these relations of the viscera, the endocrines, the
unconscious and the mind, it may be stated as a far-reaching
generality for the understanding of human life: that character and
conduct are expressions of the streams of energy arising in the
vegetative apparatus, primarily endocrine determined at birth, and
secondarily experience determined after the organism has learned to
react as a whole, as consciousness. The result of such a reaction as a
whole tends to balance the disturbance of energy, so as to maintain
or restore the equilibrium, or sense of harmony and comfort, when
consciousness again disappears. This law is an attempt at synthesis of
the labors of the psychanalysts, the behaviourists, and the students
of the internal secretions (Freud, Jung, Adler, Sherrington, Watson,
Von Bechterew, Kempf, Crile, Cannon, Cushing, Fraenkel are the
great names of the movement). Most of the details, and all of the
quantitative applications of the law still remain to be worked
out. But a statement like the following of Cushing, the eminent
surgeon-student of the endocrines, that "it is quite probable that the
psychopathology of everyday life hinges largely upon the effect of
ductless gland discharges upon the nervous system," shows which way
the wind is blowing.

In the face of these conceptions the position of the psychanalyst as a
practical therapeutist becomes clearer, and the causes of his failure
when he fails. In the first place, he deals with psychic results as
processes, and ignores the physiology of their production. Since a
true cure of the neurosis, what he is after, is impossible without a
removal of the cause, a disturbance in the vegetative apparatus, he
cannot succeed where an automatic adjustment among the viscera does
not follow his probings and ferretings of the unconscious. In the
second place, he disregards the existence of a soil for the planting
of the malign complexes in the individual in whom they grow and
flourish. That soil is composed in part of the endocrine relations
within the vegetative apparatus. And as we can often attack that soil
more effectively and radically from the endocrine end than from the
experience end (e.g., repressed episodes) we may transform the soil
and make it barren rock for morbid complexes, at any rate. The concept
of the endocrine-vegetative apparatus as the determinant of normal
and abnormal behaviour, emotional reactions and disturbances of power
should in time cause even the most fanatic of the psychanalysts to
recognize the functional basis of the mental acrostics they are so
fond of dissecting.

NATURAL ABILITY

Another achievement of the psychanalysts is the recognition of the
influence of organic and functional inferiorities of the individual
upon the history of his personality. Gross organ inferiorities are
those which are definite handicaps in the struggle for success in
society, such as heart disease. Such handicaps, however, are limited
to relatively few of a population. The raison d'etre of the greater
number of minor mental inefficiencies the psychanalyst puts down to
handicaps in the unconscious. Again he mistakes figurative imagery for
explanations. The conception of endocrine diversity in the make-up
supplies us with the rationale of the vast majority of organic and
functional defects and inferiorities, in short, subnormalities of any
group, large or small.

Moreover, how would the psychanalyst explain the occurrence and
influence of organic and functional _superiorities_ and their
tremendous influence upon the individual and society? We live in a
generation which has acquired a flair for the pathologic. Undoubtedly
it is a soul-sick generation, and its interest in sickness of the
mind is only natural. Just the same, whatever advances, improvements,
progress, have been made (and certainly a number of the changes in his
environment, external and internal, must be admitted to be changes for
the better) have been made, not by natural disability, but by natural
ability. What is the physiology of natural ability?

The finest study of natural ability that has as yet been composed is
Francis Galton's on Hereditary Genius. It also remains the best study
of the natural conditions of success. He showed that of the type of
man he classed as "illustrious" there occurred about one in a million,
and of the type "eminent" about two hundred and fifty in a million.
Of the qualities which determine natural ability of this kind, he
selected inherent capacity, zeal, and perseverance as the three
prerequisites. And he states that "If a man is gifted with vast
intellectual ability, eagerness to work, and power of working, I
cannot comprehend how such a man should be suppressed." "Such men
(those who have gained great reputations) biographies show to
be haunted and driven by an incessant, instinctive craving for
intellectual work." "They ... work ... to satisfy a natural craving
for brain work." "It is very unlikely that any conjunction of
circumstances should supply a stimulus to brain work commensurate with
what these men carry in their own constitutions."

What is this inherent craving for brain work? What is this zeal? And
what is power of endurance and perseverance, the quality of stamina?
How are they to be interpreted in terms of the internal secretions?

In view of what has been said of the ante-pituitary as the gland of
intellectuality, studies of intellectually gifted people having shown
well functioning large pituitaries, and of mental defectives in a
certain number of cases a small limited pituitary, it is justifiable
to regard the factor of inherent capacity as a function of the
ante-pituitary. The factor of zeal or enthusiasm points to the
thyroid. Markedly enthusiastic types are thyroid dominant types. Vigor
as a third factor, the ability to stand stress and strain of continued
effort is dependent upon good adrenal and interstitial cell function.
So we may say that craving and capacity for brain work plus ardor plus
perseverance in its pursuit, the triplicate of natural ability, are
the reflections in conduct and character of balanced and sufficient
ante-pituitary, thyroid, and adrenal-interstitial contributions in
the chemical formula of the personality. In the chapter on historic
personages analyzed from the endocrine viewpoint, we shall see that
some of the most eminent and illustrious people of history have been
pituitary-centered.

MENTAL DEFICIENCY

Natural ability grows in an endocrine soil of a particular kind,
perhaps affected by the internal secretions much as natural soil is by
fertilizers like phosphates or nitrates. Increased production follows
increased fertilization. Natural disability must vary similarly with a
perversion or improper mixture, deficiency or absence of the hormones
that combine in natural ability.

It is assumed as a matter of course that the brain itself is there,
which, to carry out our analogy, means that the crude soil or earth is
there. Sufficient quantity and adequate quality of nerve tissue must
be regarded as prerequisite. If the brain has been damaged in any way
during development or birth, if it has been smashed up in any way, or
if it has failed to evolve the minimum number of healthy nerve cells,
the endocrine influence becomes negligible. It is like attempting to
insert a key into a door which has no lock.

It is among the specimens of normality of the brain cells that we may
look for our examples of endocrine mental deficiency. Included are all
sorts of examples of feeble-mindedness varying from the moron to the
imbecile and idiot, arrested brain life. The cretin is the classic
type of mental deficiency due to endocrine insufficiency, curable or
improvable by the proper handling.

Insanity, degeneration of the normal brain life, may be caused by an
upset of the endocrine balance. Among the commonest manifestations
of insanity are excitements and depressions, apathies and manias,
hallucinations, delusions and obsessions, all of which are
reproducible under known conditions of internal secretion excess or
failure. Alternating states of mania and depression are caused in some
instances by extreme hyperthyroidism. The critical periods of life,
when a profound revolution is overturning the endocrine equilibrium,
puberty, pregnancy, and the menopause, are the periods of most
frequent occurrence of insanity, when mental instability reveals
endocrine instability (Dementia praecox, pregnancy psychosis,
menopause neurosis). Actual insanity need not be the only
manifestation. By far the greater number of mental disturbances due
to aberrations of the internal secretions never see an asylum or a
doctor. They live more or less close to the borderline of insanity as
persons who have spells, eccentricities and peculiarities, hysteria,
tics or just "nervousness."

About two-thirds of mental deficiency is definitely inherited, about
one-third acquired. It is the opinion of a number of psychologists
that it is inherited as what the Mendelians call a recessive, that is
as a trait which will be overshadowed, if there is admixture of normal
mentality, but will crop up by breeding with another mental defective.
What we know of the endocrine factors in heredity leads us to suppose
that it is the mating of one marked endocrine insufficiency with
another that is often responsible for the inherited tendency to
feeble-mindedness and insanity. The effect of the hormone system upon
the vegetative apparatus may create the more obscure insanities and
quasi-insanities. The direct action of the internal secretions upon
the brain cells, producing a sort of hair trigger situation within
them, may cause the explosive discharges from them which appear as
overpowering impulses or uncontrollable conduct. The waves of feeling
which precede them are unquestionably endocrine determined. The wave
of fear a cat experiences upon seeing a dog is accompanied and indeed
preceded by an increase of the amount of adrenalin in the blood. The
picture of fright, as observed in a so-called normal person, staring
eyes, trembling hands, dry lips and mouth, corresponds to the portrait
of the appearance in hyperthyroidism. In persons afflicted with
uncontrollable impulses, the inhibiting hormones may not be present in
sufficient quantity.

Feeble-mindedness, ranging from stupidity to imbecility, may also be
a direct effect of insufficient endocrine supply to the brain cells.
When there is not enough of the thyroid secretion in the blood, the
tissue between the cells in the brain become clogged and thickened, so
that a gross barrier to the passage of the nerve impulses is created.
We have here an illustration of internal secretion lack actually
producing gross changes in the brain. But without a doubt, most
endocrine influences upon the brain, at work every minute and second
of its life, are the subtle ones of molecular chemistry and atomic
energetics. We know that such mental qualities as irritability and
stupidity, fatigability, and the power to recover quickly or slowly
from fatigue, sexual potency and impotence, apathy and enthusiasm are
endocrine qualities. We know also that the thyroid dominant tends to
be irritable and excitable, the pituitary deficient to be placid and
gentle, the adrenal dominant to be assertive and pugnacious, the
thymus-centered to be childish and easy-go-lucky and the gonad
deficient to be secretive and shy. This brings us to the relation of
the internal secretions to the type of personality as a whole.




CHAPTER X

THE TYPES OF PERSONALITY


THE ENDOCRINE PERSONALITY

If a single gland can dominate the life history of an individual it
becomes possible to speak of _endocrine types_, the result of the
_endocrine analysis_ of the individual. Studying endocrine traits of
physique, life reactions, disease tendencies, hereditary history and
blood chemistry, one may gain an insight into the composition or
constitution of an individual. The endocrine type of an individual
is a summary of these, his behaviour in the past, and is also a
prediction of his reactions in the future, much as a chemical formula
outlines what we believe to be the skeleton of a compound substance
as deducible from its properties under varying conditions. Only,
admittedly, as yet the endocrine label is but roughly qualitative and
most crudely quantitative, whereas the chemical formula is the essence
of the exact.

However, the fact remains that though we are only upon the first
rungs of the ladder, we are upon the ladder. The horizon undoubtedly
broadens. We possess a new way of looking upon humanity, a fresh
transforming light upon those strange phenomena, ourselves. Of the
ugly achievements of that dreadful century, the nineteenth, the most
illuminating was the discovery of itself as the _ape-parvenu._ Yes,
we are all animals now, it said to itself, and set its teeth in the
cut-throat game of survival. But there was no understanding in that
evil motto of a disillusioned heart. The ape-parvenu, desperately
lonely and secretive, has still to understand himself.

Let us be clear if we can. There is perhaps a certain presumption in
the phrase, the endocrine type. It is ambitious, and perhaps will not
fulfill its promise. But it is useful because it points a parallel and
an ideal. As Wilhelm Ostwald never tired of repeating, H_{2}O is a
complete shorthand record for the bundle of qualities commonly known
as water. It is an example of that highest task of mind, synthesis.
It is the highest synthesis of the studies of the internal secretions
that certain combinations of them, permutations and blendings of
them, are responsible for those unique wonders of the universe,
personalities.

The riddle of personality! Are we at last upon the track of its
uncovering? That elusive mystery, which philosophers have wrapped in
the thousand veils of Greek and Latin words, and psychologists, even
unto the third and fourth generation of Freudians, have floundered
about in, moles before a dazzling sun, is it to be unwound for our
inspection? Think of the human soul. What an invisible, intangible
chameleon is its true reality! Watch it, and you see something that
seems to uncurl and expand like a feather with exultation and delight
and joy, to contract and stiffen into a billiard ball with fear and
pride, shrewd caution and vigilant malevolence, to rear back and spark
fire like lightning with anger and temper, and to crawl and slither
with abjection and smirking slyness, when it needs to. This multiplex
Thing-Behind-Life, are we really about to dissect it into its
elements?

Personality embraces much more than merely the psychic attributes. It
is not the least important of the lessons of endocrine analysis
that there is no soul, and no body, either. Rather a soul-body, or
body-soul, or the patterns of the living flame. The closer tracking of
the internal secretions leads us into the secrets of the living
flame, why it lives, and how it lives, the strange diversities of its
colorings and music and the odd variations in its energy, vitality
and longevity. Why it flickers, why it flares and glares, spurts,
flutters, burns hard or soft, orange-blue or yellow.

The medieval scholiasts, who fought as fiercely about names as nations
about territories, divided men into the sanguine, the bilious, the
lymphatic and the nervous. It was a pretty crude classification of
different constitutions. The endocrine criteria, more exact and
concrete, divide them into the adrenal centered, the thyroid centered,
the thymus centered, the pituitary centered, the gonad centered, and
their combinations.

THE ADRENAL PERSONALITIES

An adrenal personality is one dominated by the ups and downs of his
adrenal gland. In the large, the curve of his life is the curve of
secretion by this gland, both of its Cortex and medulla. Such an
adrenal personality is entirely normal, within the definition of
the normal as something not threatening the duration of life, nor
comfortable adaptation to it. So are the other glandular types. No
sharp line can be drawn between the normal and the abnormal in any
case, the borderland is wide, the transitions many.

The skin is one of the chief clues to the adrenal personality. The
relation between the adrenal and the skin dates way back in the
evolutionary scale, for adrenalin has been isolated directly from
pigment deposits in the epidermis of frogs. Skin pigment bears a
direct relation to the reaction of the organism to light, especially
the ultraviolet rays, to the radiation of heat, and hence to the
fundamental productions and consumptions of energy by the cells. So
the gland of energy for emergencies writes its signature always all
over the skin.

In an adrenal personality, the epidermis is always slightly, somewhat,
or deeply pigmented. The pigmentation is due to a dark brown deposit
lightly or thickly scattered over the skin. With the general diffuse
pigmentation or darkening there are often the black spots, the
pigmented birth marks, or the lighter ones of freckles. The latter
signify some permanent or transitory adrenal inadequacy in the past,
ante-natal or post-natal, of the individual, and presage the same in
his future. These spots have been frequently observed to appear
after an attack of diphtheria or influenza. There seems to be more
tuberculosis among those who have them than those who do not. We
therefore say that diphtheria, influenza and tuberculosis stand out
as adrenal-attacking diseases, which have a greater power to kill,
cripple or hurt those with defective adrenal constitutions than
others.

The hair of the adrenal type is characteristic: ubiquitous, thick,
coarse and dry. It is prominent over the chest, abdomen and back,
and has a tendency to kink. Often its color is not the expected: an
Italian's will be yellow, a Norwegian's jet black. It has been stated
that most red-haired persons are adrenal types. Such persons also have
well-marked canine teeth which is another adrenal trait. They also
have a low hair line.

When the adrenal type has a properly co-operating pituitary and
thyroid, he possesses a striking vigor, energy and persistence. With a
fortunate combination, he develops into a progressive winning fighter,
arriving at the top in the long run every time.

Brain work is pretty well lubricated in the well-compensated adrenal
type. Brain fag is closely associated with, if not dependent upon,
adrenal fag, particularly of the cortex. Brain tissue and adrenal
cortex tissue are near relatives, and a normal human brain never
develops without a normal adrenal cortex. The adrenal type with an
hypertrophied adrenal cortex is always efficient.

Among women, the adrenal type is always masculinoid. If physically
feminine--due to adequate feminine reactions on the part of the
other endocrines--she will at least show the qualities of a psychic
virilism. A generation ago, such a woman had to repress her inherent
trends and instincts in the face of public opinion and law, and so
suffered from a feeling of inferiority. Nowadays, these women are
striding forward and will attain a good many of the masculine heights,
commanding responsible executive positions and high salaries. An
adrenal type will probably be the first woman president of the United
States.

However, that presupposes a normal range of action of the other
endocrines. Let there be some quirk or weakness elsewhere in the
chain of hormones, and instead of the successful woman, behold
the spinsters, the maiden aunts, the prudes and cranks who never
satisfactorily adapt themselves in society. To them must be given
a good deal of credit for the suffrage revolution. These unadapted
adrenals, as we may call them, once sowed the seeds, expending their
masculinism in the struggles of the pioneers' martyrdoms, preparing
the harvest their sisters, the more adequate adrenal types, will now
reap. The unadapted adrenals of today will have to look for new worlds
to conquer.

So much for the compensated adrenal types. They are the good workers,
the efficients, the kinetic successes of the driven world. They make,
at a certain level, good slave drivers because they feel within
themselves a driving force. But suppose the adrenal type becomes
uncompensated, or perhaps is inadequate to the demands of life to
start with. Then the story becomes different. The perfect efficient
superman of business or profession begins to lag. Though he is himself
in the morning, he begins to lag in the afternoon. That is when he
tires. In the evening he is all in. More sleep, recreational trips,
vacations slip into the rank of necessities, whereas previously they
had been laughed at as luxuries. More minute or large moles emerge
in the skin, especially if the individual is of a fair type. If a
strenuous effort is not made to give the adrenals an opportunity to
recuperate, or if adjustment on the part of the other glands does not
occur, this stage of intermittent and remittent adrenal inadequacy
gives way in turn to the state of permanent adrenal insufficiency.

The adrenal insufficient is important because he is to be seen
everywhere. Built along the same lines as the adrenal adequate and
apt to be taken for him, he differs and contrasts vividly below the
surface. One may sum him up by saying that he is one variety of
neurasthenic, perhaps the most frequent variety. Cold hands and feet
plague him, cold feet psychically as well as physically, for a chronic
and obsessive indecision is one of his most prominent complaints.
A fatigability, that goes with a low blood pressure, lowered body
temperature and a disturbed ability to utilize sugar for fuel
purposes, is another of his chief complaints. The skin often presents
an instability of the blood vessels, so that they now react to
stroking with a blanched instead of a reddened effect. Irritability,
a liability to go off the handle at the slightest provocation, and a
consequent complete exhaustion that, after an outburst, sends him to
bed, is conspicuous. Dismissed sometimes contemptuously as weaklings,
they are accused of laziness, craziness, and haziness. In their
psychic attempts to compensate, they land into all kinds of hot water,
from which friends, relatives or luck extricate them sometimes. The
other times they go to the wall.

The congenital adrenal deficient is a special problem. If the history
of such an individual is followed from birth, one gets a pretty
typical story. The genealogy is nervous. Nervous is a word of many
meanings. But when parents confess themselves nervous, it generally
means a mental and emotional instability of some sort. Sometimes the
idea is camouflaged as high strung. In the feeding narrative of the
child, one finds not occasional incidents or episodes, but continued
trouble, difficulties, adventures. Even after the first year or two,
the nutritional chronicle is not satisfactory. Lack of appetite, lack
of energy, lack of response to stimuli are its keynotes and the motifs
of the later years of childhood.

Growth is a strain. It becomes a task to make these children grow
and gain. Chronically below the average weight and height, herculean
efforts are made by the conscientious parents, but with small success.

With the entry of school life and competition, the curtain rises upon
the real tragedy, a tragedy in which the avenging Fates are the usual
ignorance, stupidity and misunderstanding. If the teachers alone are
duty-obsessed, or perhaps sadistic, the child endures the agonies of
repeated admonitions, demotions, and punishments. However, a certain
thick-skinned indifference may develop to protect the sufferer.

If the parents are in addition ambitious, or proud, or competitive,
then woe betide the victim. With their nervous dispositions, it is
the school and the tutor who are to be blamed, if not the child. From
school to school, from system to system, from novelty to fad, from
doctor to doctor, from fakir to charlatan, from pillar to post, they
wander in search of an education. Educational cults by the dozen have
sprouted and grown fat around these unfortunates.

The chief defect of the congenital adrenal inadequate is an
insufficiently developed adrenal cortex. That means an insufficiently
developed brain and nervous system. For we have seen how closely all
these are related in development. Now education can never be the
education of a vacuum. And we have to deal here with a relative
vacuum. When there are no potentialities, there can be no education.
Where the potentialities are limited, education must be limited.
The congenital adrenal inadequate is defined in physical and mental
energy. Hence educators cannot drive him. Up to a certain point he can
be led, but no farther. He should not be expected to go to a college,
and waste the opportunity of some one financially unlucky, but whose
endocrine system is more generously endowed.

Not that the outlook is absolutely hopeless. Puberty, with its
tremendous changes in the glands of internal secretion, when one can
almost hear the clicks and the whirring of the wheels in the internal
machinery, may transform. The unfathomed possibilities of gland
therapy are still to be probed. But the general rule remains.

THE REACTIONS TO MODERNISM

The adrenal personalities in all their variations must be safeguarded
and carefully looked after in the strained complexities of modern
post-bellum civilization. In a sense, the adrenal type is the Atlas
of the twentieth century world, and small wonder that he and his
descendants stagger beneath the burden. The adrenals are organs for
the mobilization of energy, physical and mental, for emergencies. They
are the glands which meet shocks and neutralize the effects of shock.
In the solitary animal, the everyday producers of shock are pain,
fright and wounds. The adrenal mechanisms oversecrete to encounter
the enemy, and then there is a period of rest and recuperation. Man,
however, with the growth of his imagination and the increase in
number and density of his surrounding herd, has become the subject of
continuous stimulation. In the past, this was balanced by the almost
universal dominance of some religious belief, as an effective opiate.
Concepts like Fate, Predestination, an all-guiding and all-wise
Providence, relieved and shielded the adrenals, and acted as valuable
adjuvants for the preservation of normality.

The nineteenth century witnessed the birth and expansion of a great
number of new stimulant reagents, the discoveries of physics and
chemistry, which, with the climax of the World War of 1914-1918, have
made for a more or less complete deliquescence of accepted religion.
For the great majority there was no faith to take its place. War,
pre-war, and post-war shocks have continued with their incessant
pounding upon the reserves of energy. Under these conditions the
adrenal personalities are bound to suffer. The other endocrine types
suffer, too, but quite differently.

Today, anti-adrenal, anti-religious ideas are epidemic. Of these,
first prize belongs to a cult of egotism fathered by the Napoleonic
Idea, consciously assertive and self-conscious in Max Stirner's
"The Ego and His Own," which engendered a swarm of imitators and
plagiarists. Human beings are all incorrigible egoists more or less,
furtive or frank. But social and religious codes curbed the most
narcissistic of kings and conquerors. Before Napoleon, all of them
vowed allegiance and expressed submission to some sort of deity,
confessed some fear of the Lord in their hearts. But the ideas
of Napoleon flouted all that. The unscrupulous predatory who
put effectual scheming for the self plainly above every other
consideration and rode rough shod over all his fellows appealed
powerfully to the latent animality of the adrenal types. Then came
the dawning awareness of capital and labor of themselves as classes
fiercely opposed forever in the policy of cut-throat versus
cut-throat. The labor organizations and the commercial companies
and corporations pitted themselves against each other consciously.
Doctrines like "Property is but Robbery," "Everyone for himself and
the devil take the hindmost," the "Iron Law of Wages" and the "Facts
is Facts" of the Gradgrinds were the phrases of the nineteenth century
that assisted. Finally came the Darwinian revelation of man as the
ape-parvenu, which completed the disintegration of the old restraints.

Man seemed to see himself now for the first time stark and naked. But
Man consists of many varieties, and all reacted differently to
the image in the clouded mirror. There was universal attempt at
suppression. But slowly the anti-adrenal forces infiltrated every
activity and every soul. Like a hidden focus of infection in the body,
it germinated and poisoned. A slow fever crept into life. A febrile
quality tinged the acquisition of wealth, the concentration upon sex,
and the desperate pursuit of the novel stimulus.

Then, like the hand that appeared at Belshazzar's Feast, came the War,
only it was a hand that stayed with a long flashing lightning sword in
its grip, sweeping pitilessly among the erstwhile dancing multitudes
to mutilate and destroy. A good many people, with that sturdy
animality George Santayana speaks somewhere of as a trait of mankind,
set out to enjoy the War. It was a new sort of good time upon an
incredibly large scale. It was an undreamed-of opportunity. The
mechanisms of suppression of the mind render it incapable of
appreciating horror until encountered. And so thousands with
dangerously unstable adrenals were plunged into the most trying
conditions possible. Hundreds of them, already shaken, on the
borderland of instability, reacted with the phenomena of breakdown
of control, lumped with a host of other phenomena, under the general
rubric of "shell shock."

That alone was not all. If hundreds collapsed, thousands approached
the verge of collapse. They survived and were discharged from the
armies as normal. They reappear in civil life as cases of "nerves."
Ordinarily that would mean that they would be classed as failures. But
such have been the psychologic reactions to the war that all kinds
of compensations in the way of dangerous mental states have become
frequent in these inadequate adrenal types. A trend to violence and a
resentful emotionalism are combined with desperate attempts to spur
the jaded adrenals with artificial excitements. Consequent melancholia
and depression, the "blues," are inevitable. A survey of drug addicts
would probably show a definite percentage of this type. The same
applies to certain petty criminals and law breakers.

The adrenal element in the personality must be considered in every
disturbance, morbid, personal, or social involving brunette types,
Huxley's dark white, Mediterranean-Iberians, red-haired persons, and
even pigment-spotted fair people. Historians have traced the earliest
civilization to the doings of a brunette people, the Sumerians, the
first to build cities in the Euphrates-Tigris region more than five
thousand years before Christ was born. An adrenalized people one
would, expect to be the first to take advantage of possibilities
because of their energy capacity. The earliest Sumerian stone carvings
of warriors exhibit an undersized skeleton compared with the large
head, broad face, a low hair line and prominent nose that would fit
into the ensemble of the adrenal type. Certain other historical
aspects of the adrenal personality have yet to be worked out.

THE PITUITARY PERSONALITIES

The presence of two antagonistic elements in the one gland complicates
any attempt at even the most abstract analysis of a personality
dominated by that gland. The pituitary, composed of an anterior lobe
and posterior lobe, supplies two fairly uncomplicated corresponding
types, best described as the masculine pituitary type, and the
feminine pituitary type. The masculine pituitary type is one
determined by the rule of the anterior pituitary, representing
superlative brain tone and action, good all-around growth and
harmonious general function, the ideal masculine organism. The
feminine pituitary type has an excess of post-pituitary, with
susceptibility to the tender emotions, sentimentalism, and
emotionalism, feminine structural lines. Ante-pituitary dominance in
a male reinforces the general masculinity while the post-pituitary
depresses it. The post-pituitary in a woman augments her natural
trend, ante-pituitary tending to counteract it. In other words,
post-pituitary and ovary are conjunctive, ante-pituitary and ovary are
disjunctive, post-pituitary and testis are opponents, ante-pituitary
and testis are allies.

One mechanical circumstance involved in the pituitary personalities
may be the determinant of the entire life history. That is the
emphasized fact that the pituitary is encased in a small bony box, at
the base of the skull. The size of this bony box, and its capacity to
yield to the various pressures of a pituitary enlarging to meet the
demands of the organism, will often spell happiness or misery,
success or failure, genius or idiocy for the man or woman. Certain
possibilities are conceivable. All of them occur, for the developments
of X-ray technique have rendered available almost a direct view of the
sella turcica.

In the first place, the bony box may be definitely too small to start
in with. That means a small and so potentially inadequate pituitary,
both anterior and posterior, potentially inadequate in that it will
become impossible for it to grow and produce extra secretion upon
demand. Handicapped thus, the unfortunate so born is doomed to
inferiority and very little can be done for him. He will not develop
satisfactorily. He possesses small genital organs which will not
evolve properly in adolescence, or if they will not stand still, tend
to revert to the opposite sex type. Then he tends to be dwarfed,
fatigable, adipose. Among these types are included subjects of
obsessions and compulsions who are dull and apathetic, cannot learn or
maintain inhibitions, and so, without initiative, evolve into moral
and intellectual degenerates, liable to epilepsy and the most
remarkable sex aberrations. All because a cranny of the skull, about
the size of a thimble, is not large enough for their dominating gland.

If the bone of the cavity of the pituitary is softer and yielding,
so that some enlargement of the gland is possible, especially of the
anterior, there appear rapid growth with a tendency to high blood
pressure, great mental activity associated with frequent and severe
headaches (often of the migraine type), a combination of initiative
and irritability and a marked sexuality. X-ray examination of the
sella turcica shows what is called erosion of the bone as it yields to
the pressure of the growing gland.

The ideal sella turcica for the ideal pituitary type is a large room
in which the gland may grow and reach its maximum size and so its
maximum function, without needing to exert pressure or destroy and
erode bone in front of it, to the side of it or behind it. The
distinctive masculine and feminine types, classed as the normal,
belong to this group. Sometimes, the bone in front of the pituitary
will yield, while the one in the rear will not, and sometimes the
conditions are reversed. Thus we may have ante-pituitary sufficiency
with post-pituitary insufficiency, or ante-pituitary insufficiency
with post-pituitary sufficiency, complexes which contribute to create
the grosser functional hermaphrodite types of mixed sex.

In the average feminine pituitary type of personality, post-pituitary
dominates. In a woman and to a lesser degree in a man, the general
build is slight and rather delicate. The skin is soft, moist, and
hairless, the face is the doll or Dresden China sort, with a roseate
or creamy complexion, flushing easily, eyes large and prominent. The
mouth shows a high arched palate and crowded teeth rather long. The
voice is high-pitched. One recognizes the traditional womanly woman,
petite and chic, who always marries the hero in stories. She is
usually fond of children, easily moved, has a good libido, and the
traditional feminine traits. When unstable, the post-pituitary type is
restless and hyperactive, craves excitement, and continual change of
interest and scene, a new pleasure every moment. A good many of the
women of today, who fifty years ago would have been nice sedate girls
because of their excellent post-pituitary constitution, have
been irritated by the atmosphere of post-1914 into the excess
post-pituitary state, the adventurous never-satiated avid pleasure
hunter, in whom the craving for stimulation will stop at nothing. F.
Scott Fitzgerald portrayed an exquisite specimen of the kind in his
short story "The Jellybean," with a quasi-heroine of a good Southern
family, built to be a high standard wife and mother, who drinks,
swears, gambles, and finally marries on a dare. Modern post-pituitary
woman is excitement mad and thrill chasing. The worst of it is that
the resultant personal tragedies cannot be dismissed as transient
inevitables. The heredity of the internal secretions determines that
the offspring of these women are bound to be pituitary unstable, the
least desirable of endocrine instabilities because of the concomitant
mental effects. Even from the purely selfish point of view, the
standpoint of enlightened selfishness, the post-pituitary type must
beware of excesses. For disturbances of menstruation, psychic fears,
anxieties, states of suspicion and obsession, various pains are among
the penalties.

A period of post-pituitary excess as an effect of disease, pregnancy,
or the rapid life, may be followed by post-pituitary deficiency as a
result of exhaustion of the gland. The girl or woman then becomes fat
and suffers from headaches (the fair, fat and forty type) yet retains
a certain capacity for enjoyment which enables her to continue gay,
happy and gentle, kind, interested. So she contrasts with the thyroid
deficient who gets fat, but also dull, stupid, even morose.

The masculine pituitary personality, the man with a dominant anterior
pituitary gland in a roomy sella turcica with plenty of space to grow
in, is the ideal virile type. They are generally tall (unless the
growth of the long bones was checked too early by a social precocity
of the testes) with a well-developed strong frame, large firm muscles,
and proportionately sized hands and feet. The head is of the marked
dolichocephalic type, flattened at the sides, face is oval more or
less, with thick eyebrows, eyes rather prominent, nose broadish and
long, lower jaw prominent and firm. Prominent bony points like the
cheek bones, the elbows and the knees, the knuckle joints of the hands
and feet. The teeth are large, especially the upper middle incisors,
and they are usually spaced. The arms and legs are hairy. High grade
brains, the ability to learn, and the ability to control, self-mastery
in the sense of domination of the lower instincts and the automatic
reactions of the vegetative nervous system, the rule by the individual
of himself and his environment are at their maximum in him. The
ante-pituitary personality is educable for intelligence, and even
intellect, provided the proper educational stimulus is supplied. Men
of brains, practical and theoretical, philosophers, thinkers, creators
of new thoughts and new goods, belong to this group. The distinction
between men of theoretical genius, whose minds which could embrace
a universe, and yet fail to manage successfully their own personal
everyday lives, and the men of practical genius, who can achieve and
execute, the great engineers, and industrial men lies in the balance
between the ante-pituitary and the adrenal cortex primarily. Men like
Abraham Lincoln and George Bernard Shaw belong to this ante-pituitary
group.

The feminine pituitary personality, in whom there is predominance of
the post-pituitary over the ante-pituitary, occurs in men. The type
is short, rounded and stout. They have heads that seem too large
for their bodies, the general hair distribution on the trunk and
extremities is poor, although that of the scalp and face is plentiful,
and they acquire an abdominal paunch early. They exhibit the feminine
tendency to periodicity of function, their moods, activities,
efficiency are cyclic, reminding one of the menstrual variations of
the female. This rhythmicity saturates their personalities, so that
poetry and music almost morbidly appeal to them. A number of the great
poets and musicians are to be classified as of the feminine pituitary
species. Last, but not least, they are the hen-pecked lovers and
husbands. Sex difficulties are frequent in their history.

The determination of endocrine type and tendencies, the prediction of
the future personality, during childhood is one of the developments
confidently to be looked for, as our knowledge of the internal
secretions will grow. The possibilities of control loom as one of the
most magnificent promises of science. Yet the high expectations for
tomorrow should not depress our respect for the achievements of today.
In the case of the pituitary, for instance, a hint as to the method
of approach is furnished by the tabulation of the traits of pituitary
dominance and pituitary inferiority in children.

  Pituitary sufficient and dominant:
    Large, spare, bony frame
    Eyes wide apart
    Broad face
    Teeth, broad, large, unspaced
    Square, protruding chin and jaws
    Large feet and hands
    Early hair growth on body
    Thick skin, large sex organs
    Aggressive, precocious, calculating, self-contained

  Pituitary inferior:
    Small, sometimes delicate skeleton
    Rather adipose, weak muscles
    Upper jaw prognathous
    Dry, flabby skin
    Small hands and feet
    Abnormal desire for sweets
    Subnormal temperature, blood pressure and pulse
    Poor control of lower vegetative functions
    Mentally sluggish, dull, apathetic, backward
    Loses self-control quickly, cries easily, discouraged promptly,
      psychic stamina insufficient

The pituitary personality in childhood produced by limitation of the
size of the gland, because its bony box is completely or partially
closed, presents typical hall-marks. He supplies the second and third
offenders in the juvenile courts, the delinquents and pathological
liars of childhood, the incorrigibles, the precocious hoboes, mental
and moral deficients and defectives, the prey of the sentimental
complexes of elderly virgins and helpful futility all around. Not
utilitarianism or futilitarianism is needed, but pituitarianism.
The feeding of pituitary gland in large enough quantities to these
unfortunates may do more than ten charity organizations, with the most
patrician board of directors complete.

THE THYROID PERSONALITIES

The accessibility of the thyroid gland in the neck, the ease of
surgical approach, the definite effects following its removal, and
then the miraculous marvels of the feeding of thyroid have rendered it
the centre of attack by the largest army of endocrine investigators.
As a result we know more about the thyroid in childhood, adolescence,
adult life and old age than about the other glands.

In childhood, the subthyroid or thyroid deficient, the cretinoid type,
the type resembling the cretin, is fairly common. The peasant's face,
with the broad nose and the tough skin, coarse straight hair, the
undergrowth, physical and mental, a persistent babyishness and a
retardation of self-control development, make up the picture. He needs
an excess of sleep, sleeps heavily, needs sleep during the day,
when awakened in the morning still feels tired, and rather dull and
restless, dresses slowly, has to be coaxed or forced to dress, gets to
school late nearly every morning, does badly at the school, reaction
time, learning time and remembering time being prolonged as compared
with the average, and is lazy at home lessons. He perspires little,
even after exertion, yet fatigues easily, is subject to frequent
colds, adenoids, tonsillitis, and acquires every disease of childhood
that happens along.

Adolescence, the coming of menstruation, the first blooming of youth
is delayed in the subthyroid. The secondary sex traits as they develop
tend to be incomplete and to mimic those of the opposite sex. Yet in
adolescence too there may be a sudden change and reversal of the whole
process, a jump from the subthyroid to the hyperthyroid state. So a
girl who has been dull and lackadaisical, with no complexion and every
prospect of evolution into a wall flower, may be transformed into a
bright-eyed woman, generally nervous and restless, high colored, and
possessed of a craving for continual activity and excitement. Skin,
hair and teeth become of the thyroid dominant type. The heart
palpitates under the slightest stimulus, she perspires almost
annoyingly, heat and emotion are prostrating. If such a
transfiguration does not occur, the effect of the reconstructions
of puberty is to create a person with about the following
characteristics.

  1. Height below the average
  2. Tendency to obesity (toward middle age)
  3. Complexion sallow
  4. Hair dry--hair line high
  5. Eyebrows scanty, either as a whole or in outer half
  6. Eyeballs deep-set, lack lustre, in narrowed slits
  7. Teeth irregular, become carious early
  8. Extremities cold and bluish
  9. Circulation poor. Subject to chilblains

Intellectually, these people vary enormously, depending upon which of
the other glands will enlarge to compensate for the deficiency of the
thyroid. If the growth of the skull has left a roomy sella turcica
for the pituitary to grow in, the intellect may be normal or even
superior, though energy is below par. If this is not possible and
the adrenals have to predominate, a lower, more animal and less
self-controlled type of mentality is produced.

In direct contrast to the subthyroid types is he who originally was
hyperthyroid. During childhood he is quite healthy, thin, but striking
robust, active, energetic, generally fair-complexioned with nose
straight and high bridged, eyes rather "poppy," teeth excellent,
regular, firm, white with a pearly translucent enamel. These children
are always on the go, never get tired, require little sleep. Seldom
will one of the classical children's diseases strike them, measles
perhaps, but no other. Adolescence for them, however, is more apt to
be stormy and episodic, adjustment to the new world of people and
things is much more difficult, wanderlust is acute. All an expression
of cells keyed up, charged with energy that must flow somewhere or
explode.

The ruddy live-wire, recognized everywhere as bubbling with vitality,
the life of any group, the magnetic personality may, however, be
shocked by some seismic event like the death of a father or mother,
or the ruin of some cherished ambition. A break in the balance of the
other glands follows quickly and disablement and invalidism, which may
cure itself after some years, remain stationary, or descend to the
worst forms of thyroid deficiency.

During maturity, the type are characterized usually by a lean body,
or tendency rapidly to become thin under stress. They have clean cut
features and thick hair, often wavy or curly, thick long eyebrows,
large, frank, brilliant, keen eyes, regular and well developed teeth
and mouth. Sexually they are well differentiated and susceptible.
Noticeable emotivity, a rapidity of perception and volition,
impulsiveness, and a tendency to explosive crises of expression are
the distinctive psychic traits. A restless, inexhaustible energy makes
them perpetual doers and workers, who get up early in the morning,
flit about all day, retire late, and frequently suffer from insomnia,
planning in bed what they are to do next day.

Certain types of thyroid excess associated with the thymus dominant
next to be described are peculiarly susceptible to emotional
instability. They are subject to brain storms, outbreaks of furious
rage, sometimes associated with a state of semi-consciousness. To
emphasize the analogy to epilepsy, their attacks have been called
psycholepsy. Among the Italians especially they were watched and
reported during the War, when the explosive fits were seen to take the
form of irresponsible acts of insubordination or violence.

THE THYMO-CENTRIC PERSONALITIES

During the first period of childhood, up to five, six or seven, or
more accurately, up to the point at which the permanent teeth begin
to appear, every child may be said to be a thymus-dominated organism,
because the thymus, holding the other endocrines in check, controls
its life. That is why up to the third and fourth years at any rate,
most children seem alike. Closer observation, however, reveals points
of differentiation and signs of the coming potencies of the other
hormones. During the second period, up to puberty, these marks of the
deeper underlying forces of the personality make themselves more
and more felt. The thymus, like a brake that is becoming worn out,
continues to function in a progressively weaker fashion. Until with
the arrival of the gonadal (ovaries' or testes') internal secretion,
its influence is wiped out.

There is a definite degree of thymus activity during everyone's
childhood, unless by its premature involution, precocity displaces
juvenility. Yet even during childhood, there are certain individuals
with excessive thymus action, foreshadowing a continued thymus
predominance throughout life. The "angel child" is the type: regularly
proportioned and perfectly made, like a fine piece of sculpture, with
delicately chiselled features, transparent skin changing color
easily, long silky hair, with an exceptional grace of movement and an
alertness of mind. They seem the embodiment of beauty, but somehow
unfit for the coarse conflicts of life. In English literature several
characters are recognizable as portraits of the type, notably Paul
Dombey, whose nurse recognized that he was not for this world. They
may look the picture of health, but they are more liable than any
other children to be eliminated by tuberculosis, meningitis or even
one of the common diseases of childhood.

It is after puberty, when the thymus should shrink and pass out of
the endocrine concert as a power, that the more complex reactions of
personality emerge when the thymus persists and refuses to or cannot
retire. The persistent thymus always then throws its shadow over the
entire personality. To what extent that shadow spreads depends upon
the strength of the other glands of internal secretion, their ability
to compensate or to stay inhibited. Whether or not the pituitary will
be able to enlarge in its bony cradle seems to be the most important
factor determining these variations. If there is space for it to grow,
at any rate normally, the individual may pass for normal, although
he will have difficulties throughout life he may never understand,
particularly in sexual directions. If the pituitary is limited.
partially or completely, the thymus predominance is more prominent
and fixed, and the abnormalities become obvious, both of person and
conduct.

The anatomic architecture of the latter thymo-centric personality is
fairly typical. The reversion in type of the reproductive organs, the
slender waist, the gracefully formed body, the rounded limbs, the long
chest and the feminine pelvis strike one at the first glance. The
texture of the skin is smooth as a baby's, and sometimes velvety to
the touch. Its color may be an opaque white, or faintly creamy, or
there may be an effect of a filmy sheen over a florid complexion.
Little or no hair on the face contributes to the general feminine
aspect in the more extreme types. They are often double jointed
somewhere, flat footed, knock-kneed.

In women, the external manifestations of a thymo-centric personality
may be limited to thinness and delicacy of the skin, narrow waist,
rather poorly developed breasts, arched thighs and scanty hair,
with scanty and delayed menstruation. Or there may be obesity, with
juvenility, if there is a repression of the pituitary secretion for
one reason or other.

In their reactions to the problems, physical and psychic, of everyday
life, the thymo-centrics are distinctly at a disadvantage. In the
first place, muscular strain, stress or shock is dangerous to them
because they have a small heart, and remarkably fragile blood vessels,
which renders their circulation incapable of responding to an
emergency, or at least definitely handicapped. In infancy, they may
die suddenly because of this, either for no ascertainable cause at
all, or because of some slight excitement like that attending some
slight operation, a fall, or a mild illness. During the run-about
epoch they are unable to cope with the necessities of an active
child's existence in playing with other children. Puberty and
adolescence are specially perilous to them for they may endeavour to
compensate for an inner feeling of physical inferiority by going
in strenuously for athletics and sports, and so risking a sudden
hemorrhage in the brain, producible by the tearing of a blood vessel,
as if constructed of defective rubber. Reports published in the
newspapers from time to time of children or young men instantly
killed by a tap on the jaw in a boxing contest, or some other trivial
injuries are doubtless samples of such reactions in thymo-centric
people.

As an illustration of the conduct aberrations of the thymo-centric
personality during adult life, the following extracts from a newspaper
report of a suicide are worth quoting.

"An autopsy made yesterday by Dr. Benjamin Schwartz, first assistant
to Dr. Charles Norris, Chief Medical Examiner, removed any mystery
that surrounded the death on Saturday night by pistol bullets of Dr.
Jose A. Arenas and the wounding of 'Miss Ruth Jackson' and Ignatio
Marti.

"Dr. Schwartz said that his post-mortem examination had convinced him
beyond doubt that the dead physician-dentist had killed himself after
he had tried to take the life of the young woman with whom he had
lived and of the youth who was his successful rival.

"'Besides that,' Dr. Schwartz said, 'my report to the police will
include a statement from the young woman to me that she always had
understood that Dr. Arenas had killed some one in Havana, Cuba, before
he came to New York.

"The autopsy left no doubt that Dr. Arenas was a case of status
lymphaticus (thymus-centered personality). I made a most complete
report because of the scientific value of the autopsy.

"'This confirmed my first deductions after seeing the body on Saturday
night in the doctor's furnished room with alcove bedroom adjoining.
You will remember that as soon as I had seen him I revealed that he
was wearing corsets.

"'These cases of status lymphaticus are intensely interesting. In them
the blood vessels are very small, and the lymphatic clement is greatly
in excess. They die suddenly, from ruptures of blood vessels. Many
of them are degenerate. Most of them are criminals. All of them are
liable to commit crimes of passion. Among them are found a large
percentage of drug addicts.

"'Miss Jackson, in the hospital, confirmed my scientific theory that
the dead man was not normal. She was perfectly frank in her statement.
She said she had left her husband, Elmer Schultz, an automobile
salesman in Toledo, several months ago and had come to New York. She
said she had lived with the doctor for some time.

"'About ten days ago she left him to live with Marti, a healthy,
normal lad. Before she went from the doctor's room she destroyed those
colored collars that were found beside the body. She cut them with
scissors. But that was after, so she states, the doctor had destroyed
stockings of hers by cutting them.

"'She told me in the hospital today, and with every appearance of
truth, that she had met Arenas in the subway at the station on
Seventy-second Street and Broadway on Friday night and that she had
asked him when she could come and get her clothes. He said, according
to her story:

"'Come to the house tomorrow afternoon--but come with Marti.'

"'She said that she and Marti went there according to this invitation:
that first the doctor showed her the cut collars and told her that she
would get her clothes back in perfect condition, and that the next
thing she knew she had been shot. She couldn't remember much after
that.

"'I believe that both she and Marti have told a perfectly
straightforward story and the autopsy is proof of it.

"'There were six bullets in the doctor's pistol to be accounted for.
One, in an undischarged cartridge, still was in the weapon. That
leaves five. One struck "Miss Jackson" in the right chest squarely in
front, and penetrated the flesh about one inch. If there had been any
power at all behind the missile it would have gone right through,
pierced a lung, caused a hemorrhage, and the chances are that "Miss
Jackson" would have died. That leaves four bullets.

"'One more struck Marti in the left upper chest. It passed through the
pocket there, and the skirt, grazed the skin, and then bounced over to
the right hand side in front. It was a most amazing case of a bounding
bullet. I was particularly careful about examining its course because
at first I was suspicious of the stories that were told by Marti and
"Miss Jackson." Now I know they are true.

"'But anyone might have been puzzled by the queer antics of the
missiles from the pistol of South American manufacture that the doctor
used. If it had had any penetrating power--or rather if the bullets
that it sent out, had any real kick behind them--the chances are that
both "Miss Jackson" and Marti would be dead now.

"'Two bullets, it will be remembered, entered the doctor's left chest,
quite close together. Well, one nicked the heart and lodged between
the lung and the heart. It didn't cause any more damage than a
mosquito bite.

"'The second bullet went through the soft flesh of the chest, but it
struck a rib and bounded back out again. That bullet was picked up
beside the body.

"'After these vain attempts to send a bullet through his body to a
fatal spot, the doctor apparently shifted the weapon to his right
temple and pulled the trigger for the fifth time. Then the fifth
bullet, driven likewise by a very weak charge of powder, pierced the
skull at a point where it was thin and tore into his brain. Its lack
of power, however, is shown by the fact that I found it this morning
in the brain tissue.

"'In all my experience I have never seen anything so queer. It sounds
almost like a dream--a man trying to kill with a pistol that shoots
bullets that either stop after striking soft flesh or bound out of the
body into which they are fired. But it is true; I have had all of the
bullets in my hand.

"'They are all accounted for. They are all of the same sort. There
is no reason to doubt that they are all from the same weapon, an
instrument without manufacturer's name, and of a design that the
police say is unfamiliar to them.

"'The dead doctor was a distinct type, and his tragic end was one that
should not surprise anyone who has any knowledge of such cases. The
courtroom was thronged with friends of the dead physician-dentist, who
not only is reported to be of a wealthy family of Bogota, Colombia,
but generally is credited with many charitable works in the uptown
Spanish colony here.'"

The distinct type to which the first assistant to the chief medical
examiner of the city referred is the thymo-centric personality
(status lymphaticus is another technical name for it), we have been
considering. The persistence of the thymus after adolescence makes for
an arrest of masculinization or feminization, the end-point arrived
at by the processes of puberty. That is, a partial castration takes
place. Now, as the experiments of Steinach upon the transplantation of
ovaries into males deprived of their testes and of testes into females
deprived of their ovaries have demonstrated, the removal of the
interstitial cells of one sex assists enormously in arousing the
opposite sex traits that have been latent, homosexuality. In a
thymo-centric, tendencies to homosexuality and masochism appear.
And so all the remarkable after-effects of those processes that the
Freudians have so lovingly traced: the father complex in men, the
inferiority complex, and the feminoid complex in general.

The feminoid complex introduces again the character of the functional
hermaphrodite, the mixed male-female. The sex index will certainly
come in time as a measurement of sexuality. But until then some more
available classification of sex tendency is necessary. Including
sex intergrades, one may divide sex types into six classes:
male, _male_-female, male-_female_, female, _female_-male, and
female-_male_. The sex intergrades, the four hyphenated classes,
nearly all have some degree of persistent thymus. If its influence is
partial, the emphasis is before the hyphen, upon the ostensible. If
its influence is unchecked, the emphasis is after the hyphen upon the
apparently latent sex. The sex difficulties produced in these people
by the conflict between their conscious sex and their subconscious
sex, the sex duel in the same mind, Siamese twins pulling in
diametrically opposite directions, are comprehensible only from the
viewpoint of the internal secretions.

Homosexuality, in one form or another, frank or concealed, haunts
the thymo-centric and spoils his life. The persistent thymus, like a
vindictive Electra, stalks the footsteps of its victim, its possessor.
He wishes to live, according to society's remorselessly rigid
expectations, for virility and happiness. But his thymus condition
forces him also to live for femininity and misery. That homosexuality
is not purely a psychic matter, of complexes and introversion, as
the newest psychology would have us believe, has been proved by
observations of its development in animals with internal secretion
disturbances, acquired or experimental. Thus it has been recorded that
a male dog showed a large goitrous swelling of the thyroid in the
neck, with a rapid heart, staring eyes, the loss of flesh and fat and
the nervousness of a hyperthyroid condition. Therewith he became an
absolute homosexual. Observations on the primates along the same
lines have been made. In goitrous hyperthyroids thymus persistence is
common.

What complicates his sex difficulties, and makes social adjustment
almost impossible or completely impossible, is that his pituitary
frequently cannot react to assist him. Often, as emphasized, it
is bound in by bone on all sides and neither ante-pituitary nor
post-pituitary can adequately secrete for his needs. So social
instinct and the capacity for inhibition, the ability to control
himself conceptually and somatically, are poor. As a child it is
difficult to train him along the lines of the elementary habits and
customs. He is into late childhood a bed-wetter, and steals and lies
quasi-unconsciously.

His mother realizes soon that he cannot be made to acquire a sense of
responsibility either for himself or for others. She becomes afraid to
let him go into the street because of his inability to take care of
himself, to acquire the right attitude toward street cars, autos,
strangers, in short, danger. She dreads to take him to places because
no sooner would they be out of them, than she would discover that he
had taken something that did not belong to him, quite as a matter of
course. He will fabricate stories with no motive, fabricate them
out of whole cloth for the pure fun of it. In a word, moral
irresponsibility is the keynote of the volitional traits of the
thymo-centric personality from childhood up.

With so much against them, physical inferiorities, mental defects,
moral lacks of every sort, it is little wonder that the thymo-centrics
die young. Infections hit them badly. The cases of flu that went off
in twenty-four hours belonged to the type. Fulminant meningitis,
pneumonia, diphtheria, scarlet fever, the varieties that are supposed
to kill in twenty-four to forty-eight hours because of the terrible
virulence of the attacking microbe, are probably so malignant only
because the organism attacked is a thymus subject.

In the alcohol and drug habitue wards of hospitals as well as in
medicolegal cases of degenerates, gunmen and other criminals,
the characteristic conformation and diagnostic stigmata of the
thymo-centric are often encountered. Life treats them badly.
Misunderstood and misjudged, they are the hopeless misfits of society.
If the pituitary and the thyroid can enlarge to compensate for their
defects, they may become the queer brilliants, the eccentric geniuses
of the arts and sciences. Should they not, mental deficiency and
delinquency are their portion. Epilepsy, then, is sometimes their mode
of escape from the terrors of an utterly foreign world. Should they
survive all other hazards, suicide may still be their most frequent
fate. A study of 122 cases of suicide by one observer showed that the
status lymphaticus was practically constant and often pronounced.

Certain of them, after a stormy life in the twenties, become adapted
to their surroundings in the thirties because the pituitary gradually
emerges and becomes dominant in their personalities. They are then
recessive thymocentrics. An increase in size, a broadening, together
with a greater mental tranquillity and stability, accompany the
adaptation. Historically, the thymocentrics who combined brilliancy
and instability played a great part as some of the famous adventurers
and restless experimentalists.

THE SEX GLAND CENTERED OR GONADO-CENTRIC PERSONALITIES

(The Eunuchoid Personality)

Among the individuals whose personality is dominated by their sex
glands the physiognomy, physique and life reactions are so distinctive
that no better examples exist of our main thesis: that the whole life
of man is controlled primarily by his internal secretions. These
gonado-centric types are not all necessarily sex gland deficient, as
the term eunuchoid implies. They may be rather gonad unstable with a
corresponding instability of the entire endocrine system.

About the face of the eunuchoid the striking feature is the
incomplete, irregular, or absent hair development. Below thirty it is
chubby and ruddy, and rather childish in its texture; after thirty,
there is an effect of premature senility: the skin is yellowish,
leathery, and wrinkled as the faces of old women are wrinkled: the
upper lip is traversed by vertical wrinkles, and wrinkles come around
corners of the mouth. The expression is juvenile, effeminate or
plaintive.

Invariably the voice is higher pitched than the usual masculine tones.
It may be gentle and subdued, like a genteel female's, or strident and
rasping. Occasionally it is a pleasant high tenor. The Adam's apple,
poetic popular name for the thyroid cartilage, is never prominent,
because it is not ossified, as it should be in the normal male.

Tall and slender, or generally undersized, the muscles are soft
and flabby as a woman's. The hands and feet are small and gracile
typically. Viewed in profile, the lines of the body are feminine. The
breasts may reach almost the size of the female's and there may be a
well-marked area of pigmentation around the nipple. The hair growth
under the shoulders and on the lower abdomen tends to be scanty and to
approximate the opposite sex in quality and distribution, as do the
reproductive organs themselves.

These traits of physiognomy and physique indicate functional
hermaphroditism in the underlying feminoid constitution. The feminoid
constitution appears again in the supposedly masculine. The feminoid
constitution should not be confused with the infantiloid constitution.
The former, the gonado-centric personality, is a digression of growth,
a deviated evolution of the individual because of the conflicting
forces, some masculine and some feminine, in his make-up. The
infantiloid constitution is one of arrested development, and may
center around the arrested function in childhood or adolescence of
any one or a number of endocrine glands. Yet the two may resemble one
another pretty closely, at times. A cretin imitates the extreme grade
of infantiloid constitution. The infantiloid is a sort of enlarged and
lengthened child. The feminoid is ostensibly a man, with a good deal
of woman in him. The infantiloid is a quite general type, but of
course when typical is a freak, recognized and treated as such. How
far the eunuchoid may deviate from the normal is suggested by the
following description of one.

"Face rounded, moon-like, chubby, devoid of hair. Eyes puffed. Lips
protruding and fleshy. Cheeks round and thick. Nose little developed.
Skin thick and of clear color. Disproportion between the size of head
and body. Hair of scalp fine. Brows and lashes scarce, trunk elongated
and cylindrical. Limbs thick and plump, tapering from the root to the
extremities. Good fat layers over the entire body. Reproductive organs
those of a little boy. Infantile mental state: light-heartedness,
naivete, timidity, easily evoked tears and laughter, promptly aroused
but fugitive wrath: excessive tenderness, but unreasonable dislikes."

An almost wholly mental infantiloid state or one purely physical
may occur. Certain rather large Tom Thumbs belong to the group. In
everyday life we see doll creatures, overgrown children, on every
hand. Mental measurements of any large group of population reveal a
remarkable percentage of it as below the mental age of 12. Juvenile
traits and juvenile mind, separate or combined, should always suggest
the possibility of the infantiloid constitution of one type of
thymocentric also.

The eunuchoid or feminoid personality is also found often among
artists. One must carefully distinguish the two because the ensemble
of characteristics of the one may easily stimulate the other. Yet
fundamentally they are as far apart as the poles. The infantiloid
type never rises above the subnormal, which is its habitat, while the
feminoid type (or masculinoid, in woman) often produces an abnormal
personality which rises above the normal. The infantiloids become the
slaves and the weaklings of society, the Mark Tapleys, and the Tom
Pinches, while the eunuchoids have created splendid literature and
immortal music.

The life reactions, and especially the sex reactions of the
gonado-centric, are as complex and difficult as those of the
thymo-centric. Straightforward homosexuality and the eunuchoid
constitution have always been intimate. The homosexuality of the
thymo-centric is more subtle and disguised, often buried under the
stronger masculine component of the personality.

Homosexuality as a cult has appeared correlated with the production of
the functional hermaphrodite by artificially creating the eunuchoid
type of constitution. Among the Aztecs, homosexuals were produced
in quantity for religious purposes by a deliberate fostering of the
eunuchoid constitution. They called them the Mujerados. Their method
consisted in making a healthy man ride horseback constantly, until an
irritable weakness of the reproductive organs ensued, and a paralytic
impotence followed. The exhausted testes would then atrophy, and the
voice ring falsetto, muscular tone and energy diminish, inclinations
and habits become feminine. The Mujerado lost his position in society
as a man, assumed female clothing, manners and customs, and to all
intents and purposes was treated as a woman. Their large breasts were
said to be capable of lactation. Their only reward was the high honor
paid them as religious consecrates.

Among the Phoenicians there was a similar sect, devoted to the worship
of Astarte. Known as the Galli, they were men who had transformed
themselves into the closest possible resemblance to women. At all
times they were prepared to engage with members of either sex in
sexual relations of the most depraved kind. They lived in idleness as
prostitutes, cultivating and extending their skill in sex perversions
as specialists. Their initiation into their professional careers was
a part of a religious ritual. During the revels of great festivals,
apprentices to the trade, wrought up by certain traditional songs and
music, would be hypnotised into a frenzy, run amuck, throw off every
garment, and, snatching up swords, deliberately placed in convenient
spots, castrate themselves at one blow. In a wilder hysteria,
screaming loudly, the self-made eunuchs would then run through the
streets holding the severed organs high above their heads. At last,
faint through loss of blood, they brought their madness to its climax
by hurling the organs in their hands into the nearest houses, so
forcing the owners to take them in, and provide them with female
wearing apparel, and the other feminine accoutrements of war.
Henceforth, this manner of dress was not to be changed. The physical
changes followed. The hair of the face was lost, the breasts enlarged,
the voice became high-pitched, and the other type-characters of the
eunuchoid complex appeared.

These constitutions thus may be either congenital or acquired.
Individuals apparently normal during childhood and adolescence may
be transformed. Injuries to the reproductive glands, sometimes the
slightest bruises, may lead to atrophy, and a change of personality
follows in less than six weeks. Mumps may achieve the same results
because of the inflammation of the gonads that may accompany or follow
it.

Whole family and races may show some of the signs of the eunuchoid
constitution for generations. According to Darwin (Descent of Man)
"the development of the beard and the hairiness of the body differ
remarkably in the men of distinct races, and even in different tribes,
and families of the same race. On the European-Asiatic continent,
beards prevail, until we pass beyond India, although with the
natives of Ceylon they are often absent.... Eastward of India beards
disappear, as with the Siamese, Kalmuks, Malays, Chinese, and
Japanese. Throughout the great American continent the men may be said
to be beardless: but in almost all tribes a few short hairs are apt to
appear on the face, especially in old age...." Hair being an adrenal
cortex trait, it is to be inferred that hairless families and races
are more eunuchoid, and possess less of the adrenal cortex secretion
than the more hairy.

Whatever the exceptions--and there have been eunuch generals in
history--Marces, Chancellor of Justinian, who beat the Goths at
Nocera, and Ali the Gallant who commanded the Turkish Army after the
invasion of Hungary in 1856--the eunuchoid generally runs to type in
his mentality and his sexuality. He is an introvert, his personality
is shut in, he isolates himself from the world.

The lower eunuchoids exhibit a curiously child-like personality.
Naively confiding, communicating to all comers all their joys and
sorrows, they ask diffidently for confirmation of their statements,
and they pass quickly from tears to laughter. About sexual matters
they are extremely timid. A moral innocence pervades their speech and
conduct. Usually they have no true conception of crimes of jealousy
or passion. The occupations they go in for are those without
responsibility away from crowds or observation, such as ship cooks,
stewards, and so on. They marry to find a home, without the object of
establishing sexual relations. When they are asked whether they think
their wives will be pleased to look at the matter in the same light,
and be contented to live with a man upon such conditions, they are
puzzled or perplexed, as if they had never thought seriously about
the matter before. Their simplicity has even extended to proposing to
their wives to seek gratification from some other man. Naturally, such
an arrangement often proves unsatisfactory, and desertion follows.

Concerning the children sometimes the offspring of these unions,
scepticism as to the identity of the father is decidedly permissible.
Still in some cases the best of evidence exists that fertility occurs.
The vitality of the children then is subnormal and the mortality
rate high. The eunuchoid tendency is transmitted. Variations and
transitions of every kind are found among the undersexed eunuchoid
personalities, depending upon the quality and degree of the secretions
lacking.

When there is an excess of these sex secretions, a turbulent,
tempestuous, sexually sensitive temperament, that may go on to
satyriasis or nymphomania, is created. It has been shown that doves
can be rendered overfeminine in their behaviour and characteristics
by injections of ovarian material. Oversexed types of personality
therefore may exist as well as undersexed.

COMBINATIONS AND PERMUTATIONS

The types of personality sketched--the thyrocentric, the
pituitocentric, the adrenocentric, the thymocentric, the
gonadocentric--are really prototypes, the great kingdoms of
personality, to which individuals can be assigned, by hall marks which
facilitate their classification. They may also be described as the
pure endocrine types, which include a minority of a population. But
the majority consist of dominant mixtures, hyphenates, groups which
are the species and varieties of the greater classes. Combinations and
variations of control among the adrenals and thyroid, pituitary or
thymus, and so on, occur, with effects that are sometimes additive,
reinforcing a particular trait of the person, and at others
conflicting, and neutralizing. Quantitative variations of the same
secretion may occur periodically in the same individual, which
explains the multiplicity and complexity, the inconsistency and
contradictions of conduct in a man or woman at the different episodes
and crises of life, to a certain extent.

There should be a stable balance between the various endocrines, the
stability expressing itself in what we are pleased to call the normal.
There should also be a balance between the antagonistic elements in
the same gland; for instance, the pituitary. The pituitary, built
of two distinct portions, the anterior and the posterior, is in
equilibrium when the two are nicely adjusted. But the accidents and
vicissitudes of life (pregnancy for example) will upset the balance.
And so there will result changes of physique, conduct and character.
Like possibilities apply to all the other glands of internal
secretion. In our ability to exercise a control over these
disturbances of balance, to be developed in the future, lies one
of the great hopes for a chemical perfectability of human life and
nature.

NATURE'S EXPERIMENTS VS. MAN'S

The kinds of personality described, as prototypes and variants and the
fundamental facts supporting the view that they are the reaction types
of the human beings we meet in everyday life, represent simply a
beginning of the work to be done. Putting into our hands a new
powerful searchlight that penetrates the interiors of body and soul, a
fresh attitude toward the complicated problems of Man in society grows
imminent. The normal and the abnormal become illuminated with an
effect as if our retinas were suddenly to get sensitive to the
ultraviolet rays to which we are now blind. An apparatus is put in our
hands which shows us not only a static condition at a given moment,
but the whole life process of an individual, normal or abnormal, his
past and his future.

Upon that fetich of the biologists, the struggle for existence, the
struggle for survival, the struggle for possessions and satisfactions,
for happiness, victory and virility, in short, for success, as success
is measured by the biologists, a searching spectroscope can play, with
a yield for our understanding and control of life, that will stand
comparison with the astronomer's analysis of the stars. Toward the
process of adjustment and adaptation, of the environment to the
individual, as well as of the individual to the environment, attitudes
will change from _hopeless acquiescence in the inevitable to a
complete self-determination of the self and its surroundings._ The
adventures of the personality, strung along as the episodes of his
career, his friendships and sex reactions, his mishaps and diseases,
and the final fate or fortune that overtakes him, be he normal,
subnormal, supernormal, or abnormal, begin to become comprehensible,
and hence controllable.




CHAPTER XI

SOME HISTORIC PERSONAGES


THE INTERNAL SECRETIONS IN HISTORY

According to the views, facts and guesses concerning human
personality, as a body-mind complex dominated by the internal
secretions, outlined in the preceding pages, biography, and human
history as the interaction of biographies, become capable of
interpretation from a new standpoint. If human life, in its
essentials, is so much the product of the internal messenger system we
speak of as the endocrines, then biography should present us with a
number of illustrations of their power and influence. What is the
evidence that, as Huxley anticipated, "the introduction into the
economy of a molecular mechanism which, like a cunningly contrived
torpedo, shall find its way to some particular group of living
elements, and cause an explosion among them, leaving the rest
untouched," and the multiplication of such cunningly contrived
mechanisms, were responsible for those personalities, magnificent
chemical compounds, with whose adventures historians are concerned?

THE CASE OF NAPOLEON

As a unique will and intelligence, Napoleon Bonaparte the First must
be classed as one of the Betelegeuses of the race. H.G. Wells has
called his career the "raid of an intolerable egotist across the
disordered beginning of a new time." "The figure of an adventurer and
wrecker." "This saturnine egotist." "Are men dazzled simply by the
scale of his flounderings, by the mere vastness of his notoriety?"
"This dark little archaic personage, hard, compact, capable,
unscrupulous, imitative and neatly vulgar." There are other opinions.
The Man of Destiny was worshipped by millions. Napoleona bring
fortunes today. Interest in the man as a man has multiplied with every
year. And certainly no one can deny him the quality of individuality
in its most exaggerated form.

In the second place he belongs among the moderns. Modern science and
methods of observation have had their chance at him, and have left a
conscious record of their results. Napoleon was the central figure of
his time, and was watched by trained medical eyes during his life,
and after his death. Protocols of the examination of his body are
accessible, and Napoleonic specimens, preserved by fixing agents,
may still be viewed at the Museum of the Royal College of Surgeons,
England. Dr. Leonard Guthrie has worked up the material at hand in
a report which he presented to the historical section of the
International Congress of Medicine, in London in 1913. I propose to
relate his findings to some other facts and the general principles
roughly sketched in this book.

There are a number of word portraits of Napoleon extant. But for our
purposes certain of the notable features of his face and physique are
to be considered. The first characteristic that struck everyone about
him was the matter of his height. He was definitely sub-average,
at death being about five feet six inches in height. As has been
emphasized several times, deficiency or excess of growth will always
direct attention to the pituitary. His sharply outlined features and
a powerful lower jaw, combined with oddly small plump hands, long
straight black hair, and dark complexion, all point to the pituitary,
with a secondary adrenal effect. His pulse was slow, according to
Corvisart, his personal physician, rarely above 50 to the minute. His
sexual life, his libido, was abnormal. Curiously explosive in their
appearance and manifestations were his sexual impulses. They "beset
him on occasions which were sometimes inconvenient, and a peculiarity
about them was that they subsided with equal suddenness if not
immediately gratified, or if meanwhile something occurred to
discourage his attention. All women were to him 'filles de joie.'
Sexual rather than social attractions in women appealed to him."
He was never in love, never possessed of permanent affection or
tenderness for any woman. This explosive periodicity of the sexual
life, "with a tendency to compression of it to the merely physical,"
is another mark of some pituitary-centered personalities.

Two other phenomena that persisted throughout his life throw light
upon his endocrine constitution. One was trouble with his bladder
which he told Antommarchi, another physician, bothered him as long as
he could remember. Irritability of the bladder was so pronounced that
he could not sleep for more than a few hours at a time. After battles,
the trouble became worse so that it interfered with his riding.
Constitutional difficulties in urination have been connected
definitely with the function of the pituitary. The other pituitary
disturbances which tinctured his life were certain "brain storms,"
attacks of vomiting followed by "stupor verging on unconsciousness"
brought on by outbursts of temper, physical overexertion, mental
strain, or sexual excitement. It has been shown that such epileptic
tendencies are present in subjects of pituitary disease, particularly
those with pituitary instability. In Napoleon's case the brain attacks
may have been crises of pituitary insufficiency in a hyper-pituitary
type. This supposition is borne out by the headache which followed
them, the headache of an oversecreting pituitary compensating for
a defect in its formation. During his prime, his intellect was
mathematical, logical, and rational, and remarkable for a prodigious
memory. Such an intellect is the product of an extraordinary
ante-pituitary. That he never permitted feeling to interfere with
the dictates of his judgment, a quality which rendered him the
most unscrupulous careerist of history, must be put down to an
insufficiency of the post-pituitary. What post-pituitary does to the
brain cells and the organism as a whole to render them susceptible
to sympathy and suggestion, the social sublimations of the maternal
instinct, with its offsprings of religion and art, we have seen.
Napoleon lacked a chemical trace of the religious instinct, his
sympathy was nil, and his conquests were made possible only because he
was blind to the suffering and misery his greed for glory and dominion
generated. Post-pituitary insufficients of this type, patent or
concealed, gradually become corpulent as they grow older. The
increasing corpulency of Napoleon was commented upon by all observers.

A student of his make-up, and acquainted with present developments
concerning the internal secretions, given an opportunity to observe
him as we have when he was alive, and at the height of his success,
would have had every reason for classing him a pituitary-centered,
ante-pituitary superior, post-pituitary inferior, with an instability
of both that would lead to his final degeneration. Besides, his
insatiable energy indicated an excellent thyroid, his pugnacity,
animality and genius for practical affairs a superb adrenal. Given the
kind of pituitary he possessed, with its great intellectual potential
energy and the relation between the two parts which would further the
objects of an intellectual machine, plus a remarkable thyroid and
adrenal, plus the military education Napoleon had, and the character
of the Revolution into which he was plunged, and we have the
conditions out of which his career emerged as inevitable.

That it was his pituitary which first failed him, rather than the
thyroid or adrenal, which might have, is demonstrated by a number of
considerations. Before he made himself Emperor, it was noticed that he
was becoming fat, a pituitary symptom. A comparison of portraits at
different stages of his rise and fall shows an increasing abdominal
paunch, and a laying down of fat in the pituitary areas, around the
hips, the legs and so on. The beginning of weakness in judgment that
he was to exhibit soon in the invasion of Russia manifested itself at
the same time. His keen calculating ability attained the peak of its
curve at Austerlitz, Jena and Friedland. Thereafter, the descent
begins. A rash, grandiose, speculative quality enters his projects,
and divorces the elaborate coordination of means and end from his
plans. That his thyroid energy capacity did not fail him is indicated
by the fact that at St. Albans he would ride for three hours at the
end of the day to tire himself sufficiently for sleep. That his
adrenals were not affected is indicated by the brutality which
remained characteristic to the end of his life.

The findings after death confirm the view of him as an unstable
pituitocentric who succumbed to pituitary insufficiency toward the
latter half of his life. We possess the account of the postmortem by
Dr. Henry, who performed it. "The whole surface of the body was deeply
covered with fat. Over the sternum, where generally the bone is very
superficial, the fat was upwards of an inch deep, and an inch and a
half or two inches on the abdomen. There was scarcely any hair on the
body, and that of the head was thin, fine and silky. The whole genital
system (very small) seemed to exhibit a physical cause for the absence
of sexual desire, and the chastity which had been stated to have
characterized the deceased (during his stay at St. Helena). The skin
was noticed to be very white and delicate as were the hands and arms.
Indeed the whole body was slender and effeminate. The pubis much
resembled the Mons Veneris in women. The muscles of the chest were
small, the shoulders were narrow and the hips wide." In other words,
the typical feminization of the body which accompanies pituitary
insufficiency was found. He died of a cancer of the stomach. But
before his death there were noted the mental transformations that
succeed deficiency of his central endocrine. Apathy, indolence,
fatigability, and frilosity were what impressed his associates at St.
Helena. The deterioration of his mentality was also exemplified in his
literary diversions, the "Siege of Troy" and the "Essay on Suicide."
The puerility of these productions, as well as of his conduct, a
sulking before his captors, and the decline of his physical energy,
once a bottomless well, all point to the same conclusion.

The rise and fall of Napoleon followed the rise and fall of his
pituitary gland. No better illustration exists of the fundamental
determination of a personality and its career by an endocrine,
aside from other factors of education, environment, accident and
opportunity. Without the sort of endocrine equipment he was born with,
however, none of the other factors would have found the material to
work upon. Born, say, with more of a posterior pituitary than he had,
which would have rendered him more sensitive to the sufferings of his
fellow-creatures, if nothing else, and the forces of the Revolution
probably would have swamped him from the very first moment of his
emergence at Toulon, when the whiff of grape-shot, symptom of an
inexorable, merciless intellect and will, started him upon the road
that led to the Napoleonic Era. Destiny is always ironic. For the
deficiency of the internal secretions which made him eligible for
glory was responsible as well as for his downfall.

EPILEPSY AND MIGRAINE IN GENIUS

In the annals of genius, there occur a number of instances of those
who suffered from attacks that have been diagnosed epilepsy
or migraine. Because their ailment was associated with their
extraordinary ability, they attracted an attention that concerned
itself not at all with the circumstance that genius has also been
liable to measles, scarlet fever, and so on. Epilepsy and migraine
certainly occur in people of no supernormal gifts, and often in
degenerates and subnormals. Yet the fact remains that these affections
of the nervous system, so terrible to feel and to behold, have
afflicted the finest brains of the race.

About forty years ago the idea established itself that epilepsy,
exhibiting itself in one form or another as "fits," and migraine, the
severe periodic sick headache, were interconvertible manifestations of
the same underlying morbid process in the brain. Nothing in the way
of a concrete cause, attackable on the material side, was elicited by
this generalization. Then the investigations of the pituitary in the
last decade produced evidence of epilepsy-like and migraine-like
symptoms in sufferers from tumors or other enlargements of it.
Reasoning back, cases of epilepsy and migraine began to be examined
for evidences of involvement of the pituitary in their troubles.
These accumulated rapidly. The physiognomy and physique of the
pituito-centric were discovered in them. The phenomena noted in
Napoleon's case were often present: lowering of the pulse, chilliness,
and an increased irritability of the bladder. In women the attack
often coincides with the menstrual period, a typical time of endocrine
unbalance. Finally X-ray examinations of the sella turcica, the bony
lodging of the pituitary, clinched the matter: it often appeared
small, or enlarged, with erosions of the bone, signifying a desperate
attempt of the gland to grow, and meet the needs of the organism. The
complex of appearances called migraine now becomes understandable.
There are a number of factors, such as fatigue, intense cold, or high
sugar food like chocolate, which will cause an engorgement of the
gland with blood and swelling of it. But they do not concern us now.
Intense mental occupation, concentration as the popular term has it,
acts as a patent excitor of the attack.

Brain work drives more blood into the brain and the gland. Besides,
mental activity is accompanied by increased function of the
ante-pituitary, if intellectual, or of the post-pituitary if
emotional. Brain work then causes a temporary enlargement of the
gland. If, now, the bone container of the endocrine is too small to
permit of much swelling, the bone will be pressed against or even worn
into. This means headache, severe, easily going on to the kind known
as sick-headache. The nerves which move the eyes in various directions
lie next to the pituitary. If, in its expansion, it moves sufficiently
outward, it may press upon, irritate them or paralyze, and so evolve
various eye disturbances in association with the headache. No one can
overrate this conception of migraine, for a number of men of genius
have suffered from sick-headache and eye symptoms.

As for epilepsy, the problem is more complex. One has to rule out
first those who have organic destructive disease of the brain. But
they are out of our field: genius predicates at least an intact brain.
Of the others a number may be interpreted upon an endocrine basis. At
least they will, in their physiognomy, physique, mentality, conduct
and character, document the glandular constellation under which they
live, and a proper understanding of which is necessary for them to be
helped. One frequently seen is the thymo-centric, with small enclosed
sella turcica. The latter fact explains the occurrence of the
epilepsy. Periodic variations in the secretory tides of the other
endocrines, the ovaries, the thyroid, and so on, may determine the
onset of the attack of "fits." The point is that when epilepsy plays a
constant part in the life history of a man of genius, we are justified
in assuming a disturbed balance among his hormones, and so a reasoned
picture perhaps of the foundations for the erratic in his behaviour or
his productions.

THE NEURASTHENIC GENIUS

The fin de siecle intelligentsia of the nineteenth century were quite
stirred up by a publication of Max Nordau on "Degeneration," in which
a number of revered artists and intelligents were held up to public
scorn as degenerates and neurasthenics. So wrought up were they, in
fact, that Bernard Shaw was moved to compose a defense entitled "The
Sanity of Art." In spite of the Great Vegetarian's dialectics, it
remains to be explained why a certain species of creative ability has
been combined with the fatigability, variability and general wretched
irritability of every organ and tissue in the body which taught them
that they were sensitive souls imprisoned in the flesh. Going from
doctor to doctor as from pillar to post, from this medical creed to
that hygienic cult, lucky to escape the worst, often landing upon the
bosom of New Thought for succor. We have noted in previous chapters
the relation of neurasthenia to the glands of internal secretion
in general, and to adrenal insufficiency in particular. A closer
examination of neurasthenic genius will show it to consist essentially
of a pituitocentric in whom for one reason or another, congenital (the
persistence of the thymus) or acquired (shocks, accidents, diseases)
there has been failure of the adrenals, thyroid or the interstitial
cells, about in the order of their occurrence.

THE CASE OF NIETZSCHE

Friedrich Nietzsche is about as good a case as there is on record of a
genius blasted by migraine. The originality and force of his mind, as
well as the articulate music of an imaginative poet, places Nietzsche
among the philosophic elect of the race. Showing that he was an
unstable pituitary-centered of a certain type will throw light upon
his malady, as well as upon his life and work.

In a set of volumes, entitled Biographic Clinics, Dr. George M. Gould
of Philadelphia contended that the ill health of a number of men and
women of genius of the nineteenth century was due to unconnected eye
troubles. In attempting to bolster up his thesis he has collected
biographic material useful to the student of personality. He never
appears to have asked himself what was behind the eye trouble. The
evidence relating to Nietzsche's endocrine personality is derived from
some of the data he collected, as well as from the two volume life of
the philosopher written by his sister, and the other biographies of
him extant.

To reconstruct the endocrine formula or equation of Nietzsche
inductively, one should analyze first the information available
concerning his parents and relatives. His grandfather was a
conservative bourgeois of a superior type, who was the author of
treatises designed to narcotize the forces of rebellion of his time.
What he was like physically, no epitaph declares. His father was a
clergyman. A description of him reads ... "tall and slender, with a
noble and poetic personality, and a peculiar talent for music ...
short-sighted." That ranks him at once as a pituito-centric.
The mother was dark and had a fiery temper and came of a family
distinguished for the powerfully built anatomy of its members. In
the heredity of Nietzsche, the father appears therefore to supply
a pituitary predominating element, the mother an adrenal-pituitary
predominating element.

Nietzsche himself worked strenuously at the intellectual life (after
20, when he probably stopped growing, and the brain tonic action of
the ante-pituitary could manifest itself). Early distinction rewarded
him with a professorship in philology at 24. One of Prussia's wars
of conquest entangled him, and presented him with diphtheria. A
friendship with Richard Wagner marked the turning point of his life,
and the point of departure for his works on the most fundamental
values of human life. Meanwhile, attacks of sick-headache of varying
degrees of severity made him miserable periodically--they came about
every two weeks and lasted two to three days--and left him wretched
and exhausted. At last, at 44, a species of stroke terminated his
sufferings, causing him to lose his speech and memory, and thenceforth
there was progressive deterioration, physical and spiritual, with
repeated attacks.

In the sister's biography there are several good photographs and
reproductions of sculptures of Nietzsche at different ages. An
examination of the frontispiece picture, which shows him in profile
(profile views are the best for physiognomy), as well as of the bust
of Nietzsche by Donndorf, exhibit the most striking traits of the
head. To the student of internal secretions, the most prominent
feature of the face, emphasized by both the camera and the artist,
is the remarkable prominence of the supra-orbital arches, the bony
protuberances from which the eyebrows spring. This is a definite
pituitary character. The eyebrows themselves are luxurious and slope
to meet, the bony development of the face as a whole is sharp and
clean-cut, the skull tends to be long and narrow and the chin is
square. All these point to a pituitary-centered personality. It is to
be regretted that we have no picture or record of Nietzsche caught
smiling, which would have preserved the state of his teeth for us. At
any rate, considered as checks to my interpretation, his physiognomy
and physique, the nature of his genius and the attacks which finally
ruined his life, all fit into the conception of him as one whose life
centered, like Napoleon's, around what was happening in his sella
turcica.

The attacks of sick-headache, diagnosable symptomatically as
migraine, were so devastating that in 1883, after the printing of his
masterpiece, "Also Sprach Zarathustra," he wrote "My life has been
a complete failure." Extracts from his letters, collected by Gould,
provide some idea of his suffering. In 1888, just before his stroke,
he said, "I have in my eyes a dynamometer of my entire condition."

The history of Nietzsche's eye trouble makes it probable that not
simply a defect in his eyes themselves, but a deeper condition behind
them was responsible. Up to the age of 15 he was a model scholar.
Essential eye defects of refraction should make themselves felt during
childhood. Then, with adolescence, he changed. Adolescence is one
of the red-letter epochs for the pituitary, when its growth and
enlargement precedes and stimulates the ripening of the sex cells
in the reproductive organs. Until adolescence ended and physical
development ceased, his intellectual interests were nil, and he was
particularly backward in mathematics. Colds and coughs, and recurring
pains in the head and eyes bothered him (colds and coughs are frequent
in those whose pituitary expansion is limited by the bony sella
turcica to any extent). After his puberty, migraine definitely became
his demon companion. Following the diphtheria in the army (which
must have damaged his adrenals), the attacks grew much worse, and
complaints about them more bitter because the pituitary now, in
addition to its own burden, had to compensate for the insufficient
adrenals. So "his frequent illness made him more and more a subject of
treatment and commiseration.... If only my eyes would hold out ...
it seems to me at the age of 30 as if I had lived 60 years ... very
frequent sufferings of stomach, head and eyes ... acidity oppresses
me, and everything except the tenderest food becomes acid.... I cannot
doubt that I am the victim of a serious cerebral disease, and that
stomach and eyes suffer only from this central cause ... half-dead
with pain and exhaustion." In December 1888, he fell, had to be
helped home, lay silent for two days, then became loud, active and
unbalanced. The attack was preceded by the drinking of much water.

The specific quality of the Nietzsche genius also directs attention to
a pituitocentric, to a pituitocentric in whom both ante-pituitary and
post-pituitary are extraordinarily well-functioning, but are in a
state of unbalance in which the post-pituitary gets the upper hand.
Now, as we have seen, the post-pituitary makes for that instability
of association between the brain cells which must be at the bottom of
originality and creative thought, as well as of phobias, obsessions,
hysterias and hallucinations. Persons in whom the post-pituitary
predominates have a lively fancy and are liable to suffer from the
tricks of association. Nietzsche, as we have noted, was poor in
mathematics and in the calm cool proportioned forward march of
scientific thought in general. His most brilliant ideas came to him in
flashes and gleams. That is why so much of his work has come down to
us in the form of aphorisms and paragraphs. He was, essentially, a
poet among the metaphysicians, which again favors the conception of
him as a pituitary-centered with a dominant post-pituitary. Yet his
incisive critical faculty, as well as his love of music, also document
the supernormal ante-pituitary.

To sum up, the physique and physiognomy of Nietzsche, his migraine
attacks and the later fate which overtook him, his likes and
dislikes, his tastes, abilities and accomplishments followed from his
composition as one pituitary-centered, with post-pituitary domination,
a superior thyroid, and inferior adrenals.

DARWIN AS A NEURASTHENIC GENIUS

Charles Darwin, as the author of the "Origin of Species" and the
greatest revolutionist of the nineteenth century, has naturally had
a great deal of attention paid to his life and personality. Yet not
until the publication of his Autobiography and his son's Reminiscences
was it generally known that he suffered from chronic ill health for
most of his adult life. Dr. W.A. Johnston, in an article in the
_American Anthropologist_, 1901, has marshalled a number of available
facts, to sustain his thesis that Darwin was a victim of neurasthenia.
Now neurasthenia, it is now accepted, is simply a waste-basket word,
corresponding to the class miscellaneous in a classification of any
group of real objects. And, as has been emphasized in preceding
chapters, most neurasthenia rises upon a disturbed endocrine
foundation, most often, an insufficiency of the adrenals. That is, a
defect in the chain of co-operation, balance and compensation among
the internal secretions is the basis for the weakness of the nervous
system the term neurasthenia is supposed to explain, actually only
names. Darwin's case was pretty certainly that.

There can be no doubt that Darwin had an abnormal fatigability, a lack
of stamina and endurance in mental as well as physical application
which plagued him from the late twenties to the sixties. As a child,
he was strong and healthy, fond of outdoors, and though underrated by
his teachers, noted to be possessed of intense curiosity, especially
concerning natural objects. At school he was a fleet runner and
cultivated a habit of long walks. Then he was surely no neurasthenic.
Three years which, he himself afterwards said, were worse than wasted,
at Cambridge, were filled with shooting, riding and hunting. His good
health lasted until the time he probably stopped growing at 21 or 22.
Thereafter his troubles began.

What was Darwin, so far as his endocrine composition was concerned?
In the first place his father was a variety of pituitocentric, of the
post-pituitary inferior type, six feet two inches tall, exceedingly
corpulent, and, in the eyes of his son, the sharpest of observers and
the most sympathetic of men. He wished to make a physician out of his
son in order to carry on the medical tradition of the family: Erasmus
Darwin was a physician before him. His son, however, showed no
inclination for so learned and confining a profession and had to
be reproached by his father in these immortal words: "You care for
nothing but shooting dogs, and rat-catching, and you will be a
disgrace to yourself and all your family."

Cambridge came after Edinburgh, as he was rushed from medicine into
the clergy. But in vain. A friendship struck up with a naturalist,
Henslow, settled his career for him. Henslow heard of a trip of
general exploration the ship _Beagle_ was to take and recommended
Darwin as naturalist. The captain at first would not hear of the
proposal because of Darwin's nose, a typical pituitary proboscis. But
his prejudices were overcome, and Darwin sailed.

It was upon this voyage that Darwin made himself the greatest
naturalist of all time, and at the same time infected himself with
the virus of neurasthenia. At Plymouth, while waiting for the ship to
sail, he complained of palpitation and pain about the heart, probably
due to a transient hyperthyroidism, brought on by excitement. During
the voyage, which lasted five years, he was afflicted often by
sea-sickness. A ship-mate relates that after spending an hour with the
microscope he would say "Old Fellow, I must take the horizontal for
it" and lie down. He would stretch out on one side of the table, then
resume his labors for a while when he again had to lie down. Already
fatigability had to be fed with rest. A serious illness that Darwin
claimed affected every secretion of his body acted probably as the
exhausting drain upon his adrenal potential.

The return to England was the date of onset for a record of continuous
illness, aggravated by his marriage, apparently, for his misery
increased progressively after it. So much so that he was forced to
leave London altogether so as to avoid the strain of social life, even
that of meeting his scientific friends or attending scientific society
meetings fatiguing him to exhaustion. After such occasions there would
be attacks of violent shivering, with vomiting and giddiness. It was
necessary for him to impose upon himself an absolute regime of daily
routine. Any interference with it upset him completely, and made it
impossible for him to do any work. Early morning was the only time for
physical as we; as mental exertion. Evening found him thoroughly used
up, with every move an effort. Insomnia made him its prey. A curious
sensitiveness to heat and cold distressed him. In 1859, when the
"Origin of Species" appeared, he wrote to a friend that his health had
quite failed, and that indigestion, headaches, with a looming hopeless
breakdown of body and mind made his life a burden and a curse. The
twenty years of research he devoted to the problems of evolution were
one long torture. For sixteen more years, during which he worked upon
and produced immortal classics of biology, he was the most wretched
and unhappy sufferer from neurasthenia. His life was a continuous
alternation of small doses of work and large doses of rest. So he
was enabled to publish twenty-three volumes of original writing and
fifty-one scientific papers. Living a sort of quasi-sanitarium life,
with the rules and regulations of one undergoing a rest cure for
thirty-six years, he thus accomplished infinitely more than the
millions who have led the strenuous life. That he thus survived, as a
genius, among the perils of an intellectual nature in an environment
for which his adrenals sentenced him to destruction, must be put down
in large measure to the ministrations and good sense of wife and
children who supplied him with the endocrine energy he lacked. All
these details I have given in the attempt to analyze the internal
secretion constitution of this great man of genius, to establish that
he really suffered from inadequate function of his adrenal glands, for
the symptoms of chronic though benign adrenal insufficiency coincide
in their mass effect with the story of his life. He was not a good
animal, as Herbert Spencer declared was a first sine qua non of the
successful life. He was a poor animal, the poorest of animals, because
he possessed poor adrenals. What saved him was his congenitally
superior pituitary (the nidus of genius) and the overacting thyroid,
which combined to compensate to some extent for his fundamental lack.
According to his son he rose early because he could not lie in bed,
and he would have liked to get up earlier than he did.

What other hints have we that in spite of his fatigue disease he was
a pituitocentric? The record of his physique and physiognomy,
documentary and that left in portraits and photographs. He was tall
and thin and his frame was naturally strong and large. Face was ruddy,
and his grey eyes looked out from under deep overhanging brows and
bushy eyebrows. The ears were large and prominent, the hair straight,
the nose broad and well developed. All these are distinctive pituitary
traits. The photograph of him taken by Maull and Fox in 1854 shows his
chin to be the square firm kind that goes with the ante-pituitary type
physique. (This photo is the frontispiece of the collection of essays
entitled "Darwinism and Modern Science," edited by A.C. Seward and
published in 1909). Charles Darwin, we may say, then, lived the
life of one with a hyperfunctioning pituitary, the anterior portion
dominating the posterior, a thyroid excess, and an adrenal much
deficient, the combination settling the fate of a grand intellect
in an invalid. It is interesting to note that an extant portrait
of Erasmus Darwin, Darwin's distinguished grandfather, shows a
pituitocentric, but with a rounder head and a fatter face, which point
to a predominance of the post-pituitary over the ante-pituitary.
Correspondingly, he was more speculative and poetic intellectually
than his grandson, and more irascible and imperious in his moods.

After 1872, when Charles Darwin was sixty-three years old, a marked
change for the better occurred in his health. For the last ten years
of his life the condition of his health was a cause of satisfaction
and hope to his family. "He was able to work more steadily with less
fatigue and distress afterwards." This is probably to be explained as
following the gonadopause hi him--the cessation of activity of the
interstitial cells. After this event, the adrenals in the male nearly
always function more efficiently, and well being is improved even
though the blood pressure often rises coincidently. In the relative
vigor of that decade we have another bit of evidence that the adrenals
had much to say over Darwin's life.

EPILEPTIC GENIUS

  He had a fever when he was in Spain
  And, when the fit was on him, I did mark
  How he did shake: 'tis true, this god did shake
  His coward lips did from their color fly;
  And that same eye whose bend doth awe the world,
  Did lose his lustre: I did hear him groan.

  --Julius Caesar.

Epilepsy, the "falling sickness" or "fits," is generally associated
with a deterioration or degeneration of mentality, and an inferior
personality is frequently an ingredient. Progressively increasing data
accumulate to incriminate more and more a disturbance of the endocrine
balance, on the side of multiple deficiencies, as the basic mechanism
at the bottom of a good many of them. Concurrent studies reveal that
abnormalities of the thyroid, the parathyroids, the ovaries and
testes, and even the thymus exist behind the attack. Investigation of
the content of the consciousness of the different kinds of epilepsies
from this point of view will doubtless bring to light some interesting
information. There is much to be done for the epileptic with this new
method of approach.

Epilepsy, just the same, may occur in men gifted with the sort of
transcendent ability called genius. Mohammed, Lord Byron, Dostoyevsky,
Flaubert, to name a few cases, are famous instances. The point to be
settled is whether epileptic genius, that is epilepsy with superior
ability, occurs most often in pituitocentrics, the epilepsy being
symptomatic of a pituitary struggling against barriers, tugging
against bonds. As mentioned, in such cases epilepsy appears as the
twin brother of migraine in genius. Should that be established,
we should have more evidence for the pituitary dominance of most
specimens of intellectual power. As a case in point let us take the
most famous of the epileptic geniuses--Julius Caesar, "When the fit
was on I marked how he did shake; tis true, this god did shake."

According to Plutarch, Julius Caesar was of slender build,
fair-complexioned, pale, emaciated, of a delicate constitution
(reminding us of Darwin), subject to severe headache and violent
attacks of epilepsy. In view of the work of Cushing, the concurrence
of "severe headache and violent attacks of epilepsy" is sharply
suggestive of a pituitary origin for both. In his seventeenth year
he was already engaged to be married, which proves his precocity. An
overactive, erratic pituitary could here also be held responsible.
Soon after he was proscribed by the dictator Sulla, and the first of
a series of epileptic convulsions is recorded. Shock tries the
pituitary, as well as the adrenals.

His sexual libido was of the quality that stimulated his soldiers to
sing celebrations of his exploits. The first woman he was engaged to
be jilted. Cornelia, his first wife, he divorced on the ground that
"Caesar's wife must be above suspicion." Matrimony committed twice
thereafter landing him in the divorce court, he devoted himself to
liaisons, one with Cleopatra. This sexual hyperactivity was probably
another pituitary trait.

The compound of intellectual and practical ability he realized was
of the rarest. It meant a most delicate balance between his
ante-pituitary, post-pituitary, adrenals and thyroid. He was an
orator, politician, historian, conqueror, and statesman. That his
thyroid functioned well can be deduced from a career which involved
more than three hundred personal triumphs as recognition from his
native city. On horseback, riding without using his hands, he would
often dictate to two or three secretaries at once. The masculine love
of glory and ambition, expression of a well-working ante-pituitary,
was combined with the effeminate echoes of an equally well-evolved
post-pituitary. No prima donna was more concerned with the care of
her skin, complexion and hair than he. The analogy extends even to
superfluous hair which he had removed, not by the modern electrolysis,
but by depilation with forceps and main force. The attendants at
his bath would polish his epidermis, for his satisfaction, until it
resembled alabaster or marble.

Caesar was not the kind of great man that Darwin was, and only
a rather muddled careerist because he had too much adrenal and
post-pituitary. But he was pituitocentric of a certain type. We
possess no authentic portraits or busts of him to go by. But the bust
in the Museum of Naples, for which he probably sat (some, H.G. Wells
among them, will not accept this), presents the sort of face that is
often seen in pituitary epileptics, and the features and skull of a
pituitocentric: long, large, well-modeled head eyebrows prominent,
with tendency to meet, aquiline nose and strong chin.

In these three, Napoleon, Nietzsche and Caesar, we have male
pituitocentrics, exhibiting diversities of life and tastes because of
differences in the co-working endocrine glands in their makeup. We
shall consider now a female pituitocentric who presents the strangest
contrasts in physique, physiognomy, conduct and character, dependent
upon a variation in the balance between the two portions of the
pituitary.

THE LEGEND OF FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE

All biographies consist of prevarications and all autobiographies
of fiction. That summing up of a mass of literature over which
industrious students have ruined their eyes, held good until after the
War, when things changed. Then Mr. Lytton Strachey, at one fell blow,
and with one magnificent masterpiece, hurdled the old idols and
established a new standard of deliberate accuracy in print. In his
"Eminent Victorians" he set the pace for the host of those who have
been stimulated by his good example, like Lady Margot Asquith.

Of the four Victorian respectable worthies Strachey has dissected as
ruthlessly as the anatomist a post-mortem, his portrait of Florence
Nightingale, the founder of the modern science and art of nursing, is
most interesting because it provides data of the utmost value to
the student of the endocrine basis of human personality. In the
conventional two-volume biography of this superwoman, she is pictured
as an intellectual saint, stepped from a stained glass window upon her
wonderful visit to a clay-smeared earth. The biographer, presenting
all the ins and outs of her body and soul as he has, makes her live
before us with a fresh vitality that is startling.

The species of life Florence Nightingale lived, involving as it did
struggle with a masculine world, and conquest of it, implies the
existence in her of certain masculine traits and marks, for the normal
feminine psyche is submissive rather than aggressive toward its
environment, human and otherwise. Belonging to a family in the highest
circles, it was upon the table d'hote of her destiny that she should
become a regulation debutante, careeristina, and successful wife and
mother. Instead, she chose to question the whole routine of the life
of her class, and in her diary she records her doubts and cravings,
and her revolt against what is assumed by her family and friends to be
the normal course of existence for her. The attitudes and questionings
in these passages, the religious feeling displayed, are distinctly
masculine. Most easily could the following, for instance, pass as
having been written by a man: "I desire for a considerable time only
to lead a life of obscurity and toil, for the purpose of allowing
whatever I may have received of God to ripen, and turning it some day
to the glory of His Name. Nowadays people are too much in a hurry
both to produce and consume themselves. It is only in retirement, in
silence, in meditation that are formed the _men_ who are called to
exercise an influence upon society." In a note-book she puts May 7,
1852, as the date upon which she was conscious of a call from God
to be a saviour. Now the vast majority of women who have remained
spinsters at 32, in spite of considerable personal attractions and
high natural ability, are visited by waves of emotional fervor for a
de-personalization of the self. But in the case of the subject, as
Strachey has so well shown, the call was pursued with a self-willed,
pitiless, unscrupulous determination, worthy of Satan himself upon the
most ferocious evil bent. In its pursuit indeed she became what her
latest biographer has called a "woman possessed by a Demon." All
necessary, not alone because if she had been meek and mild she would
have existed in futility, but because of the high percentage of the
masculine endocrines in her composition. It is most regrettable that
we have no statement of the findings of a gynecologic examination of
her. That she was almost consciously masculine may be inferred not
only from the way she bullied Lord Pannure and worked to death her
dearest friend with the angelic temper, Sidney Herbert, who was so
amiable that he could be driven by one who wrote: "I have done with
being amiable. It is the mother of all mischief." She could also
write, "I attribute my success to this: I never gave or took an
excuse. Yes, I do see the difference now between me and _other men_.
When a disaster happens, I act, and they make excuses."

Lytton Strachey has painted superbly all this in his essay. But for us
his most significant passage is the following: "When old age actually
came, something curious happened. Destiny, having waited patiently,
played a queer trick upon Miss Nightingale. The benevolence and public
spirit of that long life had only been equaled by its acerbity. Her
virtue had dwelt in hardness, and she had poured forth her unstinted
usefulness with a bitter smile upon her lips. And now the sacredness
of years brought the proud woman her punishment. She was not to die
as she had lived. The sting was to be taken out of her: she was to be
made soft; she was to be reduced to compliance and complacency. The
change came gradually, but at last it was unmistakable."

"_There appeared a corresponding alteration in her physical mould._
The _thin, angular_ woman, with her haughty eye, and her acrid mouth,
had vanished, and in her place was the _rounded, bulky form_ of a _fat
old lady_, smiling all day long. Then something else became visible.
The brain which had been steeled at Scutari was, indeed,
literally growing soft. Senility--an ever more and more amiable
senility--descended."

We have here an absolutely typical pituitary history, with another
case of pituitocentric natural ability. What happens when pituitary
hyperfunction or superiority becomes underfunction or inferiority is
precisely as Strachey has described so cleverly of the "ministering
angel": the acrid, thin and keen degenerate every time into the
amiable, fat and dull. Just as Napoleon was transformed by the
mutations of his pituitary, so was the Saint with the Lamp. And in
both instances the contrasting modifications, from one extreme of
glandular function to the other, supply us with the clue to the secret
hand of their inner being and becoming, which worked upon the twists
and turns of circumstance about them as a sculptor upon clay.

The official biography by Sir Edward Cook contains three portraits,
representing three different stages, which bear out the pituitocentric
thesis of her personality and life history. One as she was at 25, and
pictured by Mrs. Gaskell: "She is tall; very straight and willowy in
figure; thick and shortish rich brown hair; very delicate complexion
... perfect teeth ... perfect grace and lovely appearance ... she is
so like a saint." The face is long and oval, of the post-pituitary
kind. Then gradually the ante-pituitary gained an ascendency in the
concert of her internal secretions, so coloring her life with its
masculine tints, and altering her face as well as her disposition. The
photograph of her taken when she was 38 shows a quadrangular outline,
and all the acridity that impressed Strachey. The last picture of her,
a water color drawing made in 1907, shows a round visaged old dame,
who might be the peasant grandmother of two dozen descendants. Little
patches of red over the cheek bones remind one of myxedema and
indicate that toward the very end of her life her thyroid failed her
as well as her pituitary. So that our biographer relates: "Then by
Royal Command, the Order of Merit was brought to South Street, and
there was a little ceremony of presentation. Sir Douglas Dawson, after
a short speech, stepped forward and handed the order of the insignia
to Miss Nightingale. Propped up by pillows, she dimly recognized
that some compliment was being paid her. 'Too kind--too kind!' she
murmured; and she was not ironical." In the days of pituitary and
thyroid hyperfunction we may be sure she would have been caustically
and penetratingly ironical.

THE EXPLANATION OF OSCAR WILDE

The case of Oscar Wilde, as one of the high tragedies of English
Literature and Life, attracted the attention of the whole world in its
heyday, and even today evokes controversy. As a literary figure and
artist, the poet of the Portrait of Dorian Gray, and "De Profundis,"
belongs without a doubt to the immortals. As a convicted criminal, who
served for two years at hard labor in Reading jail, and afterwards,
a prey to chronic alcoholism, died in obscurity in Paris, he still
remains a subject of whispered conversation in private, and his crime
a taboo to the public, mentionable only at the risk of arousing the
terrible odium sexicum of the prurient majority. Oscar Wilde was a
homosexual of a certain type. In view of the previously laid down
considerations concerning the endocrine genesis of homosexuality, how
are we to explain him, and his natural history?

As with the other exemplars of genius examined we need here, too, to
gain some insight into his "internal secretion heredity." His father,
Sir William Wilde, was a surgeon. Photographs of him show the long
and broad face of a pituito-adrenal centered individual, with
a corresponding duplex incarnation in the face, the upper half
strikingly spiritual, the lower curiously animal.

He was active, practical and eminently successful. His wife recalls
Florence Nightingale, in face, figure and conduct (people who are
built alike as regards their internal secretions are those whom we
recognize as similar physically and psychically). She, too, was a
pituito-adrenal, and in so far resembled her husband. But as in a
woman ante-pituitary and adrenal superiority make for masculinity,
she must be classed as a masculinoid type of woman. She was socially
aggressive, and took part in the revolutionary movement of her time in
Ireland. Thus we find that Oscar Wilde was the result of a mating of
internal secretions acting in the same direction. The process might be
compared to parthenogenesis.

It is on record that when enceinte his mother often expressed the
wish that her child be a girl. When a boy was born, she was immensely
disappointed. To compensate for her disappointment, she brought him up
a good deal like a little girl. She had him dressed in girls' clothes
at an age when most boys are violent destroyers of clothing. She would
hang massive jewelry upon him, for the delight of playing with the
resultant stage picture as a satisfaction for her discontented
desires. In the light of modern psychology, and our formulization of
her endocrine status, we must put down her conduct to a suppressed
homosexual craving. Had her son been built along the lines of strong
emphatic masculinity, her influence, though vicious, would probably
have found no congenial soil, and would have died out altogether after
his contacts with the outer world, beginning with school. No matter
how she would have conditioned his vegetative system temporarily,
his internal secretions, released then from compression, would have
asserted themselves and determined his fate differently. However, it
is quite possible that if such had been the case Oscar Wilde, the
aesthete, the paradoxer, the disciple of Walter Pater and Baudelaire,
would have stayed in the land of the to be born. I mean that then
we would not have had Oscar Wilde, but another person, genius or
commonplace, who also might have borne the name of Oscar Wilde.

That was not to be. The singular assortment of endocrines that mingled
their activities to make Oscar Wilde shaped a personality which we
must classify as the thymocentric (thymus-centered). Why this should
be so is an interesting question. Pituito-adrenal plus pituito-adrenal
of his heredity should make two pituito-adrenals according to
elementary arithmetic and the rule of three. A cancellation of the two
factors of the equation rather than addition seems to have occurred.
The result was a persistent thymus superiority, with an instability of
the other two main glands involved.

How do we know that Oscar Wilde was a thymocentric? Because in his
fullest development he exhibited all the earmarks of the thymus
pattern. We possess a number of good pictures and descriptions of him,
as he was really a contemporary, and would probably be alive today
if he had been put in a hospital for proper treatment instead of in
prison. An excellent description is that of Henri de Regnier's: "This
foreigner (Wilde) was _tall_, and of _great corpulence_. A _high_
complexion seemed to give still greater width to his clean shaven
face. It was the _unbearded_ (glabre) face that one sees on coins. The
_hands_ ... were rather _fleshy_ and _plump_." The points of immediate
interest are the height, the complexion and the beardlessness. One
classic variety of the thymocentric is tall, has a baby's skin, and
has little or no hair on the face. A passage from a narrative written
by one of his warders confirms the last condition decidedly. "Before
leaving his cell to see a visitor, he was alway careful to conceal, as
far as possible, his unshaven chin by means of his red handkerchief."
Bristles on the chin, with little or none on the cheeks, is the
inference. It is important to stress the thymocentric significance of
this glabrosity of the face. Another sign to be put in italics was the
quality of his voice. It has been described as a beautiful tenor, when
he had it under perfect control, and high pitched and strident when
under the influence of passion or temper. Such a voice would be the
product of a larynx remaining partly or completely in the infantile
state, as in a woman's. That, and the large breasts he is said to have
had, point again to the thymus-centered constitution. All in
all, there can be no doubt that Oscar Wilde was a case of status
lymphaticus, the technical name for the thymus-centered personality.

As happens in a number of thymocentrics, his pituitary must have
attempted to compensate for the endocrine deficiencies always present
in them. The exceptional size of his head was a pituitary trait.
Finding, possibly making, plenty of room for itself to grow, for some
unknown reason, in an extraordinary fashion, it reinforced the love of
the beautiful that is part of the feminine post-pituitary nature, with
an intellectual ability and maturity that was at first all-conquering.
In the face of a society organized for pure masculine and pure
feminine types, disgrace and disaster at last overtook him with almost
the ruthlessness of natural selection wiping out an unadapted sport
suddenly cropping up in an environment. In prison he suffered from
severe splitting headaches, which were probably due to changes in his
pituitary. Described as being directly over the eyes, they haunted him
until his death, and may have had a good deal to do with the absinthe
addiction he acquired.

THE TREATMENT OF GENIUS

The problem of Oscar Wilde raises an ethical question that still
remains to be finally answered. Granting that all of society should
one day see him and his kind as a peculiar and specific constitutional
product of an odd intermixture of internal secretions, what should
be done with him and them? It is easy to play with words like
"degenerates." But still, we do not condemn imbeciles, idiots or
defectives, or other substandard, subnormal creatures to the prisons.
For the sake of the good opinion society would maintain of itself,
it sends the latter nowadays to hospitals, sanitaria, or their
equivalents, where protection for itself without punishment for them
may be practised. But is confinement, or even treatment the solution?
For we have to consider what society would lose by cutting such
abnormals off from itself, and them from its stimulations. A number
of artists have been built like Oscar Wilde, musicians in particular.
Without them, would there not be a great gap, a yawning absence, in
the world's culture?

Modern diagnosis and modern therapy might have done a great deal for
Napoleon, Nietzsche, Julius Caesar, Florence Nightingale, Oscar Wilde.
Were they alive today, and willing to submit themselves to scientific
scrutiny, the X-ray would tell us of the state of the pituitary and
thymus in them, chemical examinations of the blood the condition of
the thyroid and adrenals, detailed investigation of the body and mind
a flood of light upon their maladies as well as their personalities.
Therapy might have relieved Napoleon of his attacks, and so, halting
the creeping degeneration of his pituitary, made Waterloo impossible.
But then, would we have had the Emperor at all? Would there have been
enough of that instability that drives on the genius to his goal?
Nietzsche might have been relieved of his headaches, and Caesar of
his epilepsy--but then, would not--with correction of the underlying
streams of activity on the part of the other glands of the internal
secretion to compensate--their peculiar superiority and distinction,
and the fruits of their lives as by-products, have been destroyed.
Florence Nightingale, too, might have been a softer and more human
person. But then would she have revolutionized the practice of
nursing? Oscar Wilde possibly might have been made over into a
heterosexual. But then would not the world be the poorer without "De
Profundis," let us ask? To state the problem in the most general
terms: how much abnormality are we to tolerate (I speak, of course, of
malignant abnormality, and disregard benign abnormality altogether)
for the sake of the valuable that is concomitant? How much are we
to stand of that which degrades the germ-plasm while it raises the
mind-plasm of the race? The Flowers of Evil. Destroy or modify the
roots, change the seed, and the buds will bloom, if at all, not
orchids, but dull brown commonplaces.

What means may be licensed for the attainment of a worthy end is
perhaps the broadest aspect of the problem. The instruments of Man's
ascent to divinity may arouse his instinctive repulsions, dislikes,
and destructive passions. The study of the internal secretions is
putting and will put the most powerful apparatus for the control of
the abnormal into our hands. What are we going to do with them?

It does not follow that because we are beginning to understand the
normal that we are to establish one fixed absolute standard of the
normal. In view of all the possible mixtures, permutations and
combinations of the endocrine glands, that may construct an
individual, it is possible to conceive a million types of normals.
For normality means harmony, the harmonious equilibrium between the
hormones, which tends to continue itself, because it does no harm to
itself. So there are all sorts and conditions of men and women who
are classed as normals. We need create no inquiry into the value of
raising the subnormal to the normal level. It is when we come to
consider the possibility of lowering the supernormal (in certain
respects) to the normal, that we pause and hesitate. Traditional
morality assists not, but hinders us here.

Whatever the race may ultimately decide, it is safe to predict that it
is now somewhat possible, and will become more and more possible, to
regulate or even check the ills of genius, without interfering with
its highest evolution and expression. For example, Bernard Shaw, to
take a living man of genius, is pretty visibly a pituitocentric of the
well-balanced variety. He has the height, the facial features, the
hands, and the sort of mentality that run together in his endocrine
make-up. He also has the headaches. It is quite probable that feeding
him pituitary gland extract in the proper dosage would relieve him of
his headaches. A process might be started in his pituitary, however,
that would diminish its extraordinary output which has assisted
to make his brain so brilliant. The possibility, nevertheless,
is excessively remote as the pituitary predominance in him is so
overwhelming, that nothing short of surgery, nature's or the medical
graduate's, could really affect that overmastering eminence. The time
will come, though it is not yet by a long, long road, when we shall
be able to intervene, and perhaps meddle, in nature's most intimate
plans. The right of the power to modify, like the power to kill, will
be defined and limited by common agreement before that goal will be
reached.




CHAPTER XII

APPLICATIONS AND POSSIBILITIES


The knowledge that the shape and action of a man's body as well as
his mind depend on the internal secretions inspires the hope of the
emergence of a hitherto inconceivable controlling power over human
life in the future. For in the wake of chemical discovery there has
always come chemical control. The nature of chemical research, the
necessity for clear thinking, accurate measurement, and experience
in the actual handling of materials, the fundamental tradition and
technique of the science, have made and will make the practical
applications about which we today may only speculate. What the study
of the internal secretions suffers from, at the beginning of the third
decade of the twentieth century, is insufficient appreciation of its
meaning for mankind. It is true that there are thousands of workers
scattered throughout the world contributing their mites to the general
store. They increase yearly, almost daily, and their achievements,
in spite of an uncritical enthusiasm in some quarters and a
semi-charlatanism in others, have been and continue magnificent. But
they are pecking at a mountain which requires organized, massive,
engineering organization for its blasting.

The crying need is for an international institute, endowed and
equipped for investigation upon the proper scale, with all the
available appliances and methods already worked out and at hand. Such
an institution would possess the right chemical laboratories for
the making of blood analyses, metabolism examinations, and tests of
endocrine functions. There would be X-ray machines and experts to
radiograph the pituitary, pineal and thymus glands when possible.
There would be psychologists to carry out intelligence tests,
determine emotional reactions, and group mental aberrations,
deficiencies and defectives. There would be statisticians, trained in
biometrics, to criticize and compare data obtained. There would be
anthropoligists to note and measure variations in angles and curves,
ratios and quotients of the external conformation of the body.
Internists would record the history and status of the organs and
viscera. There would be librarians to collect, abstract and collate
the vast, accumulating literature. In short, the mystery of
personality, the most marvelous, complex, and variable process in the
universe, would be attacked and at length penetrated systematically
and persistently, with the ideal of absolute control of its
composition as the goal in view.

The nature of the researches? They would be infinite in their variety
and significance. Their practical by-products, dropped in the pursuit
of knowledge by the scientist, as Atalanta's lover the golden apples
in his race, to assuage the scent of the hard-headed business man,
would be profitable enough for any country in peace or war, to pay
for itself ten times over and at compound interest. A volume could be
filled with suggestions for interesting and promising investigations.
But we may glance at some of the immediately useful aspects that might
exercise those concerned with the everyday life of men, women and
children.

THE ENDOCRINE EPOCHS OF LIFE

There is no more famous classifications of the epochs of life
that mark off the milestones of the individual's evolution than
Shakespeare's Seven Ages. So different is he at those different stages
of his development, so changed his body and mind that it has become a
part of popular physiology that we are entirely made over every seven
years, and that no cell in the organism lasts longer than that. The
tradition certainly does not apply to the brain and nervous system,
for the number of brain cells is fixed at birth, and cannot be
increased, only decreased, because they are too highly specialized to
reproduce themselves.

What transfigures the individual as the years go by is no simple wear
and tear of the tissues, nor the replacement of old cells by new. It
is the rearrangement of relationships among the ductless glands, the
shifting of influences from the predominant to the subordinate, and
vice versa, in the constellation of the internal secretions, that
determines the unfolding of the personality. The transformations raise
doubt sometimes as to the reality of personal identity. What actually
happens in the changes from childhood to adolescence, from adolescence
to maturity, and so on, is the sloughing of one internal glandular
dominance for another.

Growth, as a general name for the mutations, the ensemble of somatic
and psychic differentiation, from year to year, passes through five
epochs that are standard for the normal. The normal is the being who
harmonizes with his environment, and yet reacts with it because of
recurring needs within him. His endocrine equation settles what is
unique and different in him. But the gland which flourishes during the
epoch as its time of triumph, when it has its day, determines what
makes him like his fellows.

From this point of view it becomes permissible to speak of the five
Endocrine Epochs. Similarities and resemblances of mind and body
between people at a given period of life, childhood, youth, maturity
must be put down to their common government by the salient endocrine
of the epoch. So one may list:

  Infancy as the epoch of the thymus
  Childhood as the epoch of the pineal
  Adolescence as the epoch of the gonads
  Maturity as the epoch of whatever gland is left in control as the
  result of the life struggle.
  Senility as the epoch of general endocrine deficiency.

Infancy as the epoch of the thymus explains why, in any given
geographic locality, the babies look alike and act alike. Specialists
in the observation and treatment of infants have noted that not until
after the second year is any tendency to differentiation discernible
to any extent among them. It is only after the second year, or
somewhere around that time, that the child begins to individuate, and
distinct individual traits and a personality manifest their outlines.
The thymus is the great inhibitor of all the glands of internal
secretion. By its checking activity upon the other members of the
endocrine system, the thyroid and pituitary in particular, it gives
the baby time to grow in bulk, which is its chief business during the
first two years of its existence. It quadruples its birth weight. The
brain and nervous system complete their growth in mass by the end of
the fourth year. Recall the experiments of Gudernatsch working with
tadpoles, who showed that feeding with thymus produced giant tadpoles
whose metamorphosis into frogs was inhibited, while feeding thyroid
produced frogs the size of flies. Differentiation occurred without the
preliminary increase in mass usual. As differentiation and bulk thus
appear antagonistic, at least at the beginning of growth, the function
of the thymus, at a maximum during infancy, seems then to be to
restrain the differentiating endocrines, until sufficient material
has been accumulated by the organism upon which the differentiating
process may work.

After the second year, the thymus begins to shrink. That is to say,
officially its involution begins. Careful dissection will demonstrate
some thymus tissue even in a normal subject up to the fourteenth year.
This refers to the average normal, for the large thymus may continue
large and grow larger after the second year in the type of individual
designated in a preceding chapter as the thymocentric.

If the thymus retrogresses after the second year, what takes its place
as a brake upon the forward driving impulses of the other endocrines?
We have every reason for assigning that role to the pineal. It
performs its service mainly, in all probability, by inhibiting the
sex stimulating effect of light playing upon the skin. Since it is
especially a sex gland inhibitor, the thyroid and pituitary become
freer to exert their influences than under the thymus regime. And so
we find that it is after the second year that thyroid and pituitary
tendencies manifest their effects. The Pineal Era, from the second
to the tenth to fourteenth years, remains to be investigated from a
number of viewpoints interesting to the parent, the educator, and
the student of puericulture. Precocity is directly related to early
involution of the pineal. For just as the thymus involutes at the
second year, the pineal atrophies before the onset of adolescence.

Adolescence is the period of stress and strain throughout the somatic
and psychic organism because of the volcanic upheavals in the sex
glands. The history of the individual is dominated by them up to
twenty-five or so, when maturity commences in the sense of a relative
sex stability. They continue to exert a powerful pressure throughout
maturity. But life episodes and crises, diseases, accidents, and
struggles, experiences of pleasure and pain, as well as climatic
factors, settle finally which endocrine or endocrines are left in
control as a consequence of the series of reactions the period of
maturity may be analyzed into.

THE INTERPRETATION OF SENILITY

Senility inevitably follows maturity, not as night follows day by a
mathematical necessity, but because of the process of degeneration
which ultimately overtakes all the glands of internal secretion,
dominant as well as subordinate. Just why the degeneration must occur
no one can say. Injury to the endocrine organs of one sort or another,
ranging all the way from emotional exhaustion to bacterial infection,
is the reason usually considered sufficient. Just why recuperation and
regeneration do not preserve them in the elderly as they do in youth
is a problem to be solved when we understand the laws of regeneration,
at present almost totally beyond our control. Some say that it is a
matter of the wear and tear of our blood vessels, those rubber-like
tubes which transport food and drainage with nonchalant equanimity to
all cells as long as they last. In the classic phrase: a man is as
old as his arteries, ergo his ductless glands will be as old as their
arteries. And the age of arteries is simply a matter of wear and tear,
the resultant of the function which is universal among molecules.
Arteriosclerosis, the hardening of arteries, might be the whole story.

But there are certain experiments and considerations which rather
confute that easy explanation, or at least make clear that the mystery
is not so simple. The work of Steinach, a Viennese investigator, has
contributed most to the elucidation of the nonarterial factor in
senility. No one has asserted more loudly the importance of the
interstitial cells that fill in the spaces between the tubules of the
testes in the male, and the follicles of the ovary in females. Rats
have been his medium of study, for they are most easily procurable,
live fastest, breed, and withstand experimental and operative
procedures better than any other animal.

An old rat is like an old man in his dotage. His bald, shrivelled skin
covers an emaciated body. His eyes are dimmed by cataracts and his
breathing is labored and difficult because his heart muscle has lost
its tone. Huddled in a corner, life to him has become concentrated
into the desire for a little food, and immobility. If now, something
is done to his sex apparatus, a marvelous transformation may be
effected. That something no one could predict. It consists in slitting
the genital duct, which leads from the germinal cells to the exterior.
After the operation, the germinal cells, which grow into the
spermatozoa, atrophy and disappear, since they can no longer function.
As if released from some restraint, the interstitial cells, however,
multiply enormously. With their multiplication, the miracle of
rejuvenation is performed.

After some weeks the sluggish currents of being in the rat, which had
slowed down as a preliminary to stopping altogether, flow fast and
furious. Waves of new chemical substances inundate his cells. And they
respond like the fields that border the Nile after the annual flood.
All his tissues, skin, muscle, nerve, even bone, are restored. A
vitality is created which makes him bound and dart like a youth of his
species. In due time, though, senility returns. It is as if a storage
battery, recharged, runs down and becomes dead again. Slitting the
genital duct of the other testis, causing its interstitial cells to
hypertrophy and multiply, repeats the effects of the first experiment.
The organism responds again to the new waves of vitality that vibrate
through it. That it is recharged is demonstrated again by a revival of
sex appetite and sex activity. The female which had become an object
of indifference is reinstated as a creature to be sought and pursued.
The second period ends in its turn. And now entirely new interstitial
glands, in the form of fresh testes removed from a young animal, are
transplanted into the body of the old rat. Once more youth returns.
But now it burns itself more quickly than even before. An acute
exhaustion of the mind appears first. Then all the other phenomena of
old age steal back upon the old rat, and senility, firmly established
in the saddle, rides him to the end.

THE POSSIBILITIES OF REJUVENATION

Whatever other deductions may be extracted from these experiments,
they prove beyond a doubt the existence of an endocrine factor in the
process of aging, as well as an arterial. They also demonstrate that
the internal secretion of the sex glands, well advertised as it has
been as the Elixir of Youth that Ponce de Leon, and Brown-Sequard with
so many others, pursued in vain, is not the whole story. For if it
was, the duration of the new youth should be another span of life,
whereas in actuality it is only a fraction of that time. This fact,
together with a number of others, make clear that while the gonads may
be the jeune premier of the drama, the vitality of the plot depends
upon the other endocrines. Since old age is an exhaustion, permanent
and irreparable of _all_ the members of the ductless gland
directorate, the reason becomes clear for the temporary quality of the
rejuvenation effected by the procedures of Steinach.

Practically, then, the question at once arises: which of the glands in
particular are involved? There is first that ubiquitous agent in the
system, the thyroid. Chemical analysis of it has shown that the
iodine content decreases with the age of the individual, and becomes
specially low after forty. It is after the menopause in women that
myxedema, the disease of complete degeneration of the thyroid, and of
the physical and mental faculties, is most frequent. The thyroid
of old people exhibits, in varying degrees, signs of a similar
degeneration. Thyroid feeding, properly controlled, will clear up
certain of the deteriorations of mind and body observable in the aged.
The grossness of the features lessens, a number of the pains go,
muscular endurance increases, memory and intelligence do not remind
one so forcibly of the old dotard in his second childhood. Of course
the improvement at present achievable is only relative. But in the
prematurely aging, decay invading a half accomplished maturity,
marvels have been achieved at times with feeding of the gland.

The pituitary, too, begins to retrogress after the period of maturity.
And an early retrogression means a short maturity. In women, the onset
of an obesity, and coincidently, of a lazy and dull morale, coincides
with this declension of the pituitary powers. All the glands of
internal secretion, in fact, shrink and shrivel as old age advances.
Only, as in other relationships, the predominating endocrine stamps
its signature more visibly upon the documents of decadence than the
others. Pituitary types, as said, get fat and slow, thyroidal become
bulky and stupid or thin and sour, the adrenal dark, shrunken and
forever tired of life. So type emerges, even in all-around glandular
deficiency.

The problem of rejuvenation is the problem of recharging, or replacing
all of the glands of internal secretion, at least the most important,
the thyroid, the pituitary and the adrenals, as well as the gonads.
Longevity is perhaps largely a matter of preventing, or postponing
their wane. Beside, there is the prophylaxis of bacterial infections,
and their all embracing corrosions--which, too, have an endocrine
aspect.

Persistence of youth or juvenility may be manufactured by nature in
two ways. There may be a persistence of early glandular predominances.
We have seen what happens to the thymocentric. That a pineal-centered
juvenile or infantile type exists may be safely predicted. Nature's
only other mode of securing perpetual youth seems to be by prolonging
the time allotted to the sex gland crescendo.

As for the golden age of maturity itself, what humdrum people and
poets have despised as middle age, the margin of reserve of the ruling
hormone is a quantity almost malleable in our hands, but still to be
regarded with respect as a hard cold proposition by the physiologist.
In general, the continuance of any stage of development means the
maintaining of the glandular administration peculiar to it. So the
chubby debonair irresponsible whom nothing can touch is happy in the
possession of a pineal uncorrupted by the years, while the genius who
can turn out his best work at sixty-five must thank his pituitary for
standing by him to the end.

THE SCIENCE OF PUERICULTURE

There is a specialty now growing in the womb of science which in its
own good time will come to fruition as the study of the child's needs
or puericulture. Even today there exists a scientific basis for the
formulation of the principles upon which every child should be brought
up. Though we have had marvelous results from the campaigns to lower
infantile mortality, most of what has been done has been medical in
its interest, and so largely negative in its accomplishments. The
removal of the causes of evil no doubt gives the good its opportunity.
But how to raise a child, endowed with satisfactory ancestral stuff,
as a Grade A normal or supernormal, still remains to be erected into
an exact science.

A number of attempts have been abortive in this field. Why they have
failed to arouse the ardor of the parent has puzzled some of the
pioneers. Child-culture as the foundation of all systems of education
has continued more or less of a hope rather than an achievement
because of a lack of appreciation of the different constitutional
varieties of children. A certain amount of attention has been lavished
upon children needing special attention, those mainly suffering from
insufficient development of one sort or another. In the last decade or
so, an endeavour to focus upon the exceptional child, exceptional
in intelligence or some special creative endowment, has started an
interesting movement. All of them have suffered from the fallacies and
troubles of the pure psychologist who would handle mind as an entity
in a vacuum.

A realization of the different physical and psychic educational
needs of various children will arrive only when we see them as built
differently. Just as shoddy and silk, cotton and wool, alone or in
combination, all possess different qualities as wearing material, so
different children have varying capacities for the wear and tear of
education. The endocrine classification of the human race, applied
to children, will here yield a harvest to the educator and to the
country. Nothing is more evident than the diversified nature of the
needs of the various internal secretion types, once they are realized
as such.

The history of a thymocentric type, for instance, is predictable from
the very first few months of his life. Difficulties in feeding, in
habit formation and adaptation, in the reaction to infections, in
social play and so on, one may expect for him. The course of events
for the other endocrine types also follow laws of their own. It will
be above all in the _understanding_ of children, their make-up,
reactions and powers, that the biologist will achieve some of his
finest triumphs.

The educator will have to take account of the state of the pituitary
in estimating the normal intelligence, or influencing the abnormal or
subnormal intelligence. As well will he have to consider the thyroid
in the child whose conduct is refractory, even though his proficiency
in his studies is excellent. And the condition of the adrenal will be
ascertained in the types that tire easily, and that seem unable to
make the effort necessary or desirable. Periodic seasonal and critical
fluctuations in the equilibrium among the hormones will have to be
taken into account in the explanation of what have hitherto been put
down to laziness, naughtiness, stupidity, or obstinacy.

A child's capacity for education, essentially its capacity for the
highest and most productive kind of life, is limited by inherent
factors. These factors are two: the quality of the nerve tissue, its
ability to make a number of associations, and the quantity of the
internal secretions, measured by the maximum obtainable in a given
situation. These inherent factors explain, too, why children born
and bred in virtually the same environment show the most extreme
differences in educability. That the differences are inherited was
made evident by Galton's finding that the chance of the son of an
eminent man exhibiting eminent ability was 500 times as great as that
of the son of a man taken at random.

Every baby, then, is born with a combination of nerve cells and
ductless glands which determine its capacity for mental development,
that might never be realized, but could never be exceeded. If, in any
family, minor differences in educability are observed, they can be
put down to disturbance of these two factors occurring after the
fertilized germ cell had started to divide and reproduce itself. But
any marked falling off in either the nervous or endocrine factors has
to be considered pathologic, due to an impairment of them by adverse
environment.

Recent studies have amply established that the proportion of
certifiable mental defectives, and of a much larger class, the
subnormal but not certifiable class, is progressing by leaps and
bounds. It is perhaps the most absurd frailty of our present system
of education that it takes almost no account of innate differences in
educability. To spend money upon the teaching of these children along
lines where they are unteachable is not only waste pure and simple,
but crime, for it deprives the educables of their just due.

These, of course, are the crude and simple lines upon which the finer
and more complex evolution of the endocrine problems of the school
child will build. The fine art of education itself is crude and gross
and simple compared with what it might be, even as a beginning. The
science of education has yet to begin, as the offspring of that
science of the future, to which knowledge of the internal secretions
will contribute no little, the science of puericulture.

VOCATIONAL EDUCATION

It is difficult, indeed, to avoid becoming merely enthusiastic upon
the possibilities of the applications of the endocrines to the
educational domain. Happiness for the average individual consists of
a double success--success in his vocation (chosen or forced upon him)
and success in his sex life. A certain hue and cry has been raised in
the last few years concerning the vast and overwhelming importance of
sex in the happiness and even in the successes of a man's everyday
life. And no doubt there is a relation. Sublimation plays its part in
the explanation of vocational idiosyncrasies. The fact, however, that
perfect success in sex may occur with absolute failure in the career,
however, splits the problem for good into its realities: a physiologic
aspect as well as a psychologic.

So, as school education will have to take serious account of endocrine
anomalies and possibilities, will the institution which selects and
trains for a career. Vocational misfits have aroused the ardor of our
efficiency experts. And again, the sweeping psychological attack has
beaten its head against the stonewall of ignorance of constitutional
predispositions and tendencies of material. The attempt to erect
psychologic types for vocational selections could never make much
headway because it could only flounder in a swamp of metaphors,
product of the vices of its methods. Not that anyone would wish to
discard at all the psychologic mode of approach. But no science, in
the sense of accurate examination, was possible, in the matter of
classification for vocation, without the insight into the physiology
of the candidate that the analysis of his endocrine formula will
provide.

One need not dilate upon the value of such an examination.
Civilization has not yet learned how to pick its personnel. And so
artists and scientists, philosophers and politicians, financiers and
religious leaders, arise and survive by the operation of the laws of
probabilities and chances, rather than by any intelligent selection
and cultivation of material. The case, indeed, is simply a subdivision
of the vast subject: haphazard muddle in the conduct of life. A cry
has been raised for the superman, and a cry has been raised for a
method of anthropometry. For the lack of these two, it has been
said, all governments have been doomed to defeat. The study of the
endocrines will by no means supply a panacea. But as it will furnish a
means of approach to the determination of how men and women are built,
and why they are built differently, no one can gainsay the tremendous
advantages to the nation that will proceed to classify its population
accordingly, and know its strength and weakness in terms of the actual
generators of success and failure.

Suggestions have been offered in the preceding pages of concrete
applications of endocrine knowledge to the understanding of behaviour,
of the genius and commonplace, criminal and Puritan. And in the
chapter on historic personages, we tracked some of the story in
detail. This vein when explored will quarry untold riches. It has been
observed that financiers of mark, like great musicians, are special
pituitary types. Also that the financiers are voracious meat eaters
and the musicians inordinately fond of sweets. Differences in anterior
and posterior predominances might account for this. That we are
playing here with no phantasy is proven by the fact that we can effect
changes of tastes as well as of intellectual direction by appropriate
feeding of various glandular extracts. Just as much, indeed, as we can
influence sex susceptibility, and the reaction to sex stimulation, by
the artificial introduction from without of the proper hormones.

FATIGUE AND INDUSTRY

In industry, business and profession, the biologist will come more and
more to be called as consultant. Labor unions as well as the large
employers of labor, and their employment managers have given much
thought to the problem of fatigue. Just what fatigue is, why different
individuals tire at different rates, why some are constructed for
monotonous routine while others must have constant variety and change,
the relation to accidents and to quantity output, are a few of the
major lines of inquiry upon which the endocrines obviously have a
large bearing. To the employment manager, labor turnover and the
selection of personnel are adjacent fields of research.

Fatigue as an endocrine deficiency--a depressed state of one or
more of the glands of internal secretion, abolished when its normal
functioning is restored--is a general principle from which departures
of exploration of sub-problems will proceed. An endocrine organ will
secrete at a certain rate. When it is stimulated excessively, it will
eject extra amounts of its secretion. How long the period of excessive
stimulation may last must depend upon the secretion potential or
margin of reserve of the cells, varying from organ to organ, and from
individual to individual. After that, exhaustion and failure follows,
with the onset of the symptoms of fatigue.

A pretty demonstration of this process has been worked out in the
electrical stimulation of muscle. If a muscle, say the biceps, is
irritated by an electric current, it will contract. As the strength of
the current is increased, the degree of contraction becomes greater.
A sort of stepladder effect of increasing contractions may be thus
obtained. After a time, the electric shocks cannot cause a greater
contraction, but only a lesser. And if continued, the muscle will
cease to function because of fatigue. If now, when the muscle begins
to lag in its response, and its contractions to decrease, one injects
into a vein extracts of thyroid, parathyroid, or adrenal glands, they
will immediately reinvigorate the failing contractions. The injections
must be made before the fatigue is carried to the point of absolute
exhaustion. It follows that these glands normally pour into the
circulation substances which counteract the effect of fatigue
substances, and in fact make possible muscular recuperation from
fatigue throughout the day as well as in emergencies and crises.

Fatigue, conventionally recognized, is something acute and urgent. As
such it means a violent draining of the endocrine wells. But there
is also a chronic fatigue, which has been dignified with the name of
Fatigue Disease. Bernard Shaw once asked for someone to tell him
the name of the germ causing the symptoms of overwork. That being
impossible, he will have to be satisfied with the answer that it is
not a germ, but an internal secretion, or rather a defect of internal
secretion that is the cause.

Whether or not the adrenals have been damaged by past experiences,
and upon their capacity to respond to the necessities of an occasion,
fatigue reactions primarily depend. A quotation from Sir James
MacKenzie, most distinguished of modern English students of medicine,
summarizes the matter neatly. "Abelous, and Langlois and Albanese have
studied the relation of the adrenal bodies to fatigue.... They infer
that the muscular weakness following removal of the adrenals is due
to toxic substances. In view of our present knowledge of the
physiological action of adrenaline in its various forms, it seems more
probable that the weakness is to be explained by the absence of the
normal tone producing internal secretions of the bodies in question."
In other words, the adrenals regulate muscle tone. They produce
nature's tonics for weary tissues. The chronic lassitude of thousands
of our generation, suffering from "that tired feeling," may be put
down to chronic adrenal insufficiency.

It requires no superlative imagination to see that an adrenal poor
subject does not belong upon a job that involves muscle stress over a
long period, or indeed fatiguing conditions of any sort. Nor that a
thyroid poor individual is not the best choice for a position that
demands a keen, alert body and mind. In the selection of executives,
the nature and stamina of the pituitary will undoubtedly be taken very
seriously in the near future.

A certain hocus-pocus concerning character reading, a perverted
revival of the ancient phrenology and physiognomy, has invaded the
employment territory in America as the newest charlatanism. The study
of the internal secretions, including blood and X-ray examinations,
will surely assist the demand for a truly scientific estimate
of constitution and character that can be relied upon in the
classification and distribution of personnel.

THE PROSPECTS FOR PUBLIC HEALTH

By their effects upon the endocrines, public health influences like
food, clothing, sleep and overpressure and last but not least,
_disease_, the so-called diseases of childhood, possess a tremendous
importance in limiting the output of the educable. They act to
subtract from and so to lower the rating, the capacity of the
germ-plasm. Most material and vital of these influences are the common
diseases of children, for they strike directly at the glands of
internal secretion.

Measles, scarlet fever, diphtheria, mumps, and the others have long
been accepted as providential visitations for sins known or unknown.
That children had to have them and were better off when they had them
has become part of the tradition of the laity, fostered by the lazy
ignorance of previous medical generations. But today we are beginning
to ask ourselves why children must have these endemic infections
of their age. The pathologist goes farther and asks the reason for
certain apparent immunities. He asks why the little boy who sleeps
with his brother sick with scarlet fever does not contract the
disease, even though not protected by a previous attack.

Determining why susceptibility to a special disease in a particular
case exists will constitute the greatest line of advance for the
understanding and prevention of disease, and so the perfection of
public health. In the last influenza epidemic countless physicians
were puzzled by the spectacle of men and women in the pink of
condition carried off in twenty-four hours while puny associates were
either passed over, or pooh-poohed their colds. Pathologists have
spent their energies fruitfully upon the infectious causes of disease,
the microbes and parasites especially. But now, having solved most of
those problems, the vital question of why an organism permits itself
to be attacked is pushing itself to the front. Why a peculiar ailment
selects its victim, why the bacillus finds a fertile soil, is the
neglected problem, which must be solved before the abolition of
disease and its carriers will be remotely conceivable.

Long ago, Hippocrates, revered founder of the art of medicine,
recognized that there was a specific affinity of disease for
individuals with more or less the same characteristic somatic and
psychic traits and trends. Tuberculosis, for instance, was noted for
its frequency in long-skeletoned, thin persons, remarkably optimistic.
And the plethoric, choleric nature of the sufferer from gout has
become proverbial. Before the era of the great bacteriologic
discoveries of the eighties and nineties, the concordance of esoteric
racial and personal markings was a great help in diagnosis to the
physician. For he realized, though he sometimes credited it to his
clinical intuition, that it was a certain type of personality that was
liable to the specific disease.

But personality and its reactions, normal and abnormal, are determined
by the endocrines. So we should find that particular infections
run with special internal glandular predominances. For the picture
presented by an infection, temperature, rash, prostration, are the
details of the general reaction of the organism in the face of a
new situation, the presence of a powerful, destructive invader.
Information has accumulated that the invader is powerful and
destructive, as well as selective, because of endocrine deficiency of
one sort or another in the body it has attacked. Work of a number of
investigators has indicated that an individual's susceptibility or its
reverse, resistance, is intimately subjected to the derangements or
harmonies of the endocrine system.

Comparison of the endocrine type and the disease assaulting has
yielded an even more interesting principle. Knowing the state of the
internal secretion reservoirs enables us to predict the liability to
certain of these infections of childhood. Diphtheria has been found to
occur most virulently among adrenal poor individuals. Moreover, they
are left poorer in adrenal afterwards. It follows that they would be
assisted by the feeding of adrenal. Mumps is a sickness that sometimes
permanently injures the gonads: the testes or ovaries. The thyroid
dominant, whose system is rich in thyroid, will rarely suffer from any
of the common diseases of children--if at all, from measles. Op the
other hand, those who have every infection of the period, and who, as
their mothers say, seem to get everything, are those whose system
is thyroid poor. Thyroid poverty is a splendid enticement to the
universal microbe. The thymocentric stands all diseases poorly. The
pituitary type is more liable to epidemic meningitis and infantile
paralysis, typhoid and scarlet fever.

The public health officer of the future will be armed with a new
weapon in his fight against the spread of an epidemic. He will be able
to classify the endocrine traits of the population exposed, and to
advise a course of glandular feeding for the types specially liable.
The Schick test for diphtheria susceptibility is an illustration
of one method of approach to the problem of the epidemiologist in
settling who needs protection. The endocrines will assist him in the
great body of diseases for which no immunity test is at hand. Should
another influenza epidemic come along, for instance, the proper
handling, from the endocrine standpoint, of the thymocentrics and
the related adrenocentrics would help considerably in lowering the
mortality.

Endocrine types have other tendencies, which when studied and
controlled, will decimate the great assassins of middle age: heart
disease and kidney disease, with accompanying degenerations of the
blood vessels and circulation. The adrenocentric tends to get up a
hyperacidity of the stomach and a high blood pressure, besides certain
forms of diseases of the lungs. The thyrocentric is predisposed to
heart disease, as well as intestinal disturbances. The pituitocentric
is liable to periodic and cyclic upsets in his health.

Narcotism, the craving for narcotic or stimulant drugs, and its
subvariety, alcoholism, has been found most often among the
thymocentrics. Any type of endocrine inferiority, interfering with
success in life, may lead to the habit of drug addiction as one way
out. But the blood and tissues of the thymocentric appear to become
habituated to the narcotic stimulant more easily than the other types,
and so to demand it with a physical imperative comparable to the food
or sex urge. Among artists, philosophers and statesmen, on the other
hand, actively productive and so contrasted with criminals and
degenerates drug addiction has frequently been a mode of endocrine
compensation. That is, the drug produced temporarily the effects of
the internal secretion lacking or insufficient. Thus the effects of
cocaine may be compared with the effects of thyroid. But while there
is a normal mechanism for thyroid detoxication, the cocaine or heroin
derivatives mark the tissues permanently with their scars and deform
the personality.

THE HYGIENE OF THE INTERNAL SECRETIONS

All these protean expressions of endocrine determination may now begin
to be looked upon with the hopeful and optimistic attitude of him who
understands cause and effect and can control. The advances made in the
last ten years in the practical manipulation of the ductless glands
from without, the introduction of glandular extracts by feeding or
injection, and the modification of their structure and function by
surgery, the X-ray and radium, and other procedures, enable us
to regard more confidently the problems hitherto accepted as the
insoluble and intricate handiwork of Fate. Fate may have woven the
patterns of our being. But as we commence to probe the machinery and
to examine the looms more carefully, we begin to understand why the
wheels creak, and why there are seconds and odd lots in the product as
well as the rare and precious firsts. Moreover, we are learning how to
handle the machinery ourselves. The abdication of Fate can therefore
be confidently expected in due time.

However, we have yet to begin, and we can begin with prevention. The
theory of Adler, that some organ inferiority is responsible for much
unhappiness in life has received much advertisement in conjunction
with the doctrines of the Freudians. It is a theory of little scope
when applied to the eyes, ears, heart and so on because only a small
minority of the cases are of that kind. But as we have seen, a
deficiency of an internal secretion, an endocrine inferiority,
reverberates throughout all the cells. Not only the mind, but all of
the members of the organism must strain and co-operate to make up for
the break in the balance.

Endocrine inferiority is indeed the most frequent organic inferiority.
And we may explain a number of mental types upon that basis. Thus the
inferior gonado-centric, who has something wrong with his reproductive
organs, will evolve in one of two directions. If his adrenal and
thyroid are of poor quality, he will become the secluded introvert,
shut off from the interests of normal life. He will enter the
borderland of insanity if pituitary difficulties supervenes. If, on
the contrary, the adrenal, thyroid and pituitary are present in
a certain proportion, he will become the active, aggressive,
never-resting, keen, and relentless fanatic reformer. A woman who is
gonad deficient with a superior adrenal will suffer from virilism
and specialize in the extreme tactics and mythology of the feminist
movement. A number of life reactions are classifiable as the strivings
of endocrine inferior individuals to overcome their sense of
inferiority. The unconscious vegetative system and the system of
consciousness are both modified by the weakness of a link in the
glandular chain.

What, therefore, is to be recommended in the prophylaxis of the
natural deterioration of the wells of life, the ductless glands? For
even if we may be able to replenish them when they dry up, would it
not be better to delay their dessication? The hormones reply to every
call of life and respond in every reaction. The normal constructive
process of their cells remanufactures what has been lost, and the
original capacity to respond is restored. If, though, the rate of
destruction and loss outruns the rate of repair and construction, they
will be permanently damaged. This is what occurs in shock, serious,
severe accidents and injuries, prolonged infections and diseases,
profound continued emotions, and the wear and tear of overwork. The
prevention of these excessive fatigues of the endocrine system in one
or all of its parts, and especially the prevention and enfeeblement of
the diseases of children which injure them at a period when they are
most sensitive to injury, is the task of the endocrine hygienist.
Periodic examinations, to check up the balance sheets of the hormone
factories and to measure the amount of their damage by means of blood
analyses, will provide the most valuable method in the campaign to
lengthen the productive and enjoying span of life.

THE TREATMENT OF CRIME

Endocrine hygiene will discover no wider or more fruitful area for
exploration and control than that of crime. For more than a generation
there have been attempts at a criminology, and a new understanding and
control of crime. In the United States a concomitant sentimentalism
has concocted measures like the honor system which, naturally failing
of their purpose, have undermined confidence in the idea of scientific
diagnosis and treatment of crime. As someone has noted, to ask a
criminal to promise not to misbehave, when discharged from prison,
is like asking a typhoid fever patient to promise not to have a
temperature above ninety-nine degrees the next morning. For a large
proportion of criminals--the percentage has yet to be determined,
although the most recent police commissioner of Chicago has estimated
it at ninety per cent--punishment for a period of time and then
letting him go free is like imprisoning a diphtheria carrier for a
while and then permitting him to commingle with his fellows and spread
the germ of diphtheria.

Of course, the doctrine of responsibility is all tangled up with our
attitude towards and treatment of crime. Though clear thought makes
mandatory the recognition of a universal cause and effect law,
practical common sense has defined free will. Consent or the
withholding of consent to a given course of action has been the
criterion of responsibility.

In practice, the limitation of responsibility will depend upon the
insertion of extraneous factors into the formula of consent. The
pragmatic test has been and will be the probability that the
correction of the somatic or psychic condition would have prevented or
will prevent the consent to the crime. As long as no such condition
will be demonstrable, society for its own protection will have to
confine the unfortunate individual.

The character of the confinement, its duration, and the uses to which
it will be put should be dominated by the idea of discovering
the unknown criminal predisposition. If crime is an abnormality
scientifically studiable and controllable like measles, court
procedure and prison management will have to be transformed radically.
There is scattered throughout the world now a group of people who are
applying medical methods to the diagnosis and treatment of crime. They
are the pioneers who will be remembered in history as the compeers of
those who transformed the attitudes toward insanity and its therapy.
The insane were once condemned and handled as criminals are in most
civilized countries yet. The criminologic laboratory as an adjunct to
the court of justice, like that associated with the court of
Chief Justice Olson in Chicago, remains to be universalized. What
contribution to a more rational treatment of the criminal will the
study of the internal secretions make?

It has been shown that the greater number of convicts are mentally and
morally subnormal. To explain the subnormality, the criminologist
has conducted and will continue to conduct investigations into the
heredity and early environment of the criminal, his education and
occupation, the social and religious influences to which he was
subjected, and the intelligence test quotient. The conditioning of the
vegetative system and the endocrine status of the prisoner, however,
will without a doubt come to occupy the leading positions in any
interpretation of crime in the future.

Introspective observation of pre-criminal states of mind by so-called
normal persons reveals that in many of them there is an impairment of
reason and will power, in others an exaltation amounting almost
to hysteria. What are these but endocrine states of the cells,
experimentally reproducible by increasing or decreasing the influence
of the thyroid, the adrenals, the pituitary? Crimes of passion may be
traced in no small part to disturbances of the thyroid. A psychologic
examiner of a Pittsburgh court, interested in the subject, has found
an enlarged thyroid in over ninety per cent of delinquent girls.
Similarly, crimes of violence may be ascribed to a profound break
in the adrenal equilibrium. Criminal tendencies in women during
menstruation and pregnancy, periods of deep-seated mutation in the
internal glandular system, have long been noted. A kleptomania,
uncontrollable desire to steal, confined to the duration of pregnancy
alone, has been described. We have seen how the thymocentric,
especially if he possesses a small bony case for his pituitary, is
predisposed to crime. A recent study of twenty murderers in the State
of West Virginia showed them all to have a persistent thymus and the
thymocentric constitution. A study of the recidivists, those who
return for second and third offences, in one institution, disclosed
that a large majority had a subnormal temperature and an increased
heart and breathing rate. These are endocrine-controlled functions.
Conduct, normal or abnormal, being the resultant of the conflict of
conscious and subconscious impulses and inhibitions, the internal
secretions as controllers of the susceptibility of the brain cells to
impulses and inhibitions, must be held accountable for a portion at
least of the chemical reactions behind crime.

It is possible, by X-ray treatment of the thymus, to cause it to
shrink to more normal proportions. It is possible, by feeding various
glandular extracts, to correct deficiencies or excesses of their
function, and so to remedy the underlying basis for a criminal career.
Here and there work of this kind has been successfully carried out in
selected instances. What a suitable drive upon the whole matter would
yield in happiness to the individual and dollars and cents to society,
time alone will show.




CHAPTER XIII

THE EFFECT UPON HUMAN EVOLUTION


The ubiquitous and deep-seated influence of the internal secretions
upon life and personality comprises but a fraction of what is known,
and only a hint of what is to become known. There is an endocrine
aspect to every human being and every human activity, normal and
abnormal, internal process and its external expression, regulated
by laws of which we are beginning to catch a glimpse. Their control
promises us now a dominion over the most intimate and inaccessible
recesses of our lives in a way comparable only to the control we now
exercise over the forces and energies once revered as the instruments
of the gods--light, heat, magnetism, electricity. We have learned how
to control and change our environment. We are now learning, endocrine
research is now discovering, how to control and change ourselves.

The story of the evolution of the two types of control has many
analogies. When man ceased looking upon his surroundings as inhabited
by spirits of good and evil, as he conceived himself, and discovered
that they were composed of things malleable and analysable in his
hands, he became their master. When now he drops the old superstitions
about himself as a spirit, an emulsion of a spirit of good and spirit
of evil, and sees himself more and more clearly as the most complex
of chemical reactions, regulated and determined as are the simple
and complex chemical reactions around him, he will begin to rule and
modify himself as he rules and modifies them. Whether or not he will
ultimately come to this final lucidity of thought and action, it
behooves us to consider some of the uses to which our present
knowledge might be put.

Since every step of the daily routine or adventure, from waking to
sleeping, eating, drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, working,
idling, fighting, playing, feeling, enjoying, sorrowing, every shade
of emotion and nuance of mood, in short every phase of happiness
and unhappiness, are endocrine episodes in the life history of the
individual, the sphere of applications is as long and broad and deep
as life itself. Not only do the internal secretions open up before us
the great hope--that Life at last will cease to stumble and grope and
blunder, manacled by the iron chains of inexorable cause and effect.
They provide tools, concrete and measurable, that can be handled and
moved, weighed and seen, for the management of the problems of human
nature and evolution.

Every department of human life, the questions of labor and industry,
science and art, education, puericulture, international problems,
crime and disease, may be illuminated. War and Sex, those two master
interests of mankind, may be understood and handled sympathetically
as they have never before. The reactions of man alone, and man in the
crowd, will be clarified. The red thread of individuality which runs
through the woof and warp of all human affairs will be unraveled.

Inevitably, customs, morals, codes of procedure and practice,
institutions, all those expressions of opinion which make conduct,
all the currents which contrive the infinite variety of life, will be
transmitted into another set of values.

A remoulding, a remodeling will take place all along the line.
Manifestly an unstable thymocentric should not be treated as a
criminal, but treated in a sanitarium. A masculinoid woman needs
satisfactions not vouchsafed in the old "love, honor and obey" home.
How absurd it is to found codes of morality upon sermons or even the
latest psychologies. During the nineteenth century progress in physics
and mechanics overturned traditions thousands of years had painfully
toiled to erect. What is to happen when man comes at last to
experiment upon himself like a god, dealing not only with the
materials without, but also with the very constituents of his
innermost being? Will he not then indeed become a god? If he does not
destroy himself before, that is surely his destiny. For better or for
worse, we possess now in the endocrines new instruments for swaying
the individual as individual, and as related to other individuals, as
a member of a type, family, nation, species and genus.

THE BASIS OF VARIATION

The sense of likeness and the sense of unlikeness plays a decisive
role in the diurnal schedule of the individual. His sense of
resemblance to his father and mother, his kin and clan, mark him and
them off against the cosmos as an alliance of defense and offense. Yet
no matter how closely he is like them and they like him, he differs
and varies, they differ and vary, with a sort of mutual forgiveness,
because the amount of resemblance overtops the degree of variation. In
a paper on the "Rediscovery of the Unique," H.G. Wells emphasized the
unique quality of the individual, and how, in spite of the cleverest
devices of classification, living things ultimately escaped the
classifying net by virtue of their tendency forever to vary.

The individual is unique. Yet when all is said and done, the fact
remains that between individuals there is resemblance, and among them
variation. What is the reason for their resemblances and what is the
cause of their variation?

The conception of a particular chemical make-up of the individual,
statable and relatively controllable in terms of the internal
secretions, supplies a more rational and satisfactory method
of approach to the problem than any so far suggested as far as
vertebrates are concerned at any rate. In effect, the differences
between individuals may fundamentally thus be grouped among the
differences which distinguish other chemical substances. The
difference between water, technically known as hydrogen monoxide,
and the antiseptic fluid labeled hydrogen dioxide lies wholly in the
possession by the latter of an extra atom of oxygen in its molecules.
All the peculiarities and qualities by which hydrogen peroxide is
separated from water are referred to that additional quantum of
oxygen. So the diversity of constitution and appearance of two
brothers, alike in that they have inherited the same internal
secretion trends, may be traced to the superiority of the pituitary of
the one over the other.

Variation and resemblance are large issues, crucial material of the
science of biology upon which much has been thought and written. That
the proportion of the endocrines determines variation and resemblance,
heredity and evolution is a hypothesis advanced, supported by a large
amount of facts, and capable of the most interesting experimental
verification and observation. If a child resembles particularly either
of its parents, grandparents or relatives, there is good reason for
believing that it is because their endocrine formulas are very much
alike. When people apparently not blood-related at all resemble
one other, the same law must hold. Resemblances may be partial or
complete, and the degree will depend upon the amount and ratio of the
internal secretions involved.

The same endocrine constitutions will produce corresponding physiques,
physiognomies, abilities and characters. Deviations in endocrine type
from that of the original stock, more of one endocrine and less of
another, is at the bottom of the phenomenon of variation, basic for
the origin of new species as well as the extinction of the old. In
short, viewing the internal secretions as determinants, by their
quantitative variations, of a host of biologic phenomena furnishes a
concrete and detailed foundation for Darwin's theory of pangenesis.

INHERITANCE OF ACQUIRED CHARACTERS

Darwin's theory of pangenesis was an attempt to harmonize everything
known in his time about heredity. It supposed that the various
organs of the body gave off into the blood substances, themselves
in miniature, which were taken up by the sex cells, and so became
responsible for the development of their mother-organ in the newly
forming individual. Modern knowledge cannot accept all this as a
whole. But in a modified version, it has become the germ of a theory
of heredity of which J.T. Cunningham, of Oxford, is the chief backer.

Beginning with the traits and qualities which distinguish the sexes,
grouped as the secondary sex characters, he showed that they are
correlated with the special sexual function of the species in which
they occur. These traits appear only when the hormones occur which
are present in one sex and that only when the gonads of that sex are
mature. In some cases they appear only at the period of the year
when reproduction takes place, disappearing again after the breeding
season. Their presence makes certain cells develop in excessive
numbers at a particular spot in the organism (as in the growth of
breasts from a few sweat glands) or causes them to specialize (to make
hair on the face in man, or to grow antlers on the head of a stag).
After castration, the hormones being absent, all these points of
contrast between the sexes fail to appear. So by analogy we may
explain all somatic and psychic differentiation as functions of the
glands of internal secretion. Contemplated from the angle of the
effect of environment upon the endocrines, and a reflected action
upon the germ cells, we may outline a mechanism of the inheritance of
acquired characters at certain times and consequent adaptation. The
cycle of events would be as follows:

1. A state of lability of cells at a point because of increased or
decreased use.

2. An increased or decreased appropriation by them of the hormone
controlling their function.

3. A corresponding increase or decrease in function of the gland of
internal secretion and so,

4. An increased or decreased representation of it in the reproductive
sex cells in the gonads.

To take a classic illustration, the long neck of the giraffe. The neck
of certain animals living in a district populated by trees with high
branches would be in state of instability. If at the same time the
pituitary, for some reason, was unstable and reacted with an extra
supply of its secretion, it would stimulate the neck cells to
reproduce themselves. In turn the pituitary would become stabilized
in the direction of increased secretion, and hand on the component of
increased secretion to the sex cells. That component, in conjunction
with other factors, would therefore determine the emergence of a
definite species character. In other words, the glands of internal
secretion, as intermediaries between the environment and body, and
between the body and the reproductive sex cells or germplasm, tender
the clue to a phase of the puzzle of heredity, adaptation and
evolution. It is only a dotted outline of an explanation to be sure,
but one certainly capable of being filled in.

THE BEARING ON BREEDING

Since the endocrine glands are so subtly sensitive and responsive to
environment, and are at the same time so intimately concerned in the
process of inheritance--a law which sums up their influence upon
resemblance and variation in animals--there is no need to stress
their importance for the practical science and art of good breeding,
eugenics. Another mode of approach to its problems is opened up, and
fresh enthusiasm instilled into its hopes and aspirations. A method
of analysis of the factors involved, together with rules for the
prediction of the outcome of certain matings, when finally worked out,
will elevate its procedure to the level of the more exact sciences.

A man's chief gift to his children is his internal secretion
composition. The endocrines are truly the matter of breeding as
they are of growth. They are the material carriers of the inherited
physical and psychic dispositions, powers, abilities and disabilities
from the soma to the germplasm and back from the germplasm to the
soma. All kinds of questions arise as soon as one attempts to consider
the bearing of this underlying principle upon concrete situations.
What happens, say, when a pituitocentric mates with a thyrocentric?
Or when a pituitocentric marries a pituitocentric? Is there a
reinforcement or a cancellation of the dominant endocrine? Is there
a quantitative addition of internal glandular tendencies in the
germplasm, or a more complex rearrangement dependent upon reactions
between all the internal secretions?

The term endocrine dominants brings up the inquiries of Mendelism, and
the relation of Mendelian conceptions of dominant and recessive to the
internal secretions. The Mendelians have emphasized the role of the
unit factor in heredity, and the conservation of the unit factor as
an entity through all the adventures of matings. Also, that when unit
factors, say of the color of the eyes, come into conflict, brown or
black being mixed with blue or grey, one, the recessive, is submerged
and overlaid but not destroyed by the other, the dominant. So brown or
black eyes, dark hair, curly hair, dark skin, and so on, are dominant,
while blue or grey eyes, light or straight hair, light skin are
recessives. A nervous temperament is dominant to the phlegmatic. A
number of psychic qualities have been declared to be Mendelian unit
factors: memory, mechanical instinct, mathematical ability, literary
ability, musical ability, and even handwriting.

As architects of human qualities the endocrines must be involved
in the Mendelian unit factors. Moreover, they seem to act upon a
particular locale in different degrees, which is the strongest
argument against the resolution of a number of structural traits into
Mendelian unit characters. Most characters, somatic or psychic, are
the products not of the action of one internal secretion alone, but of
the interlinked activities of all of them. The amount of fat deposited
under the skin, for instance, is influenced by the pituitary, the
thyroid, the pancreas, the liver, the adrenals and the sex glands.
Other qualities, likewise, are resultants of a compromise between all
the endocrine factors comprising the equation of the individual. If
we are to look for unit factors at all in endocrine heredity, we must
look more deeply into constitution, and measure the hormone potentials
and their mobilization or suppression.

It will, in all probability, be found that the stability or
instability of an endocrine will have a good deal to do with the part
played by it in inheritance as well as in the life of the individual
An unstable pituitocentric marrying another unstable pituitocentric
will have children either exceptionally small or tall, or abnormally
bright or stupid. The instability tends to right itself in the next
generation, or that following. Genius as a sport, as well as sudden
degeneration of family stock, the whole problem of mutation, may be
closely connected with this tendency.

It has been noted that the extinction of species has been preceded by
a great increase in their size, for example, the case of the great
reptilia of prehistoric time. That possibly represented pituitary
stabilization, and so an abeyance of the ability to vary, necessary
for fresh adaptation to a changing environment. Indeed, endocrine
instability appears the fundamental condition of the tendency to vary,
endocrine stability the opposite.

Certain endocrine facts in relation to heredity should be mentioned.
The daughters of mothers who menstruated early, themselves menstruate
early. Animals fed upon thyroid during pregnancy, comparable to the
thyrocentric, give birth to offspring with a very large thymus,
comparable to the thymocentric. Women with partial thyroid deficiency,
or myxedema, bear cretins. These are suggestive of what the internal
secretions may do to an individual in inheritance and development.
Inherited endocrine potential is the maximum reaction of which a gland
is capable. This matter of potential is comparable to the factor of
reserve power or margin of safety demonstrated up to the hilt for
such organs as the heart and kidney as varying from individual to
individual. A low potential, like instability of an internal secretion
gland, may be latent, and not made manifest until the proper stimulus,
the maximum amount of stress and strain, like accident, disease, shock
or war, arrives.

When the individual is tested the effects may be purely local because
there is always in the organism a point of least resistance. Physical
changes alone may be prominent. Or because somatic changes are minor,
the psychic will dominate the picture. An attack of the "blues,"
unaccompanied by any demonstrable transformation of the bodily
processes, may be the sole symptom of an endocrine failure somewhere
in the chain due to hereditary weakness or low potential.

So we may account for family trends and streaks, for varieties
and strains among individuals, upon more precise lines based upon
endocrine analysis. Family disturbances of the internal secretions of
the extreme sort denominated disease are well known. Indeed, a number
of family diseases or predispositions to diseases, have been traced
to them. Predisposition in any direction will probably be shown to be
caused by them, within limits. Research here has its opportunity.

THE IMPROVEMENT OF RACIAL STOCK

A vast new territory of inquiry and achievement, as yet totally
unexplored, is opened by the endocrines to the eugenists, and those
idealists whose most earnest aspiration is the improvement of racial
stock as a necessary preliminary to improvement of racial life.
Beginning with Galton, they have brought to light a great collection
of data to prove that human traits and faculties, good and bad, are
inherited. Ability has been shown to run in certain families and
degeneracy in others. Yet all of the practical net result has been
summed up in the term "negative eugenics," the eugenics of prohibition
and warning.

Now the concept of personality, as woven around a system of chemical
reflexes, handed on from generation to generation, is bound to change
all that, and to create a structure of positive eugenics. It has been
said that what radium is to chemistry, the internal secretions are to
physiology. Just as radium enlightens the chemist about the history of
matter, and the integrations and disintegrations constituting the life
of an element--the internal secretions illuminate the history of the
individual as part of the life of the race, and of its integrations
and disintegrations. Seeing the individual as a system of chemical
substances interacting will assist enormously to predict the nature,
character and constitution of his descendants, which is essentially
what the eugenist is after.

The study of matings, the heart of the matter, will concern itself
with the investigation and comparison of the kind of endocrine
personalities that mate, the internal secretion predominances that
cross, and the consequent endocrine personality of the offspring.
Data bearing upon physique and physiognomy, details of anatomy and
function, mind and behaviour will so be co-ordinated as no eugenist
has hitherto succeeded in doing. Laws of endocrine inheritance will
emerge that will bring the control of heredity within measurable
distance. Standards and norms of a new kind would be obtained.

A beginning of this study of endocrine inheritance, on the pathologic
side, has been made. Some of these have been along Mendelian lines.
Following up abnormal growth (making giants and dwarfs) and abnormal
metabolism (goitre, diabetes, and so on), it has been stated that it
would seem that abnormal growth is dominant in the male, and recessive
in the female, while abnormal metabolism is dominant in the female and
recessive in the male. If an endocrine abnormality like a goitre,
or cretinism, or a dwarf or giant appear in a family as a sign of
endocrine instability, other members of that family will very likely
show internal secretion abnormalities.

If one gland of internal secretion acts as the centre of the system
and the others as satellites, we should be able to trace what happens
to it in the different generations. Does it maintain its supremacy? Or
will it be ousted by another member of the group? The time will come
when we shall thus be able to advise prospective parents of the
consequences of procreation and to forecast the meaning for the race
of a particular marriage. Internal glandular analysis may become
legally compulsory for those about to mate before the end of the
present century.

What are desirable and undesirable matings? The general law followed
by nature in her helterskelter way seems to be the production of the
greatest number of hybrids and variations possible, whether for
good or evil does not matter. Certain endocrine types appear to be
specially attracted to others belonging to the same group. Thus
thymus-centered types frequently marry. The ante-pituitary type of
male, the strongly masculine, mates often with the post-pituitary type
of female, the markedly feminine. The children exhibit the lineaments
of the pituitary-centered type. The general trend seems to be the
establishment of a better balanced, equilibrated type. Yet the
children often are apt to segregate into pituitary dominants or
pituitary deficients. Happiness and unhappiness in marriage should
be examined from the standpoint of endocrine compatibility or
incompatibility. Likewise those divorced or about to be divorced.

The correction of endocrine defects, disturbances, imbalances and
instabilities, before mating, presents another field. It remains to be
seen whether we shall thereby, in one generation, be able to affect
at all the germplasm, hitherto revered by all pious biologists as an
environment-proof holy of holies. No one can deny, in the face of the
multitude of evidence available, that internal secretion disturbances
occur in the mother, which, when grave, offer in the infant gross
proof of their significance, and therefore when slight must more
subtly work upon it. Endocrine disturbances in infancy have been
traced to endocrine disturbances in the mother during pregnancy.
Pregnant animals fed on thyroid give birth to young with large thymus
glands. The diet of the mother has been proved conclusively to
influence the development and constitution of the child. As the
internal secretions influence the history of the food in the body,
they affect development in the womb indirectly as well as directly.
Certainly, whether or no we learn how to change the nature of
germplasm within a short time, we have in the endocrines the means at
hand for affecting _the whole individual that is born and sees the
light of day_.

THE CONTROL OF MUTATIONS

The true physical and intellectual evolution of man depends upon the
production of mutations of a desirable kind that can survive. The
information furnished by the study of the endocrines concerning
the genesis of personality provides the foundations for a positive
eugenics, a eugenics of the encouragement of desirable matings, with
the proper legal and social procedures. Selective breeding for the
production of the best endocrine types should become practicable.

But the biologist should be able to go farther. If the eugenist is to
limit himself to the method of the animal breeder he will have to rest
satisfied with the characters or hereditary factors given, that turn
up spontaneously in an individual. But with the internal secretions
as the controllable controllers of mutations, the outlook changes.
It should become possible to produce new mutations, good and bad, to
speed up their production at any rate. The feeding of thyroid to
a gifted father before procreation might enhance immeasurably the
chances of transmission of his gift as well as of its intensification
in his offspring. A field of investigation is opened that would
embrace in due time the deliberate control of human evolution.

All the physical traits, stature, color, muscle function, and so on,
offer themselves for improvement, as well as brain size, and the
intellectual and emotional factors which have dominated man's social
evolution. The general prevalence of nervous disorders in civilized
countries, visible even in the nervous infants the specialist in
children's diseases is called upon to treat, shows that the nervous
system of the better part of mankind is in a state of unstable
equilibrium. It may be another example of the curious coincidences
that have been called the Fitness of the Environment that the
investigation of the endocrines promises to put into our hands the
instruments of the control of the future of the nervous system. In
general, meanwhile, the eugenist should strive for raising the level
of the endocrine potential, and discourage its lowering. That means
the encouragement of matings in which all the internal secretion
activities are reinforced. On the other hand, those internal secretion
combinations, generally leading to a deficiency of all of them which
produce types of mental defectives, delinquency and crime should not
be allowed to occur.

THE INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT

What suggestions now are there for the euthenist who would control
the influence of environment upon child culture. There are certain
pertinent facts and leads that are worth considering.

In analyzing environment, one must distinguish sharply in the jungle,
the non-living factors from the living. For while the nonliving act
upon the endocrines directly, the living act upon the vegetative
system, as a whole. The non-living factors are those with the intimate
scrutiny of which physics and chemistry have busied themselves: food,
water, air, light, heat, electricity, magnetism. The living are the
animals that prowl all over the planet, the predatories spreading the
gospel of fear.

The dietetic habits of a person, for instance, are known to have an
influence upon the glands of internal secretion. Meat-eating produces
a greater call upon the thyroid than any other form of food. In time
this ought to produce a degree of hyperthyroidism in the carniverous
populations. Pre-war statistics concerning meat-eating in different
countries show the greatest meat-eating among the English-speaking
groups, who all in all must be admitted the most energetic.

                                _Meat per Day per_
  _Countries_              _Capita in Grams_

  Australia                             306
  U.S. of America                       149
  Great Britain                         130
  France                                 92
  Belgium and Holland                    86
  Austria-Hungary                        79
  Russia                                 59
  Spain                                  61
  Italy                                  29
  Japan                                  25

Sea-water contains iodine. People living in contact with sea-water
would be apt to get more iodine in their systems, and so a greater
degree of thyroid activity. On the other hand, certain bodies and
sources of inland water hold something deleterious to the thyroid, so
that whole populations in Europe, Asia and America drinking such water
have become goitrous and cretinous, and a large percentage straight
imbeciles. Endemic cretinism is the name given to the condition. In
parts of Switzerland, Savoy, Tyrol and the Pyrenees, in America
around some of the Great Lakes, there are still such foci. Marco Polo
described similar areas he encountered in his travels through Asia.

Certain foods with aphrodisiac qualities may act by stimulating the
internal secretion of the sex glands. A type of pituitocentric has an
almost uncontrollable craving for sweets. Alcohol and the endocrines
remain to be studied.

Light, heat and humidity stand in some special relation to the
adrenals. Pigment deposit in the skin as protection against light
is controlled by the adrenal cortex. The reaction of the skin blood
vessels to heat and humidity is regulated by the adrenal medulla. A
change in the adrenal as a response to changes of temperature and
humidity in an environment would result in a number of concomitant
transformations throughout the body. So variation and adaptation are
probably connected. Most Europeans living for a sufficiently long time
in the tropics suffer from a combination of symptoms spoken of as
"Punjab head" or "Bengal head." The condition is probably the result
of excessive adrenal stimulation by the excessive heat and light of
the tropical sun, followed by a reaction of exhaustion and failure,
with the consequent phenomena of a form of neurasthenia. In the
section on the pineal gland there was mentioned the relation between
light and the pineal gland in growing animals, and how it serves to
keep in check the sex-stimulating action of light. The earlier puberty
and menstruation of the warmer climates may be explained as due to an
earlier regression of the pineal under the pressure of a great amount
of light playing upon the skin.

All these, and many more could be cited, are instances of the direct
influence of environmental factors upon one or more of the endocrines,
and so upon the organism as a whole. Indeed, stimuli may be considered
to modify an organism only in so far as they modify the glands of
internal secretion. Consequently, climatic factors will tend to make a
population possess certain points of resemblance in common.

Varieties of the human race exist as do varieties of dogs. The
pekingese and the fox terrier are as different as the Slav and Latin
are different: because of differences in internal secretion make-up.
The Slav peasant is definitely subthyroid in his general effect:
round head, coarse features, stubby hands, and his stolid, brooding
intellectual and emotional reaction. The Latin shows a pronounced
adrenal streak in his coloration, his emotivity, his susceptibility to
neurosis and psychosis. H. Laing Gordon, a Scot physician, reported
that of 700 cases he studied, more than twice as many of duplex eyed
individuals (brown or black, i.e., adrenal-centered most often), were
susceptible to the mental disturbances of war as the simplex (blue or
gray-eyed, i.e., thyroid-centered most often). He also pointed out
that such individuals tend to have a narrow and abnormally arched
palate. The Anglo-Saxon tends to be more sharply pituitarized, his
features are more clean-cut, his mentality more stable. The Frenchman
is rather a cross between the Anglo-Saxon pituitary-centered and the
Italian or Spanish adrenal-centered.

So national resemblances, traceable to climatic influences being
repeated from generation to generation upon the endocrines, may be
explained physiologically. The physiologic interpretation of history
will indeed be found the broadest, including as complementary Buckle's
climatic theory, Hegel's ideas on the influence of ideas, and Marx's
on the superiority of the economic motives and forces.

THE RACES OF MANKIND

Arthur Keith, conservator of the Museum of the Royal College of
Surgeons of England, was the first to apply the principle of endocrine
differentiation to the problem of the color-lines--the lines which
have divided mankind crudely into the yellow, the red, the white and
the brown, the Negro, the Mongol, the Caucasian, the copper tinted
American. It has long been recognized by anthropologists that the
differences of color march with differences in every comparable trait.
Thus the ideal Negro is built upon a pattern in which all the elements
are specific and singular. When the looms revolve that make him,
there is produced a gleaming black skin, kinky black hair, squat
wide-nostriled nose, thick protruding lips, large striking teeth,
prominent jaws, and staring eyes. As his upright carriage and
bone-muscle-fat proportions are distinctive, so are his musical voice
and his easily wrought upon nerves. In contrast the Caucasian has a
good deal of hair on his body, his skin is a pale tan-pink, his lips
are thin, and his nose especially has the definite bridge which
narrows it. The Mongol, like the Negro, has the hairless body and the
beardless face, but unlike him has lank straight hair on his head,
while his features are flattened and fore-shortened.

Upon the basis of these structural, functional and mental differences,
the qualitative and quantitative evolution of which in the race as in
the individual is guided by the glands of internal secretion, Keith
presents a very good case for the view that the white man is an
example of relative excess of the pituitary, thyroid, adrenal and
gonad endocrines. "The sharp and pronounced nasalization of the
face, the tendency to strong eyebrow ridges, the prominent chin, the
tendency to bulk of body, and height of stature in the majority of
Europeans" are the signs of pituitary dominance. Keith is also of the
opinion that "the sexual differentiation, the robust manifestations of
the male characters, is more emphatic in the Caucasian than in
either the Mongol or Negro racial types ... in certain negro types,
especially in Nilotic tribes, with their long stork-like legs, we seem
to have a manifestation of abeyance in the action of the interstitial
glands." As for the adrenal superiority of the white man, "it is 150
years since John Hunter came to the conclusion ... that the original
color of man's skin was black, and all the knowledge that we have
gathered since his supports the inference he drew. From the fact that
pigment begins to collect and thus darken the skin when the adrenal
bodies become the seat of a destructive disease we infer that they
have to do with the clearing away of pigment, and that we Europeans
owe the fairness of our skins to some particular virtue resident in
the adrenal bodies." Finally, as regards the thyroid, a comparison of
the face of a cretin with that of the Negro or Mongol tells the story.
A certain variety of idiocy, Mongolian idiocy, in which the face
simulates cretinism so closely as to deceive practised clinical
observers, is characterized by a Chinese cast of the features and
eyes, hence the name. And in the Bushman of South Africa, the cretin's
face is even more startlingly recalled.

There is every reason then for believing that the white man possesses
more of pituitary, adrenal, gonad, and thyroid internal secretions as
compared with the yellow man or black man. And since these endocrines
control not only physique and physiognomy, anatomic and functional
minutiae, but also mind and behaviour, we are justified in putting
down the white man's predominance on the planet to a greater
all-around concentration in his blood of the omnipotent hormones.
While the Negro is relatively subadrenal, the Mongol is relatively
subthyroid. Their relative deficiency in internal secretions
constitutes the essence of the White Man's Burden.

MAN'S ATTITUDE TOWARD HIMSELF

A last, but by no means least, application we may consider of the
developing knowledge of the internal secretions in relation to human
evolution is its effect upon Man's attitude toward himself and so
toward his fellow men. Whatever else he is, man is a land animal with
ideas. That makes him a thought-adventurer among materials. In a word,
he is the last word of mind working upon matter. But persistently he
has refused to recognize himself as matter and as subject to the laws,
to the physics and chemistry of matter.

History consists of the protocols that record the high lights of the
interactions of materials and ideas which is the adventure of man in
time and space. Materials and ideas have reacted, the record shows;
materials come upon have begotten strange fantasies. Ideas that
flashed from nowhere into a consciousness have transformed utterly the
face of the earth. The herd-brute, agglutinated with his fellows by a
magnetism beyond his ken, could be infected with thought, and so cast
in the heroic mould. The possibility of communion,--that possibility
of possibilities, for without it none other could be possible--has
rendered man the heir of a divine destiny. For the progressive
education of the race, a single discoverer here, an inventor there,
and thinkers everywhere have been inspired. In due time their
inspiration becomes the possession of even the lowest brain but
capable of grasping it.

Man's attitude toward himself, his self-consciousness, and his
attitude toward his fellow creatures has grown and varied and
evolved with his education about himself. According to the theory he
formulated concerning his being, his why and wherefore, he directed
and governed, punished and mutilated himself and them. But the
pressure of his curiosity, and the inexorable quality of the truth
would not let him stand still. The poetic genius within him, as Blake
called it, struggled on from one dogma concerning his nature to
another. Behaviour malignant or beneficent, horrible in its tragedy
and pitiable in its comedy, flowed inevitably on. Witchcraft trials
and the tortures of the Spanish Inquisition belong among the more
mentionable consequences of some of man's theories about his own
nature and its requirements.

Heretofore the imaginative spirit has had its day in the matter. And,
curiously enough, an obsession to subjugate the natural has made it
exalt the supernatural. Visions, dreams, portents, revelations, all
symptomatic of an order of things above nature, are the stuff of what
more than ninety-nine per cent of the millions of the race believe
about themselves and their fate. Man's cruelty to man, through the
ages, is a comment upon how vast and ramifying may be the consequences
of a delusion.

But now for a couple of centuries the critical spirit, which is the
spirit of science, has been invading the affairs of men. Humble but
persistent corrosive of delusion, it has infiltrated the furthest
bounds of ignorance and superstition. It has not dared to assert the
supremacy of its fundamental views upon the everyday problems of human
life because it was without concrete means of vindicating its claims.
That lack is now supplied by the growing understanding of the chemical
factors as the controllers and dictators of all the legion aspects of
life.

The profoundest achievement of the physiologist will be the change his
teachings and discoveries will bring about in man's attitude toward
himself. When he comes to realize himself as a chemical machine that
can, within limits, be remodeled, overhauled and repaired, as an
automobile can be, within limits, when he becomes saturated with the
significance of his endocrine-vegetative system at every turn and move
of his life, and when sympathy and pity informed by knowledge and
understanding will come to regulate his relationships with the lowest
and most despised of the men, women and children about him, the era of
the first real civilization will properly be said to be born.

Morality, as society's code of conduct for its members, will have
to change in the direction of a greater flexibility with the
establishment of organic differences in human types. There is nothing
that is more emphasized to the pathologist than that one man's meat is
another man's poison. In the family, as nature's laboratory for
the manufacture of fresh combinations of the internal secretions,
allowances will be made for divergences in capacity and deportment
from a new angle altogether. Schools will function as the developers,
stimulators and inhibitors of the endocrines, as well as investigators
of the individuals who have not enough or too much of one or some of
them. Prisons will have the same function, only they will be named
detention hospitals. The raising of the general level of intelligence
by the judicious use of endocrine extracts will mean a good deal to
the sincere statesman. The average duration of life will be prolonged
for an enormous mass of the population. If the prevention of war
depends upon the burning into the imagination of the electorates
what the consequences of war are, a high intelligence quotient and
revaluation of life will count for a good deal.

Man is the animal that wants Utopia. So long as human nature was
looked upon as fixed constant in the ebb and flow of life, a Utopia of
fine minds could be conceived only by the dreamer and poet. The desire
for such a Utopia could only be regarded as a tragic aspiration for an
impossibility. The physiology of the internal secretions teaches that
human nature does change and can be changed. A relative control of its
properties is already in view. The absolute control will come.

Nor need anyone fear that the science of the internal secretions in
its maturity will signify the abolition of the marvelous differences
between human beings that create the unique personalities of history.
A derangement of the endocrines has been responsible for masterpieces
of the human species in the past and will be responsible for them in
the future. The equality of Utopia can be the equality of the highest
and fullest development possible for each of its inhabitants. The
applications of endocrine control will not necessarily interfere
with the life of the individual. There will be breeding of the best
mixtures of glands of internal secretion possible. And there will
be treatment for those born with a handicap, or who have become
handicapped in the life struggle. There will be a stimulation of
capacity to the limit. But beyond that, compulsory equalization is a
theorist's bogey.

The internal secretions are the most hopeful and promising of the
reagents for control yet come upon by the human mind. They open up
limitless prospects for the improvement of the race. A few hundreds of
investigators are engaged upon their study throughout the world. That
is one of the ironies of our contemporary civilization. A concerted
effort at the task of understanding them, backed by the labors of tens
of thousands of workers, would, without a doubt, accomplish as much
for humanity as the vast armies and navies that consume the substance
of mankind. If we could not obtain Utopia then, we might, at least by
abolishing the subnormals and abnormals who constitute the slaves and
careerists of society, render the human race less contemptible and
more divine.




INDEX


 Ability, natural
  Acquired characters, inheritance of
  Acromegaly
  Addison
  Addison's disease
  Adolescence, period of
  Adrenal glands
    and anger
    and courage
    and emergencies
    and emotions
    and fatigue
    and fear
    and neuroses
    and pseudo-hermaphroditism
    and puberty
    blood pressure and
    brain cells and
    chromaffin cells of
    cortex of
    excess of secretion
    failure of secretion
    function of
    glands of combat and fight
    hair and
    influence of in hermaphroditism
    insufficiency of secretion
    medulla of
    pigment cells and
    relation to pineal gland
    relation to pituitary
    secretion of
    sexuality and
    skin and
  Adrenal-centered type
  Adrenal face
  Adrenal personalities, or types
    compensated
    insufficient
    in pregnancy
    of brain work
    of girl
    of hair
    of skin
    of teeth
  Adrenal personalities, or types of women
    reactions to modernism in
  Adrenalin
  Alcoholism and endocrine types
  Analysis, endocrine
  Anger
    and adrenals
  Antagonisms
  Anti-Fate
  Antitoxic function of thyroid gland
  Ape-parvenu, the
  Applications of endocrinology
  Autonomic system

  Backgrounds of personality
  Baldness and the thyroid
  Baumann
  Bayliss
  Beard
  Beard's neurasthenia
  von Bechterew
  Behavior
  Bell, Blair
  Bernard, Claude
  Berthold
  Black races, endocrine control in
  Blood pressure, and adrenals
  Body, influence of glands upon
  Body-mind complex
  Bones
    long, development of
  Bordeau
  Bossi
  Brain cells and adrenals
  Brain, growth of
  Brainwork, adrenal type of
  Breakdown, nervous
  Breeding, bearing of endocrine glands on
  Brown-Sequard

  Caesar, Julius, an epileptic
    pituitary in
  Capacity
  Careerist
    as abnormals
    feminine
    instincts of
    masculine
    super-
  Carlson
  Castration
    effects of
    effects of, on thymus
  Character
  Charcot
  Charging of wishes, endocrine
  Check and drive system
  Chemistry of the soul
  Child--bearing, transfigurations of
  Childhood, epoch of the pineal
  Chromaffin cells of adrenals
  Chromosomes
  Climacteric
  Color, endocrine control of, in races
  Combat, adrenals and
  Combinations of types of personality
  Conduct
  Constitutions, endocrine
  Cooperation
  Corpus luteum
    and mammary glands
  Courage and the adrenals
  Cretinism
    a thyroid deficiency
    effect of feeding thyroid in
  Cretinoid type
  Cretin
  Crime, treatment of
  Criminals and endocrine types
  Critical ages
  Curling
  Cushing, Harvey

  Dangerous age, the
  Darwin, Charles
    as a neurasthenic genius
    his "Descent of Man"
    his theory of Pangenesis
  Davenport
  Deficiency, mental
  Development
  Diabetes, and the pancreas
  Diet, effect of on the endocrine glands
  Directorate, endocrine glands as a
  Diseases and endocrine types
  Division of labor
  Drug addiction and endocrine types
  Dwarfs

  Education, of vegetative-system
    vocational
  Egomania
  Elixir of life
  Emergencies, adrenals glands of
  Emotions, adrenals glands of
  Endocrine
    analysis
    charging of wishes
    constitutions
    control in color of races
    corporation
    deficiency in old age
    epochs of life
    glands
      and feeblemindedness
      and insanity
      as an interlocking directorate
      bases of variation
      bearing on breeding
      discovery of
      effect of diet on
      influence upon body
      influence upon mind
    inferiority
    neurosis
    personality
    sex traits
    types
      alcoholism and
      criminals and
      diseases and
      drug addiction and
      narcotism and
  Endocrines, evolution of
  Endocrinology, applications of
    possibilities of
  Energy
    and thyroid
  Enthusiasm and thyroid
  Environment, influence of
  Epilepsy, in genius
  Epochs of life, endocrine
  Eugenics, negative
    positive
    promises of
  Eunuchoid face
    personality
  Eunuchoidism
  Eunuchs
  Evolution, human, effect of internal secretions upon
  Exhibitionism
  Expressionism
  Eyes

  Face, adrenal
    eunuchoid
    hyperpituitary
    hyperthyroid
  Facial types
  Family, and mixed sex
  Fat, distribution of
  Fat people
  Fate and Anti-Fate
  Fatigue and industry
    as an endocrine deficiency
    relation of adrenals to
    relation of thymus to
  Fear
    mechanism of
    relation of adrenals to
  Feeblemindedness and the endocrine glands
  Feminine pituitary type
  Feminine precocity
  Feminoid complex
    constitution and personality
  Fertilization
  Fight, relation of adrenals to
  Fingers, pituitary and
    thyroid and
  Forgetting
  Freedom
  Freud
  Freudianism
  Freudians
  Friedleben

  Galli
  Galton
  Genius, epilepsy in
    migraine in
    neurasthenic
    treatment of
  Giants
  Girl, endocrine types of
  Glands, definition of
    endocrine, as an interlocking directorate
    discovery of
    influence on body
    influence on mind
  Goitre, relation of iodine to
  Gonads
    and libido
    and sexuality
    and thymus
  Gonads and thyroid
    function
    secretion
  Gonad-centric personalities
    homosexuality and
  Growth
    relation of thymus to
  Guilford
  Gull

  Hair
    and adrenals
    and pineal
    and thymus
    and thyroid
  Hands, and pituitary
    and thyroid
  Henle
  Hermaphrodite
  Hermaphroditism
    functional
    influence of adrenals in
    influence of pituitary in
  Hibernation
    and the pituitary
  Historic personages
    Darwin, Charles
    Julius Caesar
    Napoleon
    Nietzsche
    Nightingale, Florence
    Wilde, Oscar
  History, internal secretions in
  von Hochwart
  Homosexuality, and gonad-centric type
    and thymus type
  Hormones
    harmony of the
  Horsley
  Howitz
  Human nature
    attitudes towards
    case against
    science and
  Hunger
  Hunter, John
  Hygiene of the internal secretions
  Hyperpituitary face
    skin
  Hyperpituitrism,
  Hyperthyroid face
    skin
    type
      of girl
      pregnancy in
      premenstrual molimina in
  Hyperthyroidism
  Hysteria

  Imagination, an endocrine gift
  Improvement of racial stock
  Industry, and fatigue
    relation of endocrines to
  Infancy, epoch of the thymus
  Infantilism
  Infantiloid constitution or personality
  Inferiority, breeding of
  Inheritance of acquired characters
  Insanity, and the endocrine glands
  Instinct
  Instincts, pituitary
    thyroid
  Insuline
  Intellectuality, and the pituitary
  Internal secretions, determinants of vegetative pressures
    effect of, upon human evolution
    hygiene of
    in history
  Interstitial glands, see Gonads
    type of teeth
  Iodine, in thyroxin
    relation of to goitre

  Janet
  Judgment
  Julius Caesar, an epileptic
    pituitary in

  Keith
  Kendall
  Kinetic chain
    drive
    system
  Kocher

  Laennec
  Lanugo
  Larey
  Libido and gonads
    sex
  Life, well-springs of
  Lime salts, and sex
  Lincoln, Abraham
  Lutein

  MacDougallians
  Malthusian law of slavery
  Mammary glands
    corpus luteum and
    placenta and
  Man, a transient
    attitude of towards himself
    a product of glands of internal secretion
    critical age in
    secondary sex characteristics of
  Manic depressive psychoses
  Mankind, races of
  Marie, Pierre
  Masculine, the secret of the
  Masculine and feminine, mechanics of, and see Sex
  Masculine pituitary type
  Masculinoid women
  Masochism
  Maternal instinct
    different from sex instinct
    relation of the pituitary to
  Matings, desirable and undesirable
  Megalomania
  Memory
  Mendelism
  Menopause
  Menstruation
    and ovaries
    cycle of
  Mental deficiency
  Migraine in genius
  Mind, influence of glands on
    oldest part of
  Mitchell, Weir
  Mixed sex and the family
  Mixed types
  Moebius
  Modernism, reactions to in adrenal types
  Moods, and the organic outlook
  Moral irresponsibility and thymus type
  Mujerados
  Mueller, Johann,
  Murray
  Muscles
  Mutations, control of
  Myxedema
    operative

  Napoleon, case of
  Narcotism, and endocrine types
  Nature's experiments _vs_. Man's
  "Nerves"
  Nervous breakdowns
  Neurasthenia
  Neurosis
    adrenals and
    endocrine
    war
  Nietzsche, case of
  Nightingale, Florence, legend of
  Normal, what is

  Obesity
  Operative myxedema
  Ord, William
  Ovaries, internal secretion of
    relation of to menstruation
    removal of, effect of
    role of
  Oversecretion

  Pancreas
    diabetes and
    function of
    removal of
    secretion of
  Pangenesis, Darwin's theory of
  Parathyroids
    function of
    secretion of
  Paulesco
  Pawlov
  Permutations, of types of personality,
  Perry, Caleb
  Personality, background of
    combinations of types of
    determined by the endocrines
    endocrine
    eunuchoid
    types of
      adrenal
      combinations of
      gonad-centric
      nature's experiments _vs_. man's
      permutations of
      pituitary of
  Philosophers, prejudices of
  Physics of the wish
  Physiologists, attitude of
  role of
  Pigment cells and the adrenals
    in skin of various races
  Pineal gland
    and hair
    and childhood
    feeding of to children
    function of
    muscle function of
  Pineal gland, obesity and
    puberty and
    relation of to adrenals
    to progressive muscular atrophy
    secretion of
    type of muscles
  Pituitary gland
    action of
    and fingers
    and toes
    compared with thyroid
    diminished action of
    extirpation of
    function of
    in Julius Caesar
    in Oscar Wilde
    instincts
  overaction of
    personalities
    regulator of organic rhythms
    relation to adrenals
      to growth
      to hair
      to hermaphroditism
      to hibernation
      to imagination
      to intellectuality
      to judgment
      to maternal instincts
      to memory
      to puberty
      to rejuvenation
      to sex difficulties
      to sexual glands
      to stature
      to thymus
    secretion of
    secretion, characteristics of inferior
      characteristics of sufficient
    type
      feminine
      masculine
      of eyes
      of hands
      of muscles
      pregnancy in
      premenstrual molimina in
  Pituitary-centered type
  Pituitocentrics, Caesar
    Darwin
    Napoleon
    Nietzsche
    Nightingale
  Pituitrin
    function of
  Placenta
    and mammary glands
  Placental gland
  Plater, Felix
  Plummer
  Poise
  Popielski
  Possibilities of endocrinology
  Postpituitary type of girl
  Precocity, feminine
    male
  Pregnancy, in various endocrine types
  Premenstrual molimina, in various endocrine types
  Progressive muscular dystrophy and the pineal gland
  Prostate
  Pseudo-hermaphroditism and the adrenals
  Psychanalyst, as a therapeutist
  Psychology, new
  Psychopathology of every day life
  Puberty
    glands, see Gonads
    in female
    significance of
  Public health, prospects of
  Pure types
  Puericulture, science of

  Races of mankind
  Reactions to modernism in adrenal types
  Rejuvenation, possibilities of
  Religion of science
  Repression
  Resilience of skin
  Restelli
  Reverdin, J.L.
  Rhythms of sex
  Robertson

  Sadism
  Schiff, Moritz
  Science, and human nature
    origin of
    religion of
  Secondary sex traits
  Secretin
  Secretion
  Sella turcica
  Semon, Sir Felix
  Senility, epoch of endocrine deficiency
    interpretation of
  Sensitivity
  Sex
    and lime salts
    attitudes towards questions of
    cause of
    chemistry of
    characteristics, secondary
    conflict
    crises
    difficulties, pituitary and
    glands, see Gonads
      and hair
      and puberty
      and muscles
      centered
      chain
    index
    instinct
      different from maternal instinct
    libido
    life, determining factors of
    mixed, and the family
    rhythms of
    traits, or characteristics
      endocrine
      origin of
      primary
    secondary
  Sexual cravings
    glands, see Gonads, and Sex glands
      and pituitary gland
  Sexuality, and gonads
    and adrenal glands
  Shaw, G.B.
  Shell-shock
  Skeletal types
  Skin
    adrenal type
    and adrenals
    hyperpituitary type
    hyperthyroid type
    pigmentation
    subadrenal type
    subpituitary type
    subthyroid type
  Slavery, Malthusian law of
    origin of
  Soul, chemistry of the
  Starling
  Statesman, problems of
    why he fails
  Stature, pituitary and
  Status lymphaticus, and thymus type
  Steinach
  Stirner, Max
  Subadrenal skin
  Subpituitary skin
  Subpituitary type of women
    premenstrual molimina in
  Subpituitism
  Subthyroid face
    skin
    type
      of eyes
      of women, pregnancy in
  Subthyroidism
  Sugar metabolism
  Super-Careerist
  Susceptibility
  Sympathetic system

  Teeth
  Tethelin
    action of
    function of
  Thymic face
  Thymo-centric personalities
  Thymo-centric type
    Oscar Wilde
  Thymus
    and gonads
    and pituitary
    and puberty
    and sexual glands
    and thyroid
    effect of castration on
    effect of feeding thymus to animals
    extirpation of
    function of
    hair and
    hyperactivity of
    infancy, epoch of the
    persistent, skin of
    relation of fatigue to
    relation of growth to
    relation of weight to
    removal of, effect on gonads
    secretion
    type of teeth
  Thymus type
    homosexuality and
    moral irresponsibility and
    status lymphaticus and
  Thyroid gland
    and adrenals
    and baldness
    and energy
    and enthusiasm
    and intersitial glands
    and judgment
    and memory
    and pancreas
    and pituitary
  Thyroid gland and puberty
    and rejuvenation
    and skin
    and thymus
    antitoxic function of
    as an accelerator
    as a catalyser
    as a differentiator
    as an energiser
    compared with pituitary
    creator of land animals
    deficiency
    effect of feeding the gland
    excess
    functions of
    hair and
    instincts
    personalities
    secretion of, and see Thyroxin
    type, of eyes
    of hands
    of muscles
    of teeth
  Thyroid-centered type
  Thyrotoxin
  Thyroxin
    and energy mobilization
    and energy production
    and speed of living
  Toes
    pituitary and
    thyroid and
  Tonus
  Types
    endocrine
    adrenal
    adrenal-centered
    alcoholism and
    combinations of
    cretinoid
    criminals and
    diseases and
    drug addiction and
    facial
    hyperthyroid
    mixed
    narcotism and
    of girls
    pituitary,
    pituitary-centered
    pure
    skeletal,
    subthyroid
    thyroid-centered
  Unconscious, the
    and the viscera
    physical basis of
  Undersecretion
  Variation
    endocrine glands as basis of
  Varieties of internal secretions
  Vegetative apparatus
  Vegetative pressures
    internal secretions
    determinants of
  Vegetative system
    education of
  Virilism
  Viscera
    the unconscious and
  Vocational education

  War neurosis
  Weight relation of thymus to
  White races
    endocrine control in
  Wilde, Oscar
    explanation of
  Wishes
    endocrine charging of
    physics of
  Women
    adrenal type of
    masculinoid
    secondary sex characteristics in

  X-chromosome

  Yellow races
    endocrine control in





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Glands Regulating Personality
by Louis Berman, M.D.

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GLANDS REGULATING PERSONALITY ***

***** This file should be named 10266.txt or 10266.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/6/10266/

Produced by Kevin Handy, Dave Maddock, Josephine Paolucci and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


