Project Gutenberg's A Golden Book of Venice, by Mrs. Lawrence Turnbull

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Golden Book of Venice

Author: Mrs. Lawrence Turnbull

Release Date: December 14, 2003 [EBook #10455]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A GOLDEN BOOK OF VENICE ***




Produced by Ted Garwin, Annika and PG Distributed Proofreaders




THE GOLDEN BOOK OF VENICE

A Historical Romance of the 16th Century


By

MRS. LAWRENCE TURNBULL

  'This noble citie doth in a manner
  chalenge this at my hands, that
  I should describe her ... the
  fairest Lady, yet the richest Paragon,
  and Queene of Christendome.'

1900


  AS A TRIBUTE TO HIS GIFT OF VIVID
  HISTORIC NARRATION WHICH WAS
  THE DELIGHT OF MY CHILDHOOD,
  I INSCRIBE THIS ROMANCE TO THE
  MEMORY OF MY DEAR FATHER.



ACKNOWLEDGMENT

I desire gratefully to acknowledge my indebtedness to many faithful,
loving and able students of Venetian lore, without whose books my own
presentation of Venice in the sixteenth century would have been
impossible. Mr. Ruskin's name must always come first among the prophets
of this City of the Sea, but among others from whom I have gathered
side-lights I have found quite indispensable Mr. Horatio F. Brown's
"Venice; An Historical Sketch of the Republic," "Venetian Studies," and
"Life on the Lagoons"; Mr. Hare's suggestive little volume of "Venice";
M. Leon Galibert's "Histoire de la Republique de Venise"; and Mr.
Charles Yriarte's "Venice" and his work studied from the State papers in
the Frari, entitled "La vie d'un Patricien de Venise."

Mr. Robertson's life of Fra Paolo Sarpi gave me the first hint of this
great personality, but my own portrait has been carefully studied from
the volumes of his collected works which later responded to my search;
these were collected and preserved for the Venetian government under the
title of "Opere di Fra Paolo Sarpi, Servita, Teologo e Consultore della
Serenissima Repubblica di Venezia" and included his life, letters and
"opinions," and all others of his writings which escaped destruction in
the fire of the Servite Convent, as well as many important extracts from
the original manuscripts so destroyed and which had been transcribed by
order of the Doge, Marco Foscarini, a few years before.

FRANCESE LITCHFIELD TURNBULL.

_La-Paix, June_, 1900.



PRELUDE

Venice, with her life and glory but a memory, is still the _citta
nobilissima_,--a city of moods,--all beautiful to the beauty-lover, all
mystic to the dreamer; between the wonderful blue of the water and the
sky she floats like a mirage--visionary--unreal--and under the spell of
her fascination we are not critics, but lovers. We see the pathos, not
the scars of her desolation, and the splendor of her past is too much a
part of her to be forgotten, though the gold is dim upon her
palace-fronts, and the sheen of her precious marbles has lost its bloom,
and the colors of the laughing Giorgione have faded like his smile.

But the very soul of Venetia is always hovering near, ready to be
invoked by those who confess her charm. When, under the glamor of her
radiant skies the faded hues flash forth once more, there is no ruin nor
decay, nor touch of conquering hand of man nor time, only a splendid
city of dreams, waiting in silence--as all visions wait--until that
invisible, haunting spirit has turned the legends of her power into
actual activities.





_THE GOLDEN BOOK OF VENICE_



I

Sea and sky were one glory of warmth and color this sunny November
morning in 1565, and there were signs of unusual activity in the Campo
San Rocco before the great church of Santa Maria Gloriosa dei Frari,
which, if only brick without, was all glorious within, "in raiment of
needlework" and "wrought gold." And outside, the delicate tracery of the
cornice was like a border of embroidery upon the sombre surface; the
sculptured marble doorway was of surpassing richness, and the airy grace
of the campanile detached itself against the entrancing blue of the sky,
as one of those points of beauty for which Venice is memorable.

Usually this small square, remote from the centres of traffic as from
the homes of the nobility, seemed scarcely more than a landing-place for
the gondolas which were constantly bringing visitors and worshippers
thither, as to a shrine; for this church was a sort of memorial abbey to
the illustrious dead of Venice,--her Doges, her generals, her artists,
her heads of noble families,--and the monuments were in keeping with all
its sumptuous decorations, for the Frati Minori of the convent to which
it belonged--just across the narrow lane at the side of the church--were
both rich and generous, and many of its gifts and furnishings reflected
the highest art to which modern Venice had attained. Between the
wonderful, mystic, Eastern glory of San Marco, all shadows and
symbolisms and harmonies, and the positive, realistic assertions,
aesthetic and spiritual, of the Frari, lay the entire reach of the art
and religion of the Most Serene Republic.

The church was ancient enough to be a treasure-house for the historian,
and it had been restored, with much magnificence, less than a century
before,--which was modern for Venice,--while innumerable gifts had
brought its treasures down to the days of Titian and Tintoret.

To-day the people were coming in throngs, as to a _festa_, on foot from
under the Portico di Zen, across the little marble bridge which spanned
the narrow canal; on foot also from the network of narrow paved lanes,
or _calle_, which led off into a densely populated quarter; for to-day
the people had free right of entrance, equally with those others who
came in gondolas, liveried and otherwise, from more distant and
aristocratic neighborhoods. This pleasant possibility of entrance
sufficed for the crowd at large, who were not learned, and who preferred
the attractions of the outside show to the philosophical debate which
was the cause of all this agreeable excitement, and which was presently
to take place in the great church before a vast assembly of nobles and
clergy and representatives from the Universities of Padua, Mantua, and
Bologna; and outside, in the glowing sunshine, with the strangers and
the confusion, the shifting sounds and lights, the ceaseless unlading of
gondolas and massing and changing of colors, every minute was a
realization of the people's ideal of happiness.

Brown, bare-legged boys flocked from San Pantaleone and the people's
quarters on the smaller canals, remitting, for the nonce, their
absorbing pastimes of crabbing and petty gambling, and ragged and
radiant, stretched themselves luxuriously along the edge of the little
quay, faces downward, emphasizing their humorous running commentaries
with excited movements of the bare, upturned feet; while the gondoliers
landed their passengers to a lively refrain of "_Stali_!" their curses
and appeals to the Madonna blending not discordantly with the general
babel of sound which gives such a sense of companionship in
Venice--human voices calling in ceaseless interchange from shore to
shore, resonant in the brilliant atmosphere, quarrels softened to
melodies across the water, cries of the gondoliers telling of ceaseless
motion, the constant lap and plash of the wavelets and the drip of the
oars making a soothing undertone of content.

From time to time staccato notes of delight added a distinct jubilant
quality to this symphony, heralding the arrival of some group of Church
dignitaries from one or other of the seven principal parishes of Venice,
gorgeous in robes of high festival and displaying the choicest of
treasures from sacristies munificently endowed, as was meet for an
ecclesiastical body to whom belonged one half of the area of Venice,
with wealth proportionate.

Frequent delegations from the lively crowd of the populace--flashing
with repartee, seemly or unseemly, as they gathered close to the door
just under the marble slab with its solemn appeal to reverence,
"Rispettati la Casa di Dio"--penetrated into the Frari to see where the
more pleasure could be gotten, as also to claim their right to be there;
for this pageant was for the people also, which they did not forget, and
their good-humored ripple of comment was tolerant, even when most
critical. But outside one could have all of the festa that was worth
seeing, with the sunshine added,--the glorious sunshine of this November
day, cold enough to fill the air with sparkle,--and the boys, at least,
were sure to return to the free enjoyment impossible within.

A group of young nobles, in silken hose and velvet mantles, were met
with ecstatic approval and sallies deftly personal. Since the beginning
of the Council of Trent, which was still sitting, philosophy had become
the mode in Venice, and had grown to be a topic of absorbing interest by
no means confined to Churchmen; and young men of fashion took courses of
training in the latest and most intellectual accomplishment.

Confraternities of every order were arriving in stately processions,
their banners borne before them by gondoliers gaudy and awkward in
sleazy white tunics, with brilliant cotton sashes--habiliments which
possessed a singular power of relieving these sun-browned sons of the
lagoon of every vestige of their native grace. On such days of Church
festival--and these alone--they might have been mistaken for peasants of
some prosaic land, instead of the graceful, free-born Venetians that
they were, as, with no hint of their natural rhythm of motion, they
filed in cramped and orderly procession through the avenue that opened
to them in the crowd to the door of the church, where they disappeared
behind the great leather curtain.

It was a great day for the friars of the Servi, who were rivals of the
Frari both in learning and splendor, and the entire Servite Brotherhood,
black-robed and white-cowled, was just coming in sight over the little
marble bridge, preceded by youthful choristers, chanting as they came
and bearing with them that famous banner which had been sent them as a
gift from their oldest chapter of San Annunziata in Florence, and which
was the early work of Raphael.

A small urchin, leaning far over the edge of the quay and craning his
neck upward for a better view, reported some special attraction in this
approaching group which elicited yells of vociferous greeting from his
colleagues, with such forceful emphasis of his own curling, expressive
toes, that he lost his balance and rolled over into the water; from
which he was promptly rescued by a human ladder, dexterously let down to
him in sections, without a moment's hesitation, by his allies, who, like
all Venetian boys of the populace, were amphibious animals, full of
pranks.

But now there was no more time for fooling on the quay, for at the great
end-window of the library of the convent of the Frari it could be seen
that a procession of this body was forming and would presently enter the
church, and the fun would begin for those who understood Latin.

A round-faced friar was giving obliging information. The contest would
be between the Frari and the Servi; there was a new brother who had just
entered their order,--and very learned, it was said,--but the name was
not known. He would appear to respond to the propositions of the Frari.

"Yes, the theses would be in Latin--and harder, it was said, had never
been seen. There were the theses in one of those black frames, at the
side of the great door."

"But Latin is no good, except in missals, for women and priests to
read."

The gondolier who owned the voice was undiscoverable among the crowd,
and the remark passed with some humorous retaliation.

Hints of the day's entertainment sifted about, with much more,--each
suggestion, true or otherwise, waking its little ripple of interest,--as
some nearest the curtain lifted it up, went in, and returned, bringing
reports.

"The church is filled with great ones, and Mass is going on," a small
scout reported; "and that was Don Ambrogio Morelli that just went in
with a lady--our old Abbe from the school at San Marcuolo--Beppo goes
there now! And don't some of us remember Pierino--always studying and
good for nothing, and not knowing enough to wade out of a _rio_? The
Madonna will have hard work to look after _him_!"

"Don Ambrogio just wants to cram us boys," Beppo confessed, in a
confidential tone; "but it's no use knowing too much, even for a priest.
For once, at San Marcuolo--true as true, faith of the Madonna!--one of
those priests told the people one day in his sermon that there were no
ghosts!"

The boy crossed himself and drew a quick breath, which increased the
interest of his auditors.

"_Ebbene_!" he continued, in an impressive, awestruck whisper. "He had
to come out of his bed at night--Santissima Maria!--and it was the
ghosts of all the people buried in San Marcuolo who dragged him and
kicked him to teach him better, because he wanted to make believe the
dead stayed in their graves! So where was the use of his Latin?"

"Pierino will be like his uncle, the Abbe Morelli, some day; they say he
also will be a priest."

"I believe thee," said Beppo, earnestly; "and that was he going in
behind the banner, with the Servi."

The little fellows made an instant rush for the door, and squeezed
themselves in behind the poor old women of the neighborhood for whom
festivals were perquisites, and who, maimed or deformed, knelt on the
stone floor close to the entrance, while with keenly observant,
ubiquitous eyes they proffered their _aves_ and their petitions for alms
with the same exemplary patience and fervor--"Per l'amor di Dio,
Signori!"

The body of the church, from the door to the great white marble screen
of the choir and from column to column, was filled with an assembly in
which the brilliant and scholarly elements predominated; and seen
through the marvelous fretwork of this screen of leafage and scroll and
statue and arch, intricately wrought and enhanced with gilding, the
choir presented an almost bewildering pageant. The dark wood background
of the stalls and canopies, elaborately carved and polished and enriched
with mosaics, each surmounted with its benediction of a gilded winged
cherub's head, framed a splendid figure in sacerdotal robes. Through the
small, octagonal panes of the little windows encircling the choir--row
upon row, like an antique necklace of opals set in frosted
stonework--the sunlight slanted in a rainbow mist, broken by splashes of
yellow flame from great wax candles in immense golden candlesticks,
rising from the floor and steps of the altar, as from the altar itself.
From great brass censers, swinging low by exquisite Venetian chainwork,
fragrant smoke curled upward, crossing with slender rays of blue the
gold webwork of the sunlight; and on either side golden lanterns rose
high on scarlet poles, above the heads of the friars who crowded the
church.

On the bishop's throne, surrounded by the bishops of the dioceses of
Venice, sat the Patriarch, who had been graciously permitted to honor
this occasion, as it had no political significance; and opposite him Fra
Marco Germano, the head of the order of the Frari, presided in a state
scarcely less regal.

His splendid gift, the masterpiece of Titian, had been fitted into the
polished marble framework over the great altar, and never had the master
so excelled himself as in this glorious "Assumption." The beauty, the
power, the persuasive sense of motion in the figure of the Madonna,
which seemed divinely upborne,--the loveliness of the infant cherubs,
the group of the Apostles solemnly attesting the mysterious event,--were
singularly and inimitably impressive, full of aspiration and faith,
compelling the serious recognition of the sacredness and greatness of
the Christian mystery.

The choir-screen terminated in pulpits at either side, and here again
the Apostles stood in solemn guardianship on its broad parapet--but
emblems, rather; of the stony rigidity of doctrines which have been
shaped by the minds of men from some little phase of truth, than of that
glowing, spiritualized, human sympathy which, as the soul of man grows
upward into comprehension, is the apostle of an ever widening truth. And
over the richly sculptured central arch which forms the entrance to the
choir, against the incongruous glitter of gold and jewels and
magnificent garments and lights and sumptuous, overwrought details--the
very extravagance of the Renaissance--a great black marble crucifix bore
aloft the most solemn Symbol of the Christian Faith.

The religious ceremonial with which the festival had opened was over,
and down the aisles on either side, past the family altars, with their
innumerable candles and lanterns and censers,--ceaselessly smoking in
memorial of the honored dead,--the brothers of the Frari and the Servi
marched in solemn procession to the chant of the acolytes, returning to
mass themselves in the transepts, in fuller view of the pulpits, before
the contest began. The Frari had taken their position on the right,
under the elaborate hanging tomb of Fra Pacifico--a mass of sculpture,
rococo, and gilding; the incense rising from the censer swinging below
the coffin of the saint carried the eye insensibly upward to the
grotesque canopy, where cumbrous marble clouds were compacted of dense
masses of saints' and cherubs' heads with uncompromising golden halos.

Some of the younger brothers scattered leaflets containing heads of the
theses.

There was a stir among the crowd; a few went out, having witnessed the
pageant; but there was a flutter of increased interest among those who
remained, as a venerable man, in the garb of the Frari, mounted the
pulpit on the right.

The Abbe Morelli sat in an attitude of breathless interest, and now a
look of intense anxiety crossed his face. "It is Fra Teodoro, the ablest
disputant of the Frari!" he exclaimed. "The trial is too great."

The lady with him drew closer, arranging the folds of the ample veil
which partially concealed her face, so that she might watch more
closely. But it was on Don Ambrogio Morelli that she fixed her gaze with
painful intensity, reading the success or failure of the orator in her
brother's countenance.

"Ambrogio!" she entreated, when the argument had been presented and
received with every sign of triumph that the sacredness of the place
made decorous, "thou knowest that I have no understanding of the
Latin--was it unanswerable?"

"Nay," her brother answered, uneasily; "it was fine, surely; but have no
fear, Fra Teodoro is not incontrovertible, and the Servi have better
methods."

"May one ask the name of the disputant who is to respond?" a stranger
questioned courteously of Don Ambrogio.

"It is a brother who hath but entered their order yesterday," Don
Ambrogio answered, with some hesitation, "by name Pierino--nay, Fra
Paolo. He is reputed learned; yet if the methods of the order be strange
to him, one should grant indulgence. For he is reputed learned----"

He was conscious of repeating the words for his own encouragement, with
a heart less brave than he could have wished. But the information was
pleasantly echoed about, as the ranks of the Servi parted and an old
man, with a face full of benignity, came forward, holding the hand of a
boy with blue eyes and light hair, who walked timidly with him to the
pulpit on the left, where the older man encouraged the shrinking
disputant to mount the stair.

There was a murmur of astonishment as the young face appeared in the
tribunal of that grave assembly.

"Impossible! It is only a child!"

It was, in truth, a strange picture; this child of thirteen, small and
delicate for his years, yet with a face of singular freshness and
gravity, his youthfulness heightened by cassock and cowl--a unique,
simple figure, against the bizarre magnificence of the background, the
central point of interest for that learned and brilliant assembly, as he
stood there above the beautiful kneeling angel who held the Book of the
Law, just under the pulpit.

For a moment he seemed unable to face his audience, then, with an
effort, he raised his hand, nervously pushing back the white folds of
his unaccustomed cowl, and casting a look of perplexity over the sea of
faces before him; but the expression of trouble slowly cleared away as
his eyes met those of a friar, grave and bent, who had stepped out from
the company of the Servi and fixed upon the boy a steadying gaze of
assurance, triumph, and command. It was Fra Gianmaria, who was known
throughout Venice for his great learning.

"Pierino!" broke from the mother, in a tone of quick emotion, as she saw
her boy for the first time in the dress of his order, which thrust, as
it were, the claims of her motherhood quite away; it was so soon to
surrender all the beautiful romance of mother and child, so soon to have
done with the joy of watching the development which had long outstripped
her leadership, so soon to consent to the absolute parting of the ways!

She had not willed it so, and she was weary from the struggle.

But the boy was satisfied; the presence of his stern and learned mentor
sufficed to restore his composure; he did not even see his mother's face
so near him, piteous in its appeal for a single glance to confess his
need of her.

"Nay, have no fear," Don Ambrogio counseled, his face glowing with
pride; "the boy is a wonder."

The good Fra Giulio, turning back from the pulpit stairs, saw the faces
of the two whose hearts were hanging on the words of the child; he went
directly to them and sat down beside Donna Isabella, for he had a tender
heart and he guessed her trouble. "I also," he said, leaning over her
and speaking low, "I also love the boy, and while I live will I care for
him. He shall lack for nothing."

It was a promise of great comfort; for Pierino--she could not call him
by the new name--would need such loving care; already the mother's pulse
beat more tranquilly, and she almost smiled her gratitude in the
large-hearted friar's face.

Then Fra Gianmaria, his mentor, seeing that the boy had gained courage,
came also to a seat beside Donna Isabella, with a look of radiant
congratulation; for he had been the boy's teacher ever since the little
lad had passed beyond the limits of Don Ambrogio's modest attainments.
Although she had resented the power of Fra Gianmaria over Pierino, she
was proud of the confidence of the learned friar in her child; already
she began to teach herself to accept pride in the place of the lowlier,
happier, daily love she must learn to do without. Her face grew colder
and more composed; Don Ambrogio gave her a nod of approval.

"It _is_ Pierino!" the bare-legged Beppo proclaimed, pushing his way
between dignitaries and elegant nobles and taking a position, in
wide-eyed astonishment, in front of the pulpit, where he could watch
every movement of his quondam school-fellow, whose words carried no
meaning to his unlearned ears. But his heart throbbed with sudden
loyalty in seeing his comrade the centre of such a festa; Beppo would
stay and help him to get fair play, if he should need it, since it was
well known that Pierino could not fight, for all his Latin!

But the little fellow in robe and cowl had neither eyes nor thoughts for
his vast audience when he once gathered courage to begin--no memory for
the pride of his teachers, no perception of his mother's yearning;
shrinking and timid as he was, the first voicing of his own thought, in
his childish treble voice, put him in presence of a problem and banished
all other consciousness. It was merely a question to be met and
answered, and his wonderful reasoning faculty stilled every other
emotion. His voice grew positive as his thought asserted itself; his
learning was a mystery, but argument after argument was met and
conquered with the quoted wisdom of unanswerable names.

One after another the great men left the choir and came down into the
area before the pulpits, that they might lose nothing.

One after another the Frari chose out champions to confute the
child-philosopher, but he was armed on every side; and the childish
face, the boyish manner and voice lent a wonderful charm to the words he
uttered, which were not eloquent, but absolutely dispassionate and
reasonable, and the fewest by which he might prove his claim.

Again and again his audience forgot themselves in murmurs of applause,
rising beyond decorum, and once into a storm of approbation; then his
timidity returned, he became self-conscious, fumbling with the white
cowl that hung partly over his face, forgetting that it was not a hat,
and gravely taking it off in salute.

The next day it was proclaimed on the Piazza, as a bit of news for the
people of Venice--for which, indeed, those who had not witnessed the
contest in the church of the Frari cared little and understood
nothing--that "in the Philosophical Contest which had taken place
between the Friars of the Frari and the Friars of the Servi, the victory
had been won by Fra Paolo Sarpi, of the Servi, who had honorably
triumphed through his vast understanding of the wisdom of the Fathers of
the Church."

This was also published in the black frame beside the great door of the
Frari and posted upon the entrance to the church of the Servi, while in
the refectories of the respective convents it formed a theme of
absorbing interest.

The Frari discussed the possibilities of childish mouthpieces for
learned doctors, miraculously concealed--but low, for fear of scandal.
The Servi said it out, for all to hear, "that it was a modern wonder of
a Child in the Temple!"

But Fra Gianmaria hushed them, and was afraid; for often while he taught
he came upon some new surprise, for he perceived that the boy's mind
held some hidden spring of knowledge which was to him unfathomable.

"It is most wonderful," he said one evening to Fra Giulio, as they
talked together in the cloister after vespers; "I solemnly declare that
it hath happened to me to ask him a question of which I, verily, knew
not the answer; and he, keeping in quiet thought for some moments, hath
so lucidly responded that his words have carried with them the
conviction that he had made a discovery which I knew not."

"It is some lesson which Don Ambrogio hath taught him."

"Not so--for Don Ambrogio hath little learning; but Paolo will cover us
with honor. In learning he is never weary, yet hath he an understanding
greater than mine own, and in docility he hath no equal. In his duty in
the convent and in the church he is even more punctilious."

"Is it strange--or is it well," asked Fra Giulio with hesitation, "that
in this year he hath spent with us he asks not for his mother, nor the
little maid his sister, nor seemeth to grieve for them? For the boy is
young."

"Nay," answered Fra Gianmaria, sternly; "it is no lack, but a grace that
hath been granted him."

"Knowledge is a wonderful mystery," Fra Giulio answered; but softly to
himself, as he crossed the cloister, he added, "but love is sweet, and
the boy is very young."

The boy was kneeling placidly before the crucifix in his cell when Fra
Giulio went to give him his nightly benediction; but the good friar's
heart was troubled with tenderness because of a vision, that would not
leave him, of a hungering mother's face.



II

Many years later one of the great artists of Venice, wandering about at
sunset with an elusive vision of some wonderful picture stirring
impatience within his soul, found a maiden sitting under the
vine-covered pergola of the Traghetto San Maurizio, where she was
waiting for her brother-in-law, who would presently touch at this ferry
on his homeward way to Murano. A little child lay asleep in her arms,
his blond head, which pitying Nature had kept beautiful, resting against
her breast; the meagre body was hidden beneath the folds of her mantle,
which, in the graceful fashion of those days, passed over her head and
fell below the knees; her face, very beautiful and tender, was bent over
the little sufferer, who had forgotten his pain in the weariness it had
brought him as a boon.

The delicate purple bells of the vine upon the trellis stirred in the
evening breeze, making a shimmer of perfume and color about her, like a
suggestion of an aureole; and in the arbor, as in one of those homely
shrines which everywhere make part of the Venetian life, she seemed
aloof as some ideal of an earlier Christian age from the restless,
voluble group upon the tiny quay.

There were _facchini_--those doers of nondescript smallest services,
quarreling amiably to pass the time, springing forward for custom as the
gondolas neared the steps; _gransieri_--the licensed traghetto beggars,
ragged and picturesque, pushing past with their long, crooked poles,
under pretence of drawing the gondolas to shore; one or two women from
the islands, filling the moments with swift, declamatory speech until
the gondola of Giambattista or of Jacopo should close the colloquy; an
older peasant, tranquilly kneeling to the Madonna of the traghetto, amid
the clatter, while steaming greasy odors from her housewifely basket of
Venetian dainties mount slowly, like some travesty of incense, and cloud
the humble shrine. Two or three comers swell the group from the recesses
of the dark little shop behind, for no other reason than that life is
pleasant where so much is going on; and some maiden, into whose life a
dawning romance is just creeping, confesses it with a brighter color as
she hangs, half-timidly, her bunch of tinselled flowers before the red
lamp of the good little Madonna of this _traghetto benedetto_, whose
gondoliers are the bravest in all Venice! Meanwhile the boatmen, coming,
going, or waiting, keep up a lively chatter.

And under the trellis, as if far removed, the sleeping child and Marina
of Murano bending over him a face glorified with its story of love and
compassion, are like a living Rafaello!

"The _bambino_ is beautiful," said the artist, drawing nearer, but
speaking reverently, for he knew that he had found the face he had been
seeking for his Madonna for the altar of the Servi. "What doth he like,
your little one? For I am a friend to the _bambini_, and the _poverina_
hath pain to bear."

She was more beautiful still when she smiled and the anxiety died out of
her girlish face for a moment, in gratitude for the sympathy.
"Eccellenza, thanks," she answered simply; "he has a beautiful face.
Sometimes when he has flowers in his little hand he smiles and is quite
still."

But the radiant look passed swiftly with the remembrance of the pain
that would come to the child on waking, and she kissed the tiny fingers
that lay over the edge of her mantle with a movement of irrepressible
tenderness, lapsing at once into reverie; while the artist, full of the
enthusiasm of creation, stood dreaming of his picture. This Holy Mother
should be greater, more compassionate, nearer to the people than any
Madonna he had ever painted; for never had he noted in any face before
such a passion of love and pity. In that moment of stillness the sunset
lights, intensifying, cast a glow about her; the child, half-waking,
stretched up his tiny hand and touched her cheek with a rare caress, and
the light in her face was a radiance never to be forgotten. The
Veronese's wonderful _Madonna del Sorriso_ leaped to instant life; a
_smile_ full of the pathos of human suffering, tender in comprehension,
perfect in faith--this, which this moment of inspiration had revealed to
him, would he paint for the consolation of those who should kneel before
the altar of the Servi!

She was busy with the child, putting him gently on the ground as a
gondola approached; he, with his thought in intense realization, fixing
the peculiar beauty of these sunset clouds in his artist memory as sole
color-scheme of his picture; for this grave, sweet face, with its pale,
fair tones and profusion of soft brown hair, would not bear the vivid
draperies that the Veronese was wont to fashion--the mantle must be a
gray cloud, pink flushed, with delicate sunset borderings where it swept
away to shroud the child; the beauty of his creation should be in that
smile of exquisite compassion, and this wonderful sunset in which it
should glow forever!

It was a rare moment with the Veronese, in which he seemed lifted above
himself; the revelation of the face had seized him, translating him into
the poetic atmosphere which he rarely attained; the harmonies of the
vision were so perfect that they sufficed for the over-sumptuousness of
color and detail which were usually features of his conceptions.

Some one called impatiently from the gondola in rude, quick tones, and
the artist woke from his reverie. The maiden lingered on the step for a
word of adieu to this stranger who wished to give the little one
pleasure, but she dared not disturb him, for he was some great
signor--so she interpreted his dress and bearing--and she was only a
maiden of Murano.

He was still under the spell of his great moment, and he was in the
presence of one who should help him to make it immortal; he uncovered
his head with a motion of courtly deference he did not often assume as
he started forward over the rough planks of the traghetto. "Signora,
where shall I bring the flowers to make the little one smile?"

"To Murano, near the Stabilimento Magagnati, Eccellenza," she answered
without hesitation, lifting the baby in her arms to escape the rough
help of the gondolier, who reached forward to hasten his stumbling
movements.

And so they floated off from the traghetto--the Madonna that was to be,
into the deepening twilight, while the Veronese, a splendid and
incongruous figure amid these lowly surroundings, leaned against the
paltry column that supported the shrine, wrapped in a delicious reverie
of creation; for he was unused to failure and he had no doubts, though
he had not yet proffered his request.

"To-morrow," he said, "I will paint that face!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"By our Lady of Murano!" the gondolier cried suddenly. "He spoke to thee
like a queen--and it was Paolo Cagliari! What did he want with thee?"

"Not me, Piero; it was the child. He wished to give him flowers. I knew
he must be great to care thus for our 'bimbo.' It was really he--the
Veronese?"

"The child! Santa Maria! He is not too much like a cherub that the great
painter should notice him!"

The baby threw out his little clenched fist, striking against the
protecting arms that held him closer, his face drawn with sudden pain;
for a moment he fought against Marina, and then, the spasm over, settled
wearily to sleep in her arms.

"Poverino!" said the gondolier softly, while Marina crooned over him an
Ave Maria, and the gondola glided noiselessly to its cadence.

"Piero," she said, looking up with eyes full of tears, "sometimes I
think I cannot bear it! He needs thy prayers as well as mine--wilt thou
not ask our Lady of San Donato to be kinder to him? And I have seen
to-day, on the Rialto, a beautiful lamp, with angels' heads. Thou
shouldst make an offering----"

The gondolier shook his head and shrugged his shoulders; he had little
faith or reverence. "I will say my aves, _poveriello_," he promised;
"but the lamps are already too many in San Donato. And for the bambino,
I will go not only once, but twice this year to confession--the laws of
our traghetto ask not so much, since once is enough. But thou art even
stricter with thy rules for me."

She did not answer, and they floated on in silence.

"To-morrow," said Piero at length, "there is festa in San Pietro di
Castello."

She moved uneasily, and her beautiful face lost its softness.

"It is nothing to me," she answered shortly.

"It is a pretty festa, and Messer Magagnati should take thee. By our
Lady of Castello, there are others who will go!"

"It would be better for the bambino," he persisted sullenly, as she did
not answer him. His voice was not the pleasanter now that its positive
tone was changed to a coaxing one.

"One is enough, Piero," she said. "And for the festa of San Pietro in
Castello--never, never name it to me!"

"Santa Maria!" her companion ejaculated under his breath; "it is the
women, the gentle _donzelle_, who are hard!"

He stood, tall, handsome, well-made, swaying lightly with the motion of
the gondola, which seemed to float as in a dream to the ripple and lap
of the water; the blue of his shirt had changed to gray in the twilight,
the black cap and sash of the "Nicolotti" accentuated the lines of the
strong, lithe figure as he sprang forward on the sloping foot-rest of
his gondola with that perfect grace and ease which proved him master of
a craft whose every motion is a harmony. If he were proud of belonging
to the Nicolotti, that most powerful faction of the populace, he knew
that they were regarded by the government as the aristocrats of the
people.

Marina arranged the child's covering in silence, and stooped her face
wistfully to touch his cheek, but she did not turn her head to look at
the man behind her.

  "L'amor ze fato per chi lo sa fare,"

he sang in the low, slow chant of the familiar folk-song, the rhythm
blending perfectly with the movement of the boat in which these two were
faring. His voice was pleasanter in singing, and song is almost a
needful expression of the content of motion in Venice--the necessary
complement of life to the gondolier, a song might mean nothing more. But
Piero sang more slowly than his wont, charging the words with meaning,
yet it did not soften her.

"Love is for him who knows how to win!"

He could not see how she flushed and paled with anger as he sang, for it
was growing dark over the water and her face was turned from him; but
she straightened herself uncompromisingly, and he was watching with
subtle comprehension.

He could not have told why he persisted in this strange wooing, for
there had been but one response during the two years of his widowhood,
while his child had been Marina's ceaseless care. Marina had loved the
baby the more passionately, perhaps, for the sake of her only sister
Toinetta, Piero's child-bride, who had died at the baby's birth, because
she was painfully conscious that Toinetta's little flippant life had
needed much forgiveness and had been crowned with little gladness.
Marina was now the only child of Messer Girolamo Magagnati, which was a
patent of nobility in Murano; and she was not the less worth winning
because she held herself aloof from the freer life of the Piazza, where
she was called the "donzel of Murano," though there were others with
blacker eyes and redder cheeks. Piero did not think her very beautiful;
he liked more color and sparkle and quickness of retort--a chance to
quarrel and forgive. He was not in sympathy with so many aves, such
continual pilgrimages to the cathedral, such brooding over the lives of
the saints--above all, he did not like being kept in order, and Marina
knew well how to do this, in spite of her quiet ways. But he liked the
best for himself, and there was no one like Marina in all Murano. During
all this time he had been coming more and more under her sway, changing
his modes of living to suit her whims, and the only way of safety for
him was to marry her and be master; then she should see how he would
rule his house! His own way had always been the right way for him--rules
of all orders to the contrary--whether he had been a wandering
gondolier, a despised _barcariol toso_, lording it so outrageously over
the established traghetti that they were glad to forgive him his bandit
crimes and swear him into membership, if only to stop his influence
against them; or whether it had been the stealing away of a promised
bride, as on that memorable day at San Pietro in Castello, when he had
married Toinetta--it was never safe to bear "vendetta" with one so
strong and handsome and unprincipled as Piero.

Gabriele, the jilted lover of Toinetta, over whom Piero had triumphed,
soon became the husband of another _donzel_, handsomer than Toinetta had
been--poor, foolish Toinetta!--and the retributive tragedy of her little
life had warmed the sullen Gabriele into a magnanimity that rendered him
at least a safe, if a moody and unpleasant, member of the traghetto in
which Piero had since become a rising star. A man with a home to keep
may not "cast away his chestnuts," and so when Piero, in that masterful
way of his, swept everything before him in the traghetto--never asking
nor caring who stood for him or against him, but carrying his will
whenever he chose to declare it--to set one's self against such a man
was truly a useless sort of fret, only a "gnawing of one's chain," in
the expressive jargon of the people.

Piero finished his song, and there was a little pause. They were nearing
the long, low line of Murano.

"It is not easy," he said, "when women are in the way, 'to touch the sky
with one's finger.'"

She turned with a sudden passionate motion as if she would answer him,
and then, struggling for control, turned back without a word, drawing
the child closer and caressing him until she was calm again. When she
raised her head she spoke in a resolute, restrained voice.

"Since thou wilt have it, Piero--listen. And rest thine oar, for we are
almost home; and to-night must be quite the end of all this talk. It can
never be. Thou hast no understanding of such matters, so I forgive thee
for myself. But for Toinetta--I do not think I ever can forgive thee,
may the good Madonna help me!"

"There are two in every marriage," Piero retorted sullenly, for he was
angry now.

"It is just that--oh, it is just that!" Marina cried, clasping her hands
passionately. "Thou art so strong and so compelling, and thou dost not
stop for the right of it. She was such a child, she knew no better,
poverina! And thou--a man--not for love, nor right, nor any noble
thing"--the words came with repressed scorn--"to coax her to it, just
for a little triumph! To expose a child to such endless _critica_!"

Only a Venetian of the people could comprehend the full sting of this
word, which conveyed the searching, persistent disapproval of an entire
class, whose code, if viewed from the moral point of view, was painfully
slack, though from its own standard of decorum it was immutable.

"It has been said, once for all--thou dost not forgive."

"It is the last time, for this also, Piero; I meant never to speak of it
again, but those words of thine of the festa in San Pietro in Castello
made me forget. It came over me quite suddenly, that this is how thou
spendest the beautiful, great strength God gave thee to make a leader of
thee in real things. But whether it be great or small, or good or ill,
thou always wilt have thy way!"

"It's a poor fool of a fellow that wouldn't keep himself uppermost, like
oil," he cried, hesitating only for a moment between anger and
gratification, and choosing the way that ministered to his pride. "Santa
Maria! I'll butter thy macaroni with fine cheese every time!"

"Nay, spare thy pains, Piero, and be serious for one moment. There is no
_barcariol_ in all Venice who hath greater opportunities, but thou must
use them well. They spoil thee at the traghetto; and if a man hath his
will always, it will either spoil him or make him noble."

"What wouldst thou have me to do?" he questioned sullenly.

"They would be afraid of thee--thou couldst quiet these troubles in the
traghetti--thou must use thy strength and thy will for the good of the
people. It is terrible to have power and to use it wrongly."

Piero moved back to his place again and took up his oar, throwing
himself in position for a forward stroke. "Forget not," he said,
poising, "that I need not listen to thee if I do not choose. I may not
stay _in casa_ Magagnati--not any more, if thou art always scolding."

"I shall scold--always--until thou dost quiet this disorder of the
traghetti," she answered, undaunted.

"And thou wilt return; for there is always the bambino."

"If I come back," he said in a softer tone, responding to the appeal for
his child, "I must speak of what I will."

"Of all but one thing, Piero;" for it was not possible to misunderstand
him, and she was resolute. "If this is not the end I shall speak with my
father--and the bambino----"

They were both silent. He knew that no one could ever care for his
invalid child as she had done; and all that he owed her and must
continue to owe her restrained him under her chiding, for the baby could
not live away from her. Sometimes, too, there were moments of strange
tenderness within him for this helpless, suffering morsel of humanity
that called him "babbo!" He did not know what might happen if the wrath
of the redoubtable Magagnati were to be invoked against him, for this
quarrel could not be disposed of as those small matters with the
gondoliers had invariably been. So far from threatening this before,
Marina had hitherto shielded Piero, in her unanswerable way, from
everything that might hasten the rupture that seemed always impending
between these two dissimilar natures; and Messer Magagnati had two
thoughts only, his daughter and his _stabilimento_--the great glass
furnaces which were the pride of Venice.

Piero had no suspicion that Marina always touched the best that was in
him; he thought she made him weaker, and it was not easy to yield the
point that had become a habit. No one else had ever moved him from any
purpose, but now he perceived that there would be no reversal of that
sentence--that he should continue to come to see his child, and that he
must continue to submit to Marina's influence. It was she who had, in
some unaccountable way, persuaded him out of his unlawful trade of
_barcariol toso_, and had forced his reluctant acceptance of the
overtures that were made to him from the Guild of Santa Maria Zobenigo,
where he had risen to be one of the _bancali_ or governors, his
qualities of force and daring making him useful in this age when
lawlessness was on the increase. He was beginning to feel a sense of
satisfaction, not all barbaric, in the position he had won among men who
had some views of order, and to perceive that there might be a lawful
use, almost as pleasant, for those very attributes which had rendered
him so formidable a foe outside the pale of traghetto civilization.

"_Ecco_!" he announced, with a slow, sullen emphasis which declared his
unwilling surrender, while he plied his oar with quick, wrathful
strokes. "It will take more than aves to make a saint of thee! And thou
mayst hold thy head too high, looking for better than wheaten bread! But
I'm not the man to wear a curb, nor to put up with thorns where I looked
for roses! Thou hast no right to mind what chances to me--yet thou hast
made me give up the old life."

"Because I knew thou couldst do better. See where thou standest to-day!
It is not a little thing to be a governor of the Nicolotti!"

"It is a truth," Piero confessed, "upside down, and not to boast of,
for whoever tries it would wish it less. The bancali are 'like asses who
carry wine and drink water,' for the good of the clouts, in days like
these."

"I heard them talking to-day, Piero. The _barcarioli tosi_ are worse
than Turks; one must pay, to suit their whim, in the middle of the Canal
Grande, or one may wait long for the landing! And there was a scandal
about a friar of San Zanipolo, of whom they had asked a fare for the
crossing; I know not the truth of it! And at Santa Sofia the great cross
with the beautiful golden lustre is gone, and one says it is the
'tosi.'"

Piero winced, for, to an ancient "toso," or even to a "bancalo" of
to-day, such enormities had not the exciting novelty that might have
been expected, and Marina had a curious habit of seeming entirely to
forget his past when she wished to exact his best of him.

"And Gabriele--"

"Fash not thyself for a man of his measure, that is fitter to 'beat the
fishes' like a galley-slave than to serve an honest gondola!" Piero
interrupted scornfully.

"But Piero, Gabriele hath sold his license to one worse than he, and
there was great talk of quarrels along the Riva, and how that yesterday
they sent for Padre Gervasio from San Gregorio to bring the Host to
quiet them."

"Ah, the Castellani!" said Piero, with the contempt that was always
ready for any mention of this great rival faction of the people whose
division into one or other of these factions was absolute.

"But the Nicolotti have their scandal also," Marina asserted,
uncompromisingly; "among themselves it is told they break the laws like
men not bound by vows! Some say there will be an appeal to the
Consiglio."

"Nay," said Piero, with an ominous frown; "the _bancali_ and _gastaldi_
are enough; we need no bossing by crimson robes."

This question of the traghetti and their abuses had lately grown to
large proportions among the people, and it possessed a deep interest for
all classes quite apart from the antiquity and picturesqueness of these
honorable institutions of the Republic--since all must use the ferries
and wish for safety in their water-streets. For centuries these
confraternities of gondoliers who presided over the ferries, or
traghetti, of Venice had been corporations, self-governing, with
officers and endowments recognized by the Republic, and with a standard
of gondolier morals admirably defined in their codes--those "Mariegole"
which were luxuriously bound and printed, with capitals of vermilion, a
page here and there glowing like an illuminated missal with the legend
of the patron saint of the traghetto, wherein one might read such
admonitions as would make all men wiser.

But of late there had been much unruliness among the younger members of
the traghetti, and a growing inability among their officers to cope with
increasing difficulties, because of these barcarioli tosi, who lived in
open rebellion against this goodly system of law, poaching upon the
dearly bought rights of the traghetto gondoliers, yet escaping all
taxes. And because of the abuses which had been gradually undermining
the fair reputation of the established orders of the traghetti, the
Republic, by slow encroachments upon ancient concessions, was surely
reducing their wealth and independence.

"Santa Maria!" Piero ejaculated after a pause, during which his wrath
had been growing. "The Consiglio hath its own matters for ruling; the
traghetti belong to the people!"

They had reached the little landing of the first long waterway of
Murano, where one of the low arcaded houses, with its slender shafts of
red Verona marble, was the dwelling of Girolamo Magagnati; the others of
this little block of three were used as show-rooms and offices for the
great establishment which was connected with them, in the rear, by small
courtyards; and the dense smoke of the glass factories always rested
over them, although this was the quarter of the aristocrats of Murano.

The buildings looked low and modest if measured by the palaces of the
greater city, and their massive marble door- and window-frames increased
the impression of gloom. But here and there a portal more ornate, with
treble-twisted cords deeply carved, or a window of fourteenth century
workmanship relieved the severity of the lines; while in this short
arcade, where the houses rose but a storey in height above the square
pillars which supported the overhanging fronts, these unexpected columns
of rosy marble, delicate and unique, on which the windows seemed to
rest, gave singular distinction to these dwellings.

Often the people passing in gondola or bark glanced carelessly into the
depth of the open window space framed between those polished marble
shafts, for the familiar vision of a wonderful young face, beautiful as
a Madonna from some high altar in Venice; often, too, this vision of a
maiden bent above a child, with rare golden hair and great eyes full of
pain.

There was a little lingering on the landing as they left the gondola;
for the baby, waking from his long, refreshing sleep, had claimed his
share of petting before the great dark man who tossed him so restfully
in his strong arms went away. There was no one who could make the little
Zuane laugh like "babbo," though the tremulous, treble echo of the full
tones of the gondolier had a pathos for those who listened.



III

The little Zuane had eaten his supper of _polenta_ and, in the painted
cradle which his grandfather Girolamo had bought for him from under the
arcades of the Piazetta, lay at last asleep, consigned to the care of
all those saints and guardian angels who make the little ones their
charge, and who smiled down upon him from the golden aureoles and clouds
of rose and blue on the cradle-roof while, slowly balancing, it charmed
him into dreams.

And now, at her window, Marina had the night and the stars to herself,
over the still lagoon and down in its mirroring depths.

It was a sad little tale soon told, this tragedy of Toinetta which had
seemed so great to the dwellers in that home three years ago. A pretty,
wilful child of fifteen, who had grown up impatient of all needful home
restraint, finding rebellion easier because there was no mother to
control her--with a love of motion, color, sunshine, sound, and laughter
that made her an Ariel of Venice, as full of frolic as a kitten and as
irresponsible, choosing in her latest caprice one from the many lovers
who were ready for the wooing with the seriousness with which she would
have chosen a partner for a festa, since to-morrow, if something else
seemed better, this lover also could be changed. But the opposition of
the grave father and sister made their consent the better worth winning,
and set the youthful Gabriele in a more attractive light. So the
betrothal had been duly made in the presence of the numerous circle of
friends and relatives who stand as witnesses at a betrothal feast in
this City of the Sea, and who were as ready with their smiles and their
felicitations for any event in the home life of the quarter, as they
would be withering in their criticism should there be any failure of
complete fulfilment of those traditional observances which are
imperative in Venice. Thus the boy and girl were _spoza_ and _novizio_,
waiting the fuller bond in all that pretty interchange of tokens so
faithfully prescribed in Venetian circles of every degree; but the
period had been one of quarrels and forgivenesses, of fallings away from
and returns to favor, as might have been expected from two capricious,
foolish children.

To make part of the pretty pageant of the "Brides of Venice," which took
place on Lady Day in San Pietro in Castello, the maidens, all in white
with floating hair, their dower-boxes fastened by ribbons from their
shoulders, had seemed to Toinetta, as she stood each year an onlooker in
the admiring crowd, a happiness devoutly to be desired. The custom was a
survival of an earlier time, fast losing favor with the better classes
of the people; but to Toinetta its dramatic possibilities held a greater
fascination than the more sober ceremonial of the usual wedding service,
and, all persuasion to the contrary, when the procession gathered in
San Pietro in Castello, Toinetta, with flushed cheeks and sparkling
eyes, was one of the twelve maidens. Marina looked on with offended
eyes; her father consenting, yet only half-convinced, atoning for this
lessening of the family dignity by the elegance of the feast he had
provided, and all permitted bravery in the gondolas that were waiting to
take them thence.

The ups and downs of her childish courtship had culminated in more tears
and jealousies than usual on the previous day, but these were secrets
between the lovers, and quite unguessed by father or sister. But when
the wedding oration had been preached over those twelve bridal pairs,
and the wedding benediction had been granted, it was _not_ Gabriele, the
boyish betrothed of Toinetta, who brought the blushing bride, partly in
triumph and partly in pique, to her father's side, but Piero Salin, the
handsomest gondolier on the lagoons, the most daring and dreaded foe of
all the established traghetti. It had been impossible for the spectators
from the body of the church to follow closely the movements of the
twelve white-robed maidens with their attendant swains while the
ceremony was progressing in the dim recesses of the choir, and the
surprise and dishonor this unexpected _denouement_ brought upon the home
were nothing to the unhappiness in store for the childish bride, whose
latest and wildest freak brought neither wisdom for self-discipline nor
power to endure that relentless criticism which ceased only when a
little one lay in the place of the child-mother, who had been too weak
to cope with the worries of the year that had followed upon that
unhappy day in San Pietro.

The jilted Gabriele had accepted the situation with a parade of
philosophical scorn which removed him beyond the pale of the sympathy
Marina would have offered him; and Marina--whose exquisite sense of
truth, decorum, and duty had been outraged to a degree beyond Toinetta's
comprehension--forgot it all in the overwhelming compassion with which
she took her little sister in her arms and tried to help her live her
difficult life; she realized, as only a large nature could, that love
was the only hope for this emergency, and, feeding on her measureless
compassion, love, the diviner faculty, grew to be a power.

Slowly and very dimly she had helped the young wife to some vague
comprehension of the duties she had so rashly assumed. Hitherto, for
Toinetta, there had been no difficulties, and now there were so many she
was frightened and did not understand; now, when Piero scolded at her
tears or temper she could not run away nor change him for a pleasanter
companion, and she knew no other way to manage such a difficulty; and
there was no pleasure in the Piazza because of that eternal critica.
There was triumph still in a _canalazzo_, for Piero was so handsome and
so strong, and in the gondola, on the Canal Grande, one could not hear
the talking--besides, Venice was not Murano; but in the home the old
friends came no more, and life was very sad--quite other than it used to
be!

Even her father, who traced the disgrace that had come upon his house to
his over-indulgence, was now proportionately severe, and to his stern
sense of honor the lawless son-in-law was a most unwelcome guest.
Through that slow year of Toinetta's life Marina was the veritable angel
in the house, not conscious of any self-sacrifice, but only of living
intensely, making the living under the same roof possible for these two
strong men who looked at life from such different standpoints, soothing
the wounded pride of her father by her perfect sympathy while striving
to rouse Piero to nobler ideals.

And now that it was all over--was it all over?--there lay the poor
little Zuane; and Piero, over the water at his traghetto, was a great
care. But he should do his best yet for the people!

A deep voice with a ring of wistfulness came through the darkness:

"Doth he not sleep yet, the little Zuane? The evening hath been long,
and I have somewhat to show thee."

"I come, my father," she answered very tenderly, as she followed him
through the narrow, dark corridor, into a large chamber which served as
a private office, but where the father and daughter often sat alone in
the evening; for here Girolamo kept many designs and papers relating to
his work, and they often discussed his plans together.

He unlocked an old carved cabinet and brought out a roll of parchments,
spreading them upon the table and explaining: "I could not leave them
while I went to call thee, for it is an order from the Senate--thou
see'st the seal--and a copy of the letter of the Ambassador of the
Republic to the Levant, with this folded therein--truly a curious scheme
of color, but very rich, and the lines are somewhat uneven. What
thinkest thou of the design?"

"The outline is good," she answered, after a careful scrutiny, for she
had been trained in copying his best designs. This was a pattern
furnished by the grand vizier of the sultan for a mosque lamp of a
peculiar shape, wrought over with verses from the Koran, in various
colored enamels. "The outline is well; but the colors--mayst thou not
change this yellow? there is too much of it."

"Nay, for the colors have a meaning; methinks this yellow is their
sacred color. But the texts are fine; the broken lines of the characters
have a charm, and the scrolls relieve the surface, making semblance of
shadow. Yet I will make thee a prettier one for thine own chamber, with
some thought of thy choosing."

She looked up at him with shining eyes; their trouble, combated and
borne together, had brought them very near to one another.

"I have often wished for a lamp with the colors soft like moonlight; and
the design shall be of thine own hand, and the verse upon it shall be an
ave, and in it there shall be always a light. It shall be a prayer for
the little one!" she said in quick response. "The Senate wished thee to
make a lamp of this design? I have seen none like it."

"Nay, not one; there will be nine hundred, for the decoration of a
mosque," and Girolamo's eyes sparkled with triumph. "It is not that it
is difficult," he explained, for Marina's eyes wandered from her
father's face to the design with some astonishment. "It is even simple
for us. But when the Levant sends to Venice for these sacred lamps for
her own temples it is her acknowledgment that we have surpassed our
teachers. It is a glory for us!"

"Father, I thought the glass of Venice was even all our own!" Marina
exclaimed in a tone of disappointment. "I knew not that our art had come
from the East to us. Some say that it was born here."

"Ay, some; but thou shouldst know the story of thy Venice better, my
daughter," Girolamo answered gravely, for to him every detail connected
with his art was of vital import. "There may be some who say this, but
not thou. In the time of Orseolo the mosaics were brought from the
Levant for our old San Marco. Thus came the knowledge to us in those
early days. But now there is no longer any country that shares it
equally with Venice, for elsewhere they know not the art in its
fineness. These, when they are finished, shall be sent as a gift from
the Republic; it is so written in this order from the Senate."

"When came it to thee?"

"To-day, with much ceremony, it was delivered into mine own hand by one
of the Secretaries of the Ten. For, see'st thou, Marina, it is a mark of
rare favor that they have trusted this parchment with me, and have not
brought me into their presence to make copy of it in the palace. If thou
couldst lend me thy deft fingers----"

"Surely," she answered, smiling up at him.

He was standing over her with one hand on her shoulder; he rested the
other lightly on her hair, looking down into her eyes for a moment with
a caress still and tender, after his own grave fashion. "It will be
safer so," he said, folding the parchment and the letters carefully and
locking them away in his cabinet. "And to-morrow, Marina--for they have
granted me but one day."

The chamber in which they sat was wainscoted with heavy carved woodwork
stained black, and every panel was a drawer with a curiously wrought
lock, containing some design or some order for the house of Magagnati;
and these archives were precious not only for the stabilimento and
Girolamo the master, but they would be treasured by the Republic as
state papers, representing the highest attainment in this exquisite
Venetian industry, which the Government held in such esteem that for a
century past one of the chiefs of the Council of Ten had been appointed
as inspector and supervisor of the manufactories. For further security
the Senate had declared severest penalties against any betrayal of the
secrets of the trade--a form of protection not quite needless, since the
Ambassador of His Most Christian Majesty had formed a species of secret
police with no other object than to bribe the glass-makers and extract
from them the lucrative secret which formed no part of the courtesies
that were interchanged between France and the Republic.

The large, low table, black and polished like teak-wood, upon which they
had been examining the vizier's design, was lighted by a lamp of wrought
iron swinging low by fanciful chains from the high ceiling, making a
centre of dense yellow flame from which the shadows rayed off into the
gloom of the farther portions of the room, and a charming picture of
father and daughter was outlined against the vague darkness. Another
lamp, fixed against a plate of burnished brass, cast a reflection that
was almost brilliant upon the glory of this chamber--a high, central
cabinet of the same dark, carved framework, with a back of those
wonderful mirror plates so recently brought to perfection by another
stabilimento of which the good Girolamo was almost jealous, although
against this luminous background the exquisite fabrications of the house
of Magagnati reflected their wonderful shapes and colors in increased
beauty.

Not yet had any plates of clear glass fine enough for the display of
such a cabinet been realized, though it sometimes seemed to Girolamo
that such a time was very near; but the solid doors of wood, with
ponderous brass locks and hinges, stood open, and the inner silk curtain
which protected these treasures from dust was always drawn aside by
Marina's own hand when these evening lamps were lighted; they were so
beautiful to see, if they but raised their eyes; the very consciousness
of their gleaming was sometimes an inspiration to Girolamo, and at this
hour they were quite safe, for the working day was over, and no one
entered this sanctum save by invitation.

Girolamo Magagnati prided himself on being a Venetian of the people, and
it was true that no member of his family had ever sat in the Consiglio;
but in few of the patrician homes of Venice could more of what was then
counted among the comforts of life have been found than in this less
sumptuous house of Murano, while its luxuries were all such as centered
about his art. He was one of the magnates of his island, for his
furnaces were among the most famous of Murano, and to him belonged
secrets of the craft in his special field to which no others had yet
attained, while in a degree that would scarcely have been esteemed by
the merchant princes of Venice, who sat in the Consiglio, they had
brought him wealth and repute. But to him, whose heart was in his work,
it was power and glory that sufficed. No stranger whom it was desired to
honor came to Venice but was conducted, with a ceremony that was
flattering, while it was also a due precaution against too curious
questioning, through the show-rooms of the factories of Murano; and
often in this chamber had gathered a group of men whom the world called
great, led by that special Chief of the Ten who was then in power at
Murano, to see the treasures of this cabinet of which Girolamo was
justly proud.

This first bit of the wonderful coloring which glowed and flashed when
the light shot through it, as if some living fire were caught in its
heart; or that curious, tortured shape, with its dragon-eyes of jewels,
and its tongue forever thrusting at you some secret which it almost
utters, yet withholds; this fragment of tenderest opalescence which is
of no color, yet blending all, as if a shower of petals were blown
across a rainbow in spring; that one--frosted in silver and gold--pink,
with the yellow sunshine in its core; here the aquamarine, lucent as
Venice's own sea! And here, throned in regal state, in its quaint case
of faded azure velvet, is that very masterpiece of the glass-workers of
Murano which was carried in the first solemn procession of all the arts
at a Doge's triumph in the thirteenth century. Its very possession was a
patent of nobility in Girolamo's reverent esteem; and the most gracious
letter of the Senate, conferring upon this piece of glass the
distinction of first mention among all that were shown upon that day of
triumph, is here also--a yellowed parchment, carefully inclosed in the
little morocco case, securely screwed to the shelf beneath, and Marina
had been present when it was opened for some rare visitor. It was a
relic of those earlier days when there were no furnaces in Murano,
though many of the finest workers came from this island and belonged to
the corporation of the workers on Rialto, and it was almost a
prehistoric record of greatness.

Marina had left the table and gone to the cabinet; her father followed
her. "This I would show thee," he said, calling her attention to a
whimsical shape, blown and twisted almost into foam. "This Lorenzo Stino
brought me only yesterday; he is full of genius; I think none hath a
quicker hand, nor a more inventive faculty. I have watched him in his
working." He scanned her eagerly as he spoke.

"Yes, it is fanciful--wonderful," she added to please him, but without
warmth, while her eyes wandered over the shelves. "Oh, father, here are
some of the very mosaics that were made for San Marco; thou hast
forgotten!"

She lifted eagerly a small opaque basin of turquoise blue and held it
toward him; it contained a few bits of gold and silver enamel, the
earliest that had been made in Venice, bearing their ancient date.

"Thou askest more of Venice than I," he said, well pleased with her
enthusiasm; "but have a care lest they say I have not taught thee well,
or that I do not know my art, or that I claim too much. At the time of
the burning of San Marco these Mosaics for the restoration were from the
stabilimenti of the Republic on Rialto--so early it came to us, this
glorious art. And it was one Piero, a founder of our house, though the
name was other than Magagnati, who was the master in that restoration.
But the first mosaics in that old San Marco--ay, and the workmen," he
added with a conscious effort, so much would he have liked to claim the
invention for Venice, "came hither from the East. Thou shouldst know the
history of our art; it is the story of thine ancestry and the nobility
of thy house. Thou hast no other."

"I have thee, my father!"



IV

The Veronese did not paint that beautiful face the next morning as he
had planned; for the first time he had encountered difficulties. Slowly,
as he wended his way through the many turnings of the narrow calle to
Campo San Maurizio, carrying a beautiful Moorish box filled with the
pearly shells which the Venetians call "flowers of the Lido," and a
bouquet of aromatic carnations for the bambino, he recalled the figure
and speech of his Madonna, and they were not those of the maidens whom
one might encounter at the traghetto or in the Piazza; there had been a
dignity and self-forgetfulness in such perfect harmony with the face
that, at the moment, this had seemed entirely natural. But the tones
returned to him as he pondered, filled with a deeper melody than the
usual winning speech of the Venetian; with the grace of the soft dialect
there was a rare, unexpected quality, as if thought had formed the
undertone. He had never heard such a voice in the Piazza--it was rare
even in the palazzo; it was the voice of some sweet and gracious woman
with a soul too large for the world; it held a suggestion of peace and
convent bells and even-songs of nuns.

Then, still more passionately, the desire overcame him to paint that
face for his Madonna; he would never give it up! Yet this maiden was
not one of whom he could ask the favor that he craved, nor to whom he
could offer any return.

He had come to San Maurizio to take a gondola from the traghetto, partly
that he might be free to wander without comment wherever his search
should lead, partly because he was always ready for a chat with the
people; their experiences interested him, and he himself belonged by his
artist life, as by his sympathies, to all classes. Perhaps, too, he had
been moved with a vague hope that he might find the face he was seeking,
for he was used to fortunate happenings. But there were no waiting
Madonnas under the pergola, and the air of the early spring morning blew
chill from the Lido, almost with an intimation of failure to his
sensitive mood. He pushed aside an old _gransiere_, without the gift of
small coin that usually flowed so easily from his hand, for service
rendered or unrendered, as he impatiently questioned the gondoliers.

"One who knows Murano well!" he called.

There was an instant response from an old man almost past traghetto
service, but his age and probable garrulity commended him.

"I will take thee and thy gondola, since thou knowest Murano," said the
artist kindly; "but I must go swiftly, and I would not tax thee. Thou
shalt have thy fare, but I will pay for another gondolier also from the
traghetto; he must be young and lusty. Choose thou him--and hasten."

There was a babel of voices and a self-gratulatory proffer of lithe
forms, while the old gondolier turned undecidedly from one to another,
and the tottering gransiere ostentatiously protected the velvet mantle
of the artist as he sprang into the boat. With an impatient gesture the
Veronese indicated his choice, and they were soon on their way.

"Come hither, _vecchio mio_, and rest thine old bones; let the young one
work for us both," the padrone commanded, as he flung himself down among
the cushions. "Do they treat thee well at thy traghetto?"

"Eccellenza, yes; but I am scarce older than the others; it is the young
ones who make us trouble; they keep not the Mariegole, and it is only
the old one may depend upon."

"_Davvero_, the world is changed then! It used to be good to be young."

"Eccellenza, yes; when I myself was not old, and his excellency also had
no beard."

"If age and wisdom might be traded for the time of youthful pranks,"
said the Veronese with twinkling eyes, "I doubt if there were wisdom
enough left in Venice to cavil at the barter! Yet thou and I, having
wisdom thrust upon us by these same beards, if trouble come to thee, or
too soon they put thee at the gransiere service, we will remember this
day passed together."

"Eccellenza, thanks; the gransiere has not much beside his beard to keep
him warm, and the time draws near," the old man answered with pleasant
Venetian insouciance.

"Tell me," said the Veronese, turning to the younger man, "why do you
young fellows make Venice ring with your scandals? You are cutting off
your own 'liberties.'"

"Yes, signore." The gondolier hesitated, glancing doubtfully at the
artist's sumptuous attire, which might have indicated a state much
greater than he kept; for the Veronese was famed throughout Venice, in
quarters where he was better known, for an unfailing splendor of costume
which would have made him at all times a model for the pictures he loved
to paint. Recently, for bad conduct, the gondoliers had been gradually
forfeiting their licenses, or "liberties," as they were called in
Venice, and the thought crossed the young fellow's mind that this
splendid stranger was possibly one of those government officials who
were charged with the supervision of the confraternities of the
traghetti.

"It is the first time I have the honor of conducting his Excellency; he
is perhaps of the Provveditori al Comun?" These officials collected the
government taxes and were viewed with jealous eyes by the gondoliers.

"Nay; I am Paolo Cagliari; I belong to a better craft. But please
thyself, for there is much talk of this matter."

"Signore, one must live!" the young fellow exclaimed, with a friendly
shrug of his shoulders and a gleam of his white teeth; for it was easy
to make friends with the genial artist. "And between the governors and
the _provveditori_ one may scarce draw breath! One's bread and onions--"
he added, with a dramatic gesture of self-pity. "It is not much to ask!"

"_Altro_! Nonsense!" the Veronese exclaimed, laughing, for the gondolier
looked little like one who was suffering from hunger, as he stood
swaying in keen enjoyment of the motion which showed his prowess, of the
wind as it swept his bronzed cheek, of the talk which permitted him to
exploit his grievances.

"There is the High Mass, twice in the month; there is the Low
Mass--every Monday, if you will believe me! There are the priests, _for
nothing_--Santa Maria, they are not few! The first fare in the
day?--always for the Madonna of the traghetto. This _maledetto_ fare of
the Madonna suffices for the Madonna's oil, I ask you? Ebbene non! There
are the fines--and these, it must be confessed, might be fewer, for the
saints are tired of keeping us out of mischief. And little there is for
one's own madonna, if one would make gifts!"

"This, then, for thine own madonna," said the artist pleasantly, tossing
him a considerable coin. "And may she make thee wiser; for, by thine
inventory, which it doth not harm thee to rehearse, thou hast a good
memory."

"Eccellenza, there is more, if you be not weary. There is the government
tax; it takes long to gather--ask the _gastaldo_! There are the soldiers
for the navy; how many good men does that leave for the traghetto
service? And a license is not little to buy for a poor barcariol who
would be his own man; one pays three hundred _lire_--not less. Does it
drop into one's hand with the first fare? One must belong to the
Guilds--it is less robbery!"

"But for your gastaldo, your great man, for him it is much honor--"

"Eccellenza, believe it not. If the taxes are not there for the
provveditori, it is the gastaldo who pays. When the money is little it
is the gastaldo who pays much. And the toso--all his faults blamed on
the traghetti! Ah, signore, for the gondolier it is a life--Santa
Maria!" He threw up his hands with a feint of being at a loss to convey
its hardships.

"_Come non c'e altro_!" said the Veronese, laughing; "there is none like
it."

"Ebbene--va bene!" the gondolier confessed, joining heartily in the
merriment, his grievance, which was nevertheless a real one, infinitely
lessened by confession.

Suddenly the old man rose and bowed his head, and both gondoliers
crossed themselves. The Veronese also bared his head and made the sign
of reverence, for they were passing the island of San Michele, toward
which a mournful procession of boats, each with its torch and its banner
of black, was slowly gliding, while back over the water echoed the dirge
from those sobbing cellos. Here, where only the dead were sleeping, the
sky was as blue and the sea as calm as if sorrow had never been born in
the world.

Before them Murano, low-lying, scattered, was close at hand, the smoke
of its daily activities tremulous over it, dimming the beauty of sky and
sea.

"His Excellency knows Murano? The Duomo, with its mosaics? Wonderful!
there are none like them; and it is old--'ma antica'! And the
stabilimenti?--it is glory enough for one island! Ah, the padrone wishes
to visit the stabilimento Magagnati?"

Paolo Cagliari had not known what he would do until the old man's
suggestion seemed to make his vision less vaguely inaccessible, and
before they reached the landing he had learned, by a judicious
indifference which sharpened his companion's loquacity, that Messer
Girolamo lived there alone with his daughter, who went about always with
a bambino in her arms--the child of a dead sister.

There could be no doubt; yet, to keep the old man talking, he put the
question, "She is very beautiful, the donzella?"

"Eccellenza"--with a pause and deprecatory movement of the
shoulders--"_cosi_--so-so--a little pale--like a saint--devote. For the
poor? Good, _gentile_, the donzel of Messer Girolamo. _Bella_, with rosy
colors? _Non_!"

With the Venetians there could be no sharp distinction between the
decorative and the fine arts, as the fine arts were employed by them
without limit in their sumptuous decorations; and that which elsewhere
would have been merely decorative they raised, by exquisite quality and
finish, to a point which deserved to be termed art, without
qualifications.

The Veronese, who had been knighted by the Doge, could scarcely go
unrecognized to any art establishment in any quarter of Venice, and with
unconcealed pleasure Girolamo bowed low before this master who had come
to do him honor; displaying all that the initiated would hold most
precious among his treasures--that design, faded and dim, almost
unrecognizable, of those early mosaics of the Master Pietro--he held
nothing back. It was a day of honor for his house, and the two were
alone in his cabinet.

The Veronese had a gift of sympathy; his heart opened to those who loved
art and had conquered difficulties in her service, and the talk flowed
freely. "I believe," he said, as together they laid away the parchment,
"that in our modern mosaics we should keep to the massive lines of these
earlier models--greater dignity and simplicity in outline and coloring.
It is a mistake to attempt to confound this art with painting."

"It is good, then, for our art, Messer Cavaliere, that at San Donato,
our mother church, we workmen of Murano have our Lady in that old
Byzantine type; there is none earlier--nor in all Venice more perfect of
its time--and the setting is of marvelous richness and delicacy."

"It is most interesting," said the Veronese. "Sometimes a question has
come to me, if an artist cannot do the _all_, is he most the artist who
stops below his limitation or beyond it? A question of the earlier hint,
or the later realization."

"Between the mosaic and the painting, perhaps?" Girolamo questioned,
greatly interested.

"Nay, not between the arts, but of that which is possible to each. It is
not a Venetian question. Here all is warmth, color, beauty, joy; here
art is the expression of redundancy--it hath lost its symbolism."

"I know only Venice--the Greek and the Venetian types. But I have heard
that the Michelangelo was in himself a type?"

"He was a prophet," the Veronese answered reverently, "like the great
Florentine--a seer of visions; but at Rome only one understands why he
was born. He was a maker, creating mighty meanings under formlessness.
His great shapes seem each a mystery, wrestling with a message."

"I had thought there was none who equaled him in form--that he was even
as a sculptor in his painting."

"And it was even so. When I spake of 'formlessness' it was not the less,
but the more; as if, _before the visions had taken mortal shape, he,
being greater than men, saw them as spirits_."

"Never before have I talked with one who knew this master," said
Girolamo, "and it is a feast."

"Nay, I knew him not, for it was not easy to get speech with him, nor a
favor a young man might crave. But once I saw him at his work in San
Pietro, where he wrought most furiously and would take no payment--'for
the good of his soul,' he said, that he might end his life with a pious
work. The night was coming on, and already his candle was fastened to
his hat, that he might lose no time. They had brought him a little bread
and wine for his evening meal, for often he went not home when the mood
of work possessed him; and beside him was a writing of the man
Savonarola--this and the Holy Evangel and the 'Inferno' fashioned his
thoughts. He lived not long after that, for we were still in Rome when
they made for him that great funeral in Santa Croce of Florence, the
rumor of which is dear to artist hearts. He was great and lonely, and he
knew no joy; there hath been none like him."

"And the Tintoretto, at Santa Maria dell' Orto?"

"He, too, is a _furioso_, wonderful in form--and the Michelangelo had
not the coloring of our Jacopo. But the terror of the Tintoretto is very
terrible and very human. The Michelangelo fills a great gloom with
phantasms--they question--and one cannot escape."

"It hath been a morning of delights," Girolamo said with grave courtesy
when the talk had come to an end. "I thank the master for this honor."

"Nay," answered the knightly Veronese; "it is I who have received. And
more, yet more would I ask. I know not if in this chamber of treasures I
may leave the trifle which I came to bring for the bambino?" he added
with hesitation, as he placed upon the table his little inlaid box of
baubles and his bunch of spicy flowers. "Yet it was a promise."

And while Girolamo listened in astonishment he told abruptly the story
of his meeting with Marina and the little one, unconsciously weaving his
thoughts into such a picture as he talked, that Girolamo recognized the
inspiration and was already won to plead his cause.

"This," continued the artist, unfolding a letter, "is the order which
hath been sent me by Fra Paolo Sarpi, of the convent of the Servi, a man
most wise and of high repute in Venice. 'The face,' this learned friar
sayeth, 'must be full of consolation and one to awaken holy thoughts.
And I, being not an artist' (which, because he is greater than so many
of his craft, he hath the grace to acknowledge!), 'have no other word to
say, save that it shall be noble and most spiritual, as befitteth our
religion.' And such a face till now, Messer Girolamo Magagnati--so
beautiful and holy--I have not found. But now it is a vision sent to me
from heaven, quite other than any picture I have ever dreamed, and I
will paint no other for this Madonna of the Servi. I also, like the
Angelo, would give my holiest work for the good of my soul; for the days
of man are numbered, though his blood be warm in his veins like wine! It
would be a pious act for the maiden; and if she will most graciously
consent, the picture shall be an offering for the altar of the chapel of
Consolation in the Servi."

"I will ask her," said the father simply, and felt no surprise at what
he had granted when he was left alone with his thoughts, for Paolo
Cagliari, because of a way he had that men could not resist, already
seemed to him a friend; for the rare mingling of knightly grace and
artistic enthusiasm, overcoming spasmodically the usual assertiveness of
his demeanor, seemed at such moments to mean more than when assumed by
those who were never passionate nor brusque, and his very incongruities
held a fascination for his friends.



V

Marina came often to the studio of the Veronese in San Samuele, while
the _Madonna del Sorriso_ grew slowly into life; it was not that most
perfect life of which the artist had dreamed, for hitherto beauty had
sufficed to him and he had never sought to burden his creations with
questions of the soul; but now the sadness of the unattainable that was
growing within him looked out of the wonderful eyes of the maiden on his
canvas, yet he tossed his brushes aside in discontent. "Her smile
eludeth me, though it hath the candor of a child's," the master cried.

Within his studio his pupils came and went, some earnest to follow in
the footsteps of the master, absorbed in their tasks; others, golden
youths, painting a little because Art was beautiful--not overcoming.

In the inner chamber, which was the artist's sanctum, were only the
Veronese and his brother Benedetto at work; his brother, who was
architect and sculptor too, was putting in the background of an
elaborate palace in a fine Venetian group upon which Paolo worked when
not occupied with his Madonna; and a favorite pupil, the young nobleman
Marcantonio Giustiniani, was in attendance upon the master. The lovely
girlish face, of a spiritual type rare in Venice, seemed to the young
patrician more beautiful than that of any of the noble, smiling ladies
who were waiting to be won by him, and in those hours of blissful
service he, too, made a study--crude and inartistic.

"Thy hand hath yet to learn its cunning," the master said, as in much
confusion, one morning when they were quite alone, his pupil revealed
his roughly executed head; "yet thou hast painted the soul! The heart
hath done it, Signorino mio, for thou art not yet an artist. There is no
other lady for Marcantonio Giustiniani; yet she comes not of a noble
house."

"She makes it noble!" cried the young fellow, flushing hotly, "for she
is like her face."

"Ay, for me and thee she is noble," said the Veronese compassionately,
for he loved the boy. "But for the noble Senator, thy father--of the
Council of the Ten--he will not find this maiden's name in the 'Libro
d'Oro.' I am sorry for thee."

"Master!" cried Marcantonio imploringly, "art thou with me?"

"Verily, but I can do naught for thee."

"Listen, then! One day the nobles shall find that name inscribed in the
'Libro d'Oro'; it shall be there, for mine shall suffice."

The master answered nothing, but bending over the sketch which his pupil
had made he caressed it, here and there, with loving touches of his
magic brush, while the young nobleman poured forth his vehement speech,
forgetting to watch the master's fingers.

"Once in the annals of the Republic there is noted such a marriage; a
daughter of Murano, of the house of Beroviero--nay, not so beautiful as
Marina--wedded with one of our noblest names; and the children, by
decree of the Senate, were written every one in the 'Libro d'Oro.'"

"_This_ have I done for thee!" said the master, moving away from the
sketch and disclosing it to the young fellow, who gazed at it in silent
amazement. "Only the eyes have I not touched," the Veronese explained;
"for thou hast made them more soulful than even unto me they seemed, and
thus have I read thy secret."

"Maestro mio!" cried Marcantonio at length, in ecstasy; "none among us
may learn the marvel of thine art!"

"I have but touched thy sketch with the power that mine art could give,"
the master answered, well pleased. "Yet it is thou who hast read the
secret of the face that was not revealed to me."

"We were speaking of the 'Libro d'Oro,'" the young patrician interrupted
eagerly.

"It may be so, I know not," the Veronese answered indifferently, for he
himself was not written in that noble chronicle. "My art deals little
with these cumbrous records of the Republic."

"Thou art wrong to scorn them, caro maestro, for in them is chronicled
the glory of Venice."

"The saying doeth honor--from a pupil to his master!" the artist burst
forth with his quick, uncontrollable temper. "The Tablets of Stone were
reserved for the highest dignity of the Law; and in that Sala dei Capi,
where at this moment sits Giustinian Giustiniani--one of the chosen
three of the Council of the Ten--my name is written largely with mine
own hand, as artists write their names, _above_ the heads of rulers for
all coming time to see! The _Avvogadori_ do not keep my 'Libro d'Oro';
the entrance to it is by divine right!"

He flung his brushes fiercely aside, in one of those moods that seemed
all unwarranted in comparison with the slightness of the
provocation--moods that alternated with the lovable, genial, generous
impulses of an artist soul, overwhelming in energy and great in
friendship; yet jealous, to a degree a lesser nature could scarcely
pardon, of anything that seemed to touch upon his province as an artist
and the claims of art to highest honor.

       *       *       *       *       *

The day was drawing near when Marcantonio Giustiniani, the only son of
Giustinian Giustiniani, a noble of the Senate and of the Council of the
Ten, should present himself before the _Avvocato del Comun_ to claim
admission to the Great Council as a noble, born in lawful wedlock, of
noble parents, inscribed in the Golden Book.

To the young fellow himself this twenty-fifth anniversary of his birth,
when, by Venetian law, the ceremony must take place, approached with
needlessly rapid footsteps; he was not yet ready for the duties it would
bring, so much more did he incline to that measure of boyish freedom
which had thus far been his, so unwilling was he to renounce his longing
for some form of art life--the impulse to which fretted him almost
unbearably, in view of the political career which opened mercilessly
before him, threatening every dearer project.

Not that he felt himself born to be an artist--Paolo Cagliari laughed at
his studies while he encouraged his coming to the studio, telling him
that for one who had not chosen Art for his mistress the drawings were
"well enough"; and from the Veronese the words were consoling. His
mother had been afraid of this taste for art, which, for a short time,
had exercised such sway over his fancy, stimulated by his _culte_ for
the beautiful, that he had plead with her to win his father's consent
for an art life. Yet he had himself acquiesced in her quiet but
inflexible showing of the futility of attempting such an overturning of
Giustiniani traditions, though he still went with dangerous frequency to
the studio of the Veronese, to which she had procured him entrance upon
his promise that he would not seriously consider that impossible
possibility at which he had hinted. There had been mention of Pordenone
and of Aretino, with a certain cool scorn that was worse than censure,
and as convincing, there was the Titian, than whom, in art and
sumptuousness, one could not be greater; but, even for him, Cavaliere of
France, there was no place in the Consiglio!

Not that Marcantonio would voluntarily have relinquished his hereditary
place in the state, his possible part in its glory--the dream which came
to all young noblemen of the portrait in that splendid Sala di Consiglio
of his own face grown venerable, wearing the ermine and the ducal
coronet, in token of that supremacy so dear to each Venetian heart, but
jealously held by every noble of the Republic within confines which
lessened with each succession, until the crown was assumed in trembling
and ignominious restriction--if with external pomp and honor that might
befit a king.

But he wanted time; he wanted liberty to choose his own life or enjoy
his restlessness, and he realized the more keenly, from the sense of
power that was so chafed in the curbing, that he was too young to be
forced into such ruthless service; and he could not but acquiesce the
less fervently because it was not open to him to _give_ himself, since
the claim of Venice was absolute and resistance was a crime.

But with quite other sentiments the preparations for the fete were
progressing in that ancient family of Giustiniani, where the day was
awaited with an impatience which increased the fervor and the pomp of
preparation, but was not otherwise manifested in any sign of undignified
eagerness. No house in Venice had held this right for more generations;
no house was princelier in its bearing, nor more superbly republican! No
member of that Supreme Council was more esteemed than the stern
Giustinian, who had been again and again elected to the most important
missions of the state; no _donna nobile_ of all the Venetians was
prouder, more highly born, more beautiful, nor more coldly gracious than
the mother of Marcantonio.

In such an environment there was but one career possible for the only
son of the house, who had been carefully trained, according to the
traditions that made culture for the young Venetian of those days; he
had even attended courses of those philosophical conferences which had
become the fashion since the sittings of the famous Council of Trent,
and which had been conducted in various convents by distinguished
professors from Padua and Bologna, and even by some of the learned men
of Rome; it was a species of amusement creditable for a young
nobleman--it would quicken the reasoning powers and give more subtlety
in debate, when government problems should later absorb his gifts.

But if, like other golden youth of his time, he was like a Greek in
possession of their liquid tongue and in a mastery of oratory that
filled the soul of Giustinian Giustiniani with satisfaction, the young
patrician himself had acquired this learning, less with a thought of one
day shining in the Senate than because it pleased him as a touch of
finish. He was, in some sort, a reaction from the proud and typical
Venetian so ably represented by the elder Giustinian, who claimed
unchallenged descent from the Emperor Justinian, upheld by the
traditions of that long line of ancestry and by the memory of many
honorable offices most honorably discharged by numerous members of his
house. Marcantonio, on the contrary, was handsome, winning,
pleasure-loving--after an innocent fashion, which brought some sneers
from his compeers, the gay "company of the hose;" but he thought life
not made for pain, nor ugliness, nor hardness of any sort; he was bred
to luxury, yet his intellectual inheritance made learning easy for him;
he was many sided and vacillating, an exquisite in taste and the science
of trifles. His affectionate nature, repressed and chilled, refused
absolute subjection to that purpose which the elder Giustinian held
relentlessly before him; he wished to live for himself a little, and not
wholly for Venice. He was an embodiment of that late time of Venetian
culture when its magnificence, its artistic and intellectual development
had touched their height, and the hint of decadence shadowed its
splendor with a pathos unguessed except by the thoughtful few.

He had dabbled a little in costly manuscripts--a taste for an exquisite
in those days, when Venice was the envy of the world for the marvels of
her press; and already he possessed a volume or two, for his cabinet,
from the atelier of Aldus Manutius--that famous edition of Aristotle,
the first ever printed in Greek, with the Aldine mark of anchor and
dolphin on the title-page. But a volume more precious still, with its
dainty finish and piquant history, conferred distinction, it was said,
among the literati, upon its youthful owner; this was no less a treasure
than that first copy of "Le Cose Volgare di Messer Francesco Petrarca,"
most exquisitely printed in type modeled after the poet's own elegant
handwriting, and the volume had been superintended by many learned
heads,--awaited with impatience, as a triumph for its makers,--and
thought a thing rare enough to be offered, like a jewel, to the learned
and illustrious lady, Isabella of Mantua. Marcantonio was no pedant, but
these treasures simply had their place in the richly painted cabinet,
beside many other bits of exquisite workmanship, because rare things in
every art were beautiful to our dilettante, and possessions of all kinds
came to him easily.

There lay the golden necklace presented by Henry III. of France to a
Giustinian who had been one of the young nobles set apart for the
household of the king, when on his visit to Venice; and beside it a
curious volume of songs, all in honor of France and of the king,
entitled "Il Magno Enrico III., difensore di Santa Chiesa, di Francia e
di Polonia Re christianissimo." Here was also preserved that still more
curious allegorical drama which had been given at the grand fete at the
Ducal Palace in honor of this over-adulated monarch. It was natural that
some of these literary curiosities, of which the visit of Henry III. had
been prolific, should have remained in possession of the masters of the
palace which had been tendered for his residence. The volume, bound in
azure velvet, embroidered with golden fleurs-de-lis and seeded with
pearls, lay open at the page "Chapter in which the Most Holy Catholic
Religion is introduced conversing with the most Christian, most powerful
and most holy Henry III., the most glorious King of France and Poland."

The noble lady Laura Giustiniani, who looked with pride upon these
costly trifles of the cabinet of Marcantonio, was a Venetian in every
throb of her patrician veins--first a patriot and then a mother--she
earnestly coveted for her son that he should render vast services to the
state, receive in his early years the Patriarch's blessing upon his
alliance with some ancient Venetian house, and close his noble career
with the Doge's coronet. She admitted reluctantly to herself, although
she would never have confessed it openly, that in these latter days of
the Republic the ermine was not likely to be offered to one so stern and
masterful as her husband; while she also knew, and the knowledge held
its compensation, that Giustinian Giustiniani could not be spared from
the Councils of his government. She knew her history well, and she
realized that the days of the Michieli and Orseoli were over, and that
the supreme honor was no longer for the strong but for the pliant; this
had made her the more willing that her son should partake of the facile
and gracious mood of this time of Renaissance, and had led her to shape
his education more in consonance with his natural tastes than with her
own views of fitness for a Venetian noble. She knew that this was
weakness for a Giustinian; but it was hard to see the noble line pass
down through the centuries without that coveted sign of honor--the
minikin Lion of San Marco, the mighty symbol--carved upon their palaces.

Meanwhile, for a suitable alliance there were already schemes on foot,
and mothers of noble young Venetian ladies paid frequent court to the
stately Lady Laura in her palace on the Canal Grande; and fathers, in
the Senate, in moments of unbending, discussed the probability of the
immediate rise of the young Giustinian upon his admission to the
Consiglio--he was competent and not positive, gracious and no fool, he
could be made to see the wisdom of other people's opinions, which, with
the elder Giustinian, was unheard of!

Among the maidens who should grace the banquet to be given on
Marcantonio's birthnight, more than one had sat for hours in some high
balcony of her palace, preparing for Venetian belle-ship with a patience
worthy of a better cause--her long locks, mysteriously treated,
streaming over the broad brim of the great, crownless hat which
protected her fair face, while the sun bestowed its last touch of beauty
in bleaching the dark tresses to that rich, red, burnished gold which
the Venetians prized.

The young patrician was already esteemed a connoisseur in the most
exquisite industries of Venice, and the Lady Laura had confided to her
son the ordering of a set of goblets of _girasole_ for the banquet--a
new opalescent glass, with iridescent borderings, such as had never yet
been seen at any Venetian fete.

Thus the gondola of the Giustiniani floated for long hours before the
famous establishment of Girolamo Magagnati, so delicate and intricate
was the work that had been ordered from him; and the gondoliers,
meanwhile, in their splendid liveries, held converse with other
gondoliers in lazily drifting barks, with hatchments of other noble
houses embroidered on their sleeves; and their tones were strident and
quarrelsome, or self-complacent and patronizing, as the quality of the
silken sashes which displayed the color of their house was heavier or
poorer than their own.

One boasts of the lantern, all of brass, "Wrought by Messer Alessandro
Leopardi--'come no c'e altro!'--there is no other like it--which he, the
favored gondolier, has been burnishing for the banquet of the Dandolo,
to which he shall that night convey the noble lady of the Giustiniani!"

"It is less beautiful," retorts a gondolier of the house of Mocenigo,
the fringes of his sash of rose sweeping the bridge of his gondola as it
moves forward, slightly tilting on its side, with a quick, disdainful
motion called forth by proper Mocenigo pride--so pliant are these barks
of Venice to the moods of the gondolier. "It is less beautiful--by the
Holy Madonna of San Castello!--than the lantern of wrought iron with the
jewels of _rubino_ that Messer Girolamo Magagnati makes this day, by
order of the Eccellentissimo Andrea Mocenigo, with the jewels of the
fine glass of Murano that shall be like roses flashing in the night!"

And he has sworn so great an oath, by that most ancient Madonna of
Castello, and so well has he vindicated the honor and splendor of his
house in thus early appropriating this recent glory of Venetian
workmanship in its own family emblem, that there is no present need of
distance between him and his rival, and resting upon his oar, as he
stands with a proud and graceful bearing of victory, he allows the
gondola to glide back into position with the lapping of the water.

For the gondoliers of the house of Giustiniani are unfolding, with
quick, ringing, jubilant voices, vast confidential tales of the fetes
that are in preparation for the marriage of the young noble of the
Council, their master, of which this banquet is only the precursor. "For
of course there will be a _sposalizia_! Santa Maria! there is no room on
the Canal Grande for the gondolas that come to the palazzo--from every
_casa_ in the 'Libro d'Oro'--to win the favor of the donna nobile of the
Giustiniani, for some bella donzella who shall be chosen for their young
master--who is like a prince, and will end one day in being Doge! Santa
Maria di Castello, he does not wait that day to scatter his golden
coins!"

If that question of "sposalizia" is not imminent there is truth enough
for any Venetian conscience in the story of the ranks of princely
gondolas at the bend of the Canal Grande, on the days when the donna
nobile of the Giustiniani gives welcome to her guests--princely gondolas
they are, with _felzes_ of brocaded and embroidered stuffs, the
framework inlaid with ivory and mother of pearl, with metal fittings
curiously wrought, and all that bravery of pomp so dear to the Venetian
heart, which calls forth surly decrees from those stern Signori of the
Council--the much unloved "Provveditori alle Pompe," the sumptuary
officers of this superb Republic.

Meanwhile, in this narrow water-street, sunk a few feet below the paved
foot path that stretches to the doors of the dwellings, there are sudden
grumbling movements among the retainers of the patrician families, as
they steer their gorgeous gondolas from side to side, to avoid
humiliating contact with that slow procession of barges bringing produce
from the island gardens of Mazzorbo, there are other barges laden with
great, white wooden tubs of water from Fusina, fresh and very needful to
these cities of the sea, and the dark hulks of barks curiously entangled
with nets and masts and unwieldy tackle of sailor and fisher, show
flashes of brilliant color as the water plays through the netted baskets
swinging low against their sides, while the sunlight glances back from
the gold and silver glory of the scales of living fish, crowded and
palpitating within their meshes.

The fisherfolk who guide these barks are gray and gnomelike in their
coloring, tanned by sky and sea and ceaseless atmospheres of fish, into
a neutral tint,--less vivid in hues of skin and hair, with eyes less
brilliant, with less vivacity and charm of bearing than the gay
Venetians,--but they are the descendants of those island tribes from
which the commerce and greatness of Venice issued; there is almost a
show of stateliness in the aggravating slowness with which their heavily
freighted barks proceed, serenely occupying the best of the narrow
waterway. They are not envious of the hangers-on of those palaces of the
nobles, these free fisherfolk of the islands; they have only haughty
stares for the servile set of gondoliers in lacings of gold and
scarlet--who are not nobles nor fishers, nor people of the soil--and
they pass them silently, with much ostentation of taking all the
gondoliers of Murano into the friendliness of their jests and curses, as
the barges touch and clash with some swiftly gliding gondolier of their
own rank, who wears no bravery or armorial bearings.

Their homes--long, low, white-washed cottages--spread along the main
channel and reach in lessening, dotted lines far off into the sea, where
other islands lie in friendly nearness; but the Bridge, with the Lions
of St. Mark on archivolt and parapet--the invariable official signet of
Venetian dominion--stretches between that simpler quarter and this,
which holds the great houses of Murano, whose masters, a sort of _petite
noblesse_, have made their names illustrious by marvelous inventions in
that exquisite industry in which Venice has no rival.



VI

The "Madonna del Sorriso" now lacked only the finishing touches upon the
exquisite central figure, which reached more nearly to the spiritual
ideal than anything that had ever come from the brush of the Veronese,
and already the Servite friars, in their long black robes and white
cowls, had visited the studio with suggestions many and fruitless,
serving only to arouse the artist's indignant protest and increase his
determination to image more perfectly the poetic vision that had been
vouchsafed to him.

"It hath not the beauty of the 'Venezia' in the palazzo," said one.

"And the church is dark," said another, "and the people like the red and
blue of the colors of the true Madonna."

"And a frate, of the Servi--since it hath been painted for the
convent--here--kneeling," suggested another, more timidly; for it was
known that the Veronese was not always docile in these days, since he
had become great.

"Nay, leave me," said the Veronese fiercely; "for this one thing I
_know_, and this will I paint, for the good of my soul, as mine art
shall prompt me and not otherwise. And if it please not him--Fra Paolo,
who hath given the order--I will bestow it elsewhere."

Then a friar habited like the others, who had stood apart and had not
spoken, came and threw back his cowl, dismissing the group with a
gesture. The features thus disclosed were unimportant, apart from the
domelike forehead, which might well belong to the most learned man of
his learned age; but Fra Paolo's face owed its distinction to the rare
impression it gave the beholder of invincible calm and self-mastery,
with a certain mysterious hint of power and a promise of unswervingness.
His gaze held no suggestion of concealment; yet for the deeper thoughts
that move the spirit of man, to those who knew him well his mild blue
eyes remained inscrutable, while his courtesy to all made one forget
that his words were few, and that of himself he had revealed nothing.

"It is well," he said, "to _know_ that we know. Serve faithfully the God
who gave the gift and take no counsel from men who know not."

Then he stood silent for a while before the picture, as if he would
learn its meaning, the artist watching anxiously, not guessing his
thought.

"The pious wish hath made the offering noble," he said at length, in
quiet, measured tones. "And for the face, it is holy--of the beauty that
God permits--yet I pretend no criticism, since Art is not of mine
understanding. I will not take the honor of the gift away from the
giver, though I had meant it otherwise."

After Fra Paolo had left the studio the Veronese was still studying his
picture, pleased and serious, feeling that this man, who was not an
artist, had comprehended the deepest mood in which he had ever
approached his art, when Marina entered.

"Fra Paolo hath found our offering worthy," he said very gravely; and
suddenly remembering that Marina had come for the last time, "Benedetto
hath need of me in the outer studio for some measurements," he said to
Marcantonio, "but I shall soon return. Do thou, meanwhile, show the
_damigella_ thy sketch."

She turned inquiringly toward Marcantonio, who placed it silently before
her. When he gathered courage to look at her she stood flushed and
trembling with clasped hands.

"Marina!" he cried.

She moved suddenly away from him, drawing herself up to her full height,
one hand slightly extended, as if to keep him from coming nearer; but
her face, as she turned it frankly to his, was lighted with a smile the
Veronese would never copy, and her eyes shone through her tears.

"Is it true, Marina?" he questioned radiantly, as he tried to seize her
hand.

But she still moved backward--not as if she were afraid, but as though
she would help him by a motion to understand.

"You have confessed me unawares," she said, "and shown me mine own
secret, which I knew not. It is not to confess nor deny."

"Yet you move away, Marina, as if you would not have it so."

"Because only the renunciation of it is for us," she answered firmly.
"For I am of the people, and you--of the Giustiniani!"

"As you shall also be!" he affirmed, undaunted.

"Marco, at Venice this is not easy!" The tone was a caress which she
made no effort to withhold, yet he dared not try again to touch her
hand; he already felt her strength.

"None the less, because it is not easy it shall be done. Reach me your
hand, Marina, to prove that you trust my vow."

He was not wont to crave favor so humbly, but a new reverence had
entered into his soul.

She hesitated for a moment, then her words came brokenly, yet with
dignity.

"Marco mio, not yet. Because I am of the people, and because the
others--your father and mother, who are of the nobles, and my father,
who is of the people--may not consent, we will make no vows until this
difficulty is conquered."

"They shall not keep us from it."

She shook her head sadly, but came no nearer. "Will Giustinian
Giustiniani ask a daughter of the people? But Girolamo Magagnati is not
less proud."

"I will return now with thee to Murano. Perhaps thy father will befriend
us."

"No, no; without their consent it would be useless. I think I shall not
tell him--it would be only a grief."

"Because it meaneth much to thee?" Marco questioned, luminous and
ungenerous.

She did not answer.

"Thou dost verily make too much of the nobles and the people, Marina; we
are all Venetians."

"Venice is of the sea and of the land--not like other cities; and the
Venetian people is not one, but twain; my father hath often said it.
Some other day, perhaps--I do not know--if it is needful for the
picture, I may come again. Will you tell the maestro? I think he is our
friend, and he will understand."

He would have followed her, but she waved him back.

The day had a melancholy cast in the narrow waterways of Murano, where
clouds of smoke, dense and constant, rose from hundreds of
glass-workers' chimneys, dimming the reflections in the lagoon and
obscuring that wonderful coloring of sky which is nowhere so radiant as
at Venice.

Beyond the bridge, which the ubiquitous Lion guards with menacing,
uplifted paw, beyond the Piazzetta of San Pietro where the acacia trees
are growing, down by the main canal, where the breath comes freer--for
it is broader than the one where the gondolas from the great houses of
Venice gather and float lazily; past the line of low, whitewashed
cottages bordering the narrow foot-path on either side, over the little
wooden bridge that spans the lagoon, fifty feet across from bank to bank
with its ugly traghetto at the farther end, a figure was often seen
wending, with a child held in tender mother fashion, to the campo of the
"Matrice," the mother church of San Donate.

To-day when Marina had returned from Venice she had caught the little
Zuane to her breast with such a passion of tenderness that he looked up
into her face with startled eyes; hers were brimming with smiles and
tears, and with that wise child-knowledge, which is not granted to
earth's learned ones, he put up his tiny hand with a wan smile and
stroked her cheek.

"We will go to San Donato, Zuanino mio," she said caressingly, as he
nestled closer, "and I have _thee_, my bimbo!"

She put the little one gently down as they entered the triangular field
where the grass grew green and long--whiteness of sand gleaming in
irregular patches between the clumps of coarse blades; but to her this
poor turf was something precious associated with that island sanctuary,
restful and strange, and she drew a long breath with a sense of
suppressed pleasure; for sometimes the water, with its shimmering,
uncertain surfaces, wearied her, and unconsciously she craved something
more positive.

The child, with uncertain steps, tottered toward the standard of San
Marco, which floated proudly from the staff that rose from the rude
stone pillar in the center of the campo, where other little ones were
playing; in the corner by the well groups of women, from the cottages
that bounded the campo on one side, were waiting to draw water for the
evening meal, putting down their jugs and going first into the Duomo to
say an ave, that the good Madonna might bless the cup.

A few feet only from the Duomo the campanile drew her vision skyward;
the film of smoke was lighter here, and the sky seemed nearer--bluer.
She turned to her little charge with a beaming face--her moods were so
easily wrought upon by phases of nature, but slowly moved by personal
influences. "See'st thou, bimbo, how it is beautiful here by the Duomo?"

But the little fellow, in one of his sudden spasms of pain, was
striking the air impotently with small, clenched fists, frightening the
children who were gathering around him, joining in his cries.

Her caress and passionate forgiveness were always ready for the paroxysm
in which she was violently pushed away and combated with struggling feet
and hands, before came the period of exhaustion in which he nestled
close, panting from weakness. Then she carried him into the church,
where, kneeling before the Mother of Sorrows, whose outstretched hands
seemed to touch her own in responsive sympathy and gift of calm, she
prayed and wept.

"O Holy Mater Dolorosa! Why need the children suffer?--they are so
tender and so dear!"

She knelt with loving, protecting arms folded close about the little
form now breathing softly and at rest, while an agony of questioning
filled her prayer to that beseeching Mater Dolorosa, who, wrapped in the
clinging folds of her long blue robe, still leaned forward from the
marble background of the apse, compassionate for the suffering ones of
earth, with imploring hands and ceaseless dropping tears, symbol of love
abounding--a symbol, too, of the dignity of those who suffer and are
pure in heart.

This sanctuary was almost a home to the maiden, who came hither to
praise or question, for life was full of enigmas. Here, too, where she
came from duty and deep devotion, with an intricate sensitiveness of
conscience which often rendered her unintelligible to her confessor, she
lingered for delight. For the tracery on the arches--the color, the
wonderful delicacy of the sculpture--were of that time when art was
suggestive and faint, in tint and meaning, like a dream, and its message
was always spiritual.

"It is not Thou, O Christ," she said, "who willest pain; but thy
children, who are not always loving!"

For in her reverie she was comforted by that vision of a legendary time
when the Holy Mother had stood, beautiful, compassionate, and
commanding, in this field of flaming scarlet lilies; when a great
emperor had obeyed her bidding, and San Donato, the Duomo of Murano, had
arisen as a refuge for the sorrowing.

In tender language of the people it was the mother church--"Matrice."

She made a cushion of her cloak and laid the little one upon it, for he
still slept and she would not waken him; and then, though the quaint,
inlaid pavement was cold and bare, she knelt again, her rosary dropping
from her hands as she shyly whispered the burden of her strange new
confession to this ever-waiting, tender Mother--her confession more full
of pain than joy, yet already dear, and a thing not to be surrendered,
though it should bring her only pain.

But there was no other friend to whom she told it.

Soon, alas! the days grew over-full of pain, and Marina came more often
to the Mater Dolorosa, for the little Zuane had not grown stronger with
the coming of the spring; sleep came to him more easily, but it did not
bring refreshment, and the roses on his cheeks were only signs of
failing bloom. Passionately Marina's loving prayers were breathed
before the shrine of the Madonna San Donato, but the little one grew
weaker every day, till, after a long night of watching, a sweet-voiced
nun stood with Marina beside the cradle.

"The burden of the baby's suffering life is changed to blessing," she
said. "Earth held no joy for him; God hath been merciful beyond thy
prayer, my daughter."



VII

Fra Paolo Sarpi--this friar so grave and great and unemotional--had been
since he had entered the convent in his precocious boyhood the central
figure, fascinating the interest of his community by the marvel of his
progress, so that those who had been his teachers stood reverently
aside, before he had attained to manhood, recognizing gifts beyond their
leading which had already won homage from the savants of Europe and
crowned the order of the Servi with unexampled honors. The element of
the unusual in the young Paolo's endowments had transformed this
Benjamin of the convent into a hero, and surrounded the calm flow of his
studious life with a halo of romance for these Servite friars; yet the
good Fra Giulio in those early days, having little learning wherewith to
estimate his progress and watching over him like a father, had been
grieved at his strange placidity. "He sorely needeth some touch of
emotion," he said yearningly; "methinks I love the lad as if he were
mine own son, and I feel something lacking in his life."

"Fret not the lad needlessly with those fanciful notions of thine," Fra
Gianmaria had retorted with much asperity. "It is the most marvelous
piece of mental mechanism that I have ever dreamed. Already he hath
attained to larger knowledge than thou, with thy gray hairs, canst
comprehend."

Fra Giulio had crossed himself devoutly, as if confessing to some
earthliness. "I measure not my simple mind with that of a genius, my
brother; for so God hath endowed our lad. Yet it may be that He meaneth
man to garner other blessings besides knowledge. We received him as a
child into our fold, and we are responsible for his development. But his
condition is not normal."

"Genius is abnormal," Fra Gianmaria had responded shortly.

"He hath no wish but for this ceaseless mental labor; all natural
youthful fancies, all joy in the things of beauty--for these he careth
naught."

The elder friar's troubled utterance had stirred no tremor in his
companion's stern reply. "Thou and I, my brother, have attained by
penances and years of abnegation to that mood which hath been granted
the boy as a gift to fit him for the cloister life. It were small
kindness to implant a struggle of which he knows not the beginnings."

And now, after all these years, through which the good Fra Giulio had
watched this son of his affections, whom he loved with a love "passing
the loves of earth" he pathetically told himself,--"as if God thus made
up to him for all the loves he had resigned,"--now that the name of Fra
Paolo was uttered with reverence while his own was unknown, he still
expressed his heart in many tender cares, providing the new cassock
before the scholar had noticed that the one he wore was seamed and
frayed, with such other gentle ministries as the convent rule permitted
toward one who never gave a worldly thought to the morrow.

And still, after all these years, the fatherly friar often fondly
recurred to a time when he had first seemed to catch some dim, shadowed
glimpse of that inner self which Fra Paolo so rarely expressed. He had
been endeavoring to rouse the lad to enthusiasm. "Never have I known one
show so little pleasure in nature," he had said. They were standing on
the terrace of a convent among the hills beyond the plains of Venetia,
and the view was beautiful and new for the youth.

"What is nature?" the lad had responded quietly.

"Nature?" Fra Giulio echoed, startled at the question. "Why, nature is
God's creation. Dost thou not find this bit of nature beautiful?"

"It is pleasant," the young friar had assented, without enthusiasm. "But
hath God created anything nobler than the mind and soul of man? The
earth is but for his habitation."

"Nay," the old man had replied, in a tone of disappointment, "it is more
for me--much more for those whom we call poets."

"Poets are dreamers," the lad had said, turning to his old friend with a
smile which seemed affectionate, yet was baffling, and went not deep
enough for love. "I would not dream; I must know."

"A little dreaming would not hurt thee, my Paolo; for sometimes it
seemeth to those who care for thee that thou needest rest."

"Rest is satisfaction," the lad answered quickly. "If there be a problem
to be solved, I would rather think than dream. I would rather come in
contact with the nobler activities--the mental and spiritual
forces--through the minds and works of men. I would find such attrition
more helpful than this phase of creation which thou callest 'nature,'
whose unfolding is more passive, depending on its inherent law."

"This also is of God's gift, Paolo mio," Fra Giulio had said yearningly.
"Sometimes thou seemest to find too little beauty in thy life, and when
I brought thee hither I hoped it might move thy soul."

"What can be more beautiful," the young philosopher had questioned
earnestly, "than the fitting of all to each, the search for hidden keys,
the linking of problems that seemed apart? These are the things that
move me. I must walk soberly, Fra Giulio, lest I miss some revelation,
so sacred and so mysterious is knowledge! And the love of it leaves me
no room for questions of outside beauty--this ordered beauty of hidden
law is so wonderful!"

For one moment, as Fra Giulio had looked at him, he fancied that he had
seen deeper into his eyes than ever before; then the veil had seemed to
rise up from the boy's heart and close over its depths. If it had been a
moment of self-revelation the young friar was again protected by that
baffling calm as he glanced about him, turning affectionately to his old
friend. "It pleaseth me that thou art pleased," he said.

Fra Giulio had answered with a sigh. It was hard for one who loved so
truly to get so near, yet be no nearer. "I could wish that thou also
shouldst take pleasure in this beauty, my Paolo, for thou art missing a
joy that God permits."

Then the youthful scholar had turned his eyes upon him silently; and it
had seemed to the old man, in his great love, that a sudden glory had
transfigured the grave young face like a consecration. He still
remembered the tones of that clear voice saying serenely: "My Father,
when God speaketh a message in our souls, the peace and beauty which
come to us as we follow its call, are in the measure which He hath
decreed for us."

Now that the convent rang with his triumphs, and Fra Paolo was often
absent from his cell on missions of honor, the old friar sometimes
wondered how many of those philosophic and scientific truths which had
made him famous as an original thinker had come to the lad in
glimmerings on that first night among the hills, when, turning to his
old friend and stretching out his hands with a solemn, imploring motion
which seemed to confess a desperate need of isolation, he had said only,
"Let me think!"

Had his seeming nearness to the stars in the convent _loggia_ brought
him a premonition of the later message which had made him the "friend
and master" of Galileo?

Did he develop his "Laws of Sound" in that voiceful silence; or was it
in that solitude he had first watched the gentle ebb and flow of his own
life-current and learned the secret which Harvey, later, uttered to the
world?

Or had he been wholly absorbed in those philosophical questions which he
so brilliantly disputed at the learned Court of Mantua?

But to be near him was only to wonder more at the mystery which
enveloped him; and Fra Giulio, now that the lad had reached his prime,
often went reverently back to that night under the stars, when the
gifted youth had first stood, distanced as it were from men, remote from
human habitations and alone with the One whom only he acknowledged as
Master--then, perhaps, he had first been conscious of his latent power;
surely then the manifold message of his life must have whispered within
him many premonitions!

The time was long past when a question could arise as to the right of
the Augustinians to rich possessions in church and convent; and the
priceless treasures of art, flung sometimes in atonement upon their
quiet walls by a world-worn artist, or sent in propitiation for some
unconfessed sin by a prince of Church or State, were found side by side
with the gifts and legacies of the faithful, which, in sincere devotion,
they often impoverished their families to bestow.

But none of these things had charms for Fra Paolo. Not even the beauty
of the cloisters, where the low, gray arches rested on slender shafts of
marble, wrought and twisted into as many devices, drew his thoughts from
the ceaseless contemplation of his problems; not even the petted
rose-tree, lovingly trained by the gentle Fra Francesco and lifting its
pink glory to the crest of the colonnade, won his eyes to wander from
the absorbing treasures of the great library where he passed his days.
Here many a brother had taught himself patience over the fine, endless
text of an ancient gospel, or wrought into the exquisite illumination of
some missal which stood to him in the place of his daily living those
yearning, torturing, hungering affections which had so enriched a gentle
home--as a brother, less disciplined, had carved his unruly tempers into
the grotesque figures of the reading desks. But for Fra Paolo the great
library of the convent held no unsatisfied yearnings--only an infinite
content and power to achieve.

From the days when those curious in philosophical research had flocked
from the neighboring universities to see this professor of theology who
could not be conquered in argument, and had been confronted by a
smooth-faced lad of twenty, until now, he was still the glory of the
Servi; and well might the friars watch in triumph, as one by one he
gathered laurels for their order. A little human flush of triumph or of
self-conceit would have added charm to his argument, but these notes
were lacking; clearly, logically, unanswerably, he met each question,
convincing without emotion and hastening from the gay court, of which
these intellectual tourneys were the delight, to the welcome seclusion
of the convent. If he seemed to have missed a real childhood,--its
follies, its innocent pleasures, its winsome affections,--so later, the
temptations that would naturally beset a career so extraordinary fell
harmlessly away from him, for a passion for knowledge burned within him,
consuming all ignoble motives and keeping this young scholar, in friar's
robes, in marvelous singleness of heart, in the midst of a flattering
and luxurious court.

Always he had been a law to himself, both morally and intellectually;
never before did it seem that genius had been cast in a mold so orderly
and calm. In that state of intense concentration which was his habitual
mood, he accomplished without apparent effort the things for which
others paid by a life-time of struggle; and morally he had no visible
combats, not seeming to be even reached by the things which tempted
other men. His wants were fewer than the simplest rule of his convent
allowed, and it seemed less that he had triumphed over the usual earthly
temptations than that he had been created abnormally free from them that
his whole strength might spend itself in the solving of problems. In a
certain sense he stood mysteriously alone, though his friends were many
and devoted and among the wise and venerated of the earth; but there was
always a door closed to them beyond the affection which he returned
them. "Always," he said once, "we veil our faces": yet none doubted his
sincerity.

From time to time, as the years sped, some echo of the jealousy which
his phenomenal success and the boldness of his bearing naturally evoked,
penetrated to the cloisters of the Servi; and more than once there had
been a denunciation to the Inquisition to discuss; some one in authority
had found fault with his theological opinions and denounced him for his
reading of a passage in Genesis, upon which he based his argument--the
affair was grave indeed.

"Ah, the pity of it--the pity of it!" Fra Giulio had exclaimed. "They
should show mercy--he is still so young a man!"

"Ay, young enough to need much discipline," bravely muttered a friar
who dared to disbelieve in their prodigy.

"Silence!" commanded Father Gianmaria, who was now the Superior, in a
stentorian tone; for within these walls there was no appeal from his
judgment or his temper. "The man who speaks only what he _knows_ is old
in wisdom;" and turning he addressed the company in great dignity: "It
doth appear that Rome approveth Fra Paolo's rendering and hath gravely
censured the Inquisitor who hath cited him, commanding him to meddle
only with that of which he hath some understanding."

"There are then tale-bearers whose jealousy would ruin our Paolo!" Fra
Giulio had exclaimed in anxiety.

"It was none other than Fra Paolo himself who carried the tale," the
Superior retorted in scorn of the old man's weak affection. "Fra Paolo
refused to appear before the Inquisitor who had cited him, who, he
alleged, knew not Hebrew nor Greek, and had therefore no knowledge upon
which to base his judgment; and on this ground Fra Paolo appealed to
Rome."

"It were a pity," said a gentle-faced young friar, who had been
listening silently, but with an expression of deep and affectionate
interest, "that one of so rare learning should remain long in a position
of danger to orthodoxy. Already the Court of Mantua hath been censured
by the Holy Father for heretical opinions."

"Nay; but for harboring heretics, hunted and driven," Fra Giulio
corrected warmly. "There be deeds of mercy that will be forgiven us."

A look of perplexity crossed the candid, boyish face of Fra Francesco.

"But the law of obedience is more simple," he said timidly; "and our
Holy Father--"

"Thou, not yet out of thy novitiate, doest well, verily, to prate of
obedience and doctrines," interrupted Father Gianmaria, less severely
than he was wont to treat such breaches of etiquette; for Fra Francesco
had deep, spiritual, loving eyes, in which an unuttered wonder sometimes
seemed to chide, for all his gentleness; and his ways were winsome.

So, through the years, whether he were present or absent, the life of
the convent had centered about Fra Paolo, who now, after many missions
of importance, had once more returned to his old cell in the Servi, with
another added for his books and labors, since often it suited him to be
alone. The breath of jealousy still clouded the serenity of his sky, and
he was not without some unfulfilled longings; but no scandal had ever
touched him. He was great enough now to be smitten through his friends,
and the good Fra Giulio had been the victim taken in his stead; upon Fra
Paolo's last homecoming to the convent the loving, fatherly greeting had
failed him.

"Ask the nuns, to whom he is father confessor; they will have no other,
and refuse admittance to one of our order who hath been sent to take
this duty upon him. And our good Fra Giulio hath been removed in
humiliation, and languisheth in Bologna, by order of the Patriarch who
hath been won by the tale of one who loveth thee not."

"There is no more to it than that?" Fra Paolo questioned.

"Nay, no more, my brother," Fra Francesco answered with conviction.

"The name then?" said Fra Paolo; and when it had been told him he
recognized the man as one in whom trust was misplaced, and one who
intrigued for power.

"The charge?" he asked again. And when he had patiently learned the
details of which Fra Giulio's long and faithful service gave little
hint, he gathered evidence wherewith to refute them, and journeyed
swiftly back to Rome, returning, triumphant, to reinstate the good old
friar with honor in the home and offices he loved--the manner of his
return making amends to Fra Giulio for the pain he had suffered, so
sweet it seemed to him to owe to this son of his affections all the
gladness of his later days.



VIII

While the little Zuane was failing, Marcantonio, seeing Marina but
seldom, solaced himself in preparing a royal gift to offer to his mother
on the occasion of his own birthday fete. The idea had come to him that
night after the Veronese had touched his own faulty sketch into such
rounded life; besides, he had thought but one beautiful thought since he
had, as it were, been unconsciously brought to confession by that scene
in the studio. And Paolo Cagliari had been most kind in accepting his
commission with an enthusiasm which promised wonderful results. Great as
was his fame in those days,--and the Veronese never lived beyond his
fame,--still, as in his earlier years, he was eager for any new method
of proving the genius in which his own faith was as unbounded as his
capacity to achieve was vigorous and tireless. And the young noble's
unique fancy for a superb goblet of crystal _da Beroviero_, with a
miniature of Marina of Murano enlaced in exquisite gold borders and set
round with costly pearls--a trifle fit to offer to a princess--not only
pleased the artist's well-known taste for luxury, but seemed to him an
object worthy of his skill. In the kindness of his heart he would make
the lovely face so winning that the great lady should yield to the
prayer that had prompted the gift.

Among all the elaborate gift-pieces that had come from the workshops of
Murano, but one had as yet approached this, and it had been sent with
the homage of the Senate, by a retiring ambassador of "His Most
Christian Majesty," to the Queen of France, and it bore, from Titian's
hand, the portrait of her royal husband. This goblet, then, must surpass
that one in magnificence, for it was the Veronese's opportunity; and in
his soul, genial as it was, some sense of rivalry, born of Titian's
assumption of the highest place in Venetian art, would last forever, in
spite of the great master's manifest affection. The suggestion of the
pearls--an added touch--was indeed due to Paolo Cagliari's over-weening
sumptuousness, and the eager young lover was scarcely more anxious for
the completion of this gem, upon which his hope depended, than was the
great artist who already had all Venice at his feet.

"I shall need no sitting," the Veronese had said, when they were
planning for the work. "My picture is nearly completed, and it will
suffice. Nay, ask her not, my Marco; she is a devote--she will not
understand."

Marcantonio flushed like a boy. He knew it would be difficult to obtain
her consent, and for that very reason he must win it, for he was a true
knight.

"How shall I win my lady's favor," he cried hotly, "if I peril it by
lack of chivalry! There is no prouder maiden among the donne nobile on
the Canal Grande."

"_Altro! Altro_!" said the master quietly. "She also shall look down
from the balconies in the palazzo Giustiniani."

But when the young patrician told her glowingly of his wish to give his
mother, on his great day, the most beautiful gift in all the world, it
was hard to make her yield.

"It is not fitting," she answered quite simply.

"Yes, yes, Marina--since I love thee!"

"Ah, no; it is only sad." Her eyes filled with tears and she moved away,
so that he could not touch her hand.

"Trust me, Marina! The Veronese knows the world, and he says it is well.
It is this that shall win the consent of my mother, and she will conquer
my father. And in the Gran' Consiglio----"

He turned his eyes suddenly away from Marina lest she should trace the
faintest flicker of a doubt within them, as the vision rose before him
of that imperious body, so relentless in its decrees, so tenacious in
its traditions, so positive in its autocracy; but the threatened
invincibility of this force only nerved him to a resistance as
invincible, and he turned back to her with a flashing face, almost
before she had noticed the interruption.

"There also--in the Consiglio--it shall be arranged, and all will be
well."

And where two were ready for the end that should be gained the pleading
was not over-long, though the thought was very strange for this simple
maiden of Murano; so the precious painting was finished and in the hands
of the decorators. And meanwhile, during those days when Marina had been
watching the flickering of the little Zuane's pale flame of life and
there had been no spare moments for Marcantonio, he had tried to absorb
himself, as far as possible, in the preparation of this gift--since she
would not let him go to her--and he had come to regard it as the symbol
of success; for failure was never for an instant contemplated in his
vision of the future. There were pearls to be selected, one by one, in
visits innumerable to the Fondaco dei Turchi, where the finest of such
treasures were not secured at a first asking, and in these his mother
was a connoisseur; but there were many more anxious visits to Murano, to
be assured that no step in the fashioning of his gift was endangering
its perfection.

But even for the most impatient, time may not tarry indefinitely, and
the lagging moments had at last brought round that festa of San Marco
which meant so much for Venice, with its splendid pageants for the
Church, its festivities for the people, its fluttering of doves in the
Piazza, and of timid, eager maiden hearts, waiting in a sort of shy
assurance for that earliest Venetian love-token, the _boccolo_--the
rosebud which breathed the secret of many a young Venetian lover to his
_inamorata_ under those April skies, on the festa of this patron saint
of Venice.

And the next morning the stately lady of the Giustiniani stood quite
alone on the balcony of the great palace at the bend of the Canal
Grande, leaning upon her gold-embroidered cushions to watch the gondola
that was just landing at the step of the Piazzetta; the restless
movements of her tapering jeweled fingers were the only sign of an
emotion she rarely betrayed, though doubtless, under the faultless
dignity of her bearing, there were often currents of feeling and
thwartings hard to be endured.

She was thinking of her boy with a great and sudden tenderness, now that
the moment had come in which she would be less to him and the world of
men must be more, as from the distance she saw the gondola touch the
landing and watched him until he passed out of sight, after pausing with
his father for a moment before the great columns of San Marco and San
Teodoro, looking up perhaps with a keener sense of the dread scenes they
had witnessed than had ever before possessed him, though the sunshine
streamed brilliantly over the water and life seemed full of promise for
this only son of the Ca' Giustiniani, on his way to take the oath of
"Silence and Allegiance to the Republic," as a "_Nobile di Gran'
Consiglio_."

Marcantonio had entered the gondola gaily, with a full, pleasurable
sense of the beauty of life, and well content with that portion which
had fallen to his lot; for he was easily affected, and the air of the
palace was full of the excitement of his fete. The only forebodings that
shadowed his sunshine were connected with Marina and the gift which he
should offer to his mother upon his return from the Ducal Palace. But
the day was one to banish every hint of failure, making him more
conscious of his power than he had ever been before, and he felt himself
floating toward attainment--whatever the difficulties might be. But with
his first step upon the Piazzetta he forgot the glory of the sunshine
flashing over the blue waters, and a sudden sense of fate possessed him,
as his father made an almost imperceptible pause in his grave progress
toward the Ducal Palace, and with the slightest possible movement of
his hand seemed to direct his son's attention to the great granite
columns which bore the emblems of the patron saints of Venice.

A hundred times, in crossing the Piazzetta, Marcantonio had been vaguely
aware of them as appropriate emblems of barbaric force and splendor and
allegoric Christian allegiance; but suddenly they stood to him for
historic records--the echoes of dread deeds avenged there rolled forth
from the space between the columns, and the jeweled eyes of the terrible
winged Lion flashed defiance upon any who questioned, in the remotest
way, the will or the act of the Republic. He glanced toward the elder
man, some deprecatory comment rising to his lips as he strove to
dissipate the symbolic mood which was surely possessing him, for he felt
himself uncomfortably conscious of the meaning wrought into the very
stones about him, and to-day this over-mastering assertion of
Venice--always Venice dominant--was oppressive.

But his father, apparently unaware of Marcantonio's turbulent
sensations, wore his usual reserved and dignified mien; even the motion
he had seemed to make before the columns in the Piazzetta was probably
only due to Marcantonio's imagination, and the young fellow's light
rejoinder passed unuttered, intensifying his discomfort. He realized
that he was not searching for this symbolism with a poet's appreciation,
nor as an archaeologist delighting in curios, but as a son of the
Republic--to gather her history and her purpose, to make himself one
with her, to put himself under her yoke--and in his heart he rebelled.

Yet it was he, this time, who paused, undeniably, before the great
window on the Piazzetta. The sun streamed in broad flashes of light over
the soft rose-tinted walls of the palazzo and over the splendid balcony
from which the Doge was wont to view the processions and fetes of the
Republic; the richly sculptured decorations detached themselves at once
in allegory, the figures all leading up to Venice enthroned, holding out
to the world her proud motto, "Fortis, justa, trono furias, mare sub
pede pono." (Strong, just, I put the furies beneath my throne and the
sea beneath my foot.) He walked on under a spell, feeling that the coils
were tightening around him; he was a noble, but not free; yet he would
not have surrendered his opportunities for the freer life of the people
who had no part in the Consiglio.

He quickened his pace that the moment of irresolution might be the
sooner over.

"Wait!" his father commanded, as Marcantonio would have entered the
palace gate; "haste ill befits thy grave and dignified purpose. Before
thou enterest the Consiglio I would have thee reverently mark how, at
the palace gate, Justice sits enthroned on high, between the Lions of
St. Mark, while Courage, Prudence, Hope, and Charity wait upon her."

"And below," answered Marcantonio, because he could think of nothing
else to say, and because he knew every angle and carving of the palace
from the aesthetic point of view better than his father did; "below is
the Doge Foscari, kneeling very reverently to our noble Lion."

His father slowly scanned him with his inscrutable gaze, but answered
nothing, and they passed under the magnificent Porta della Carta quite
silently. Under the deep shadow of the gateway the business of the Ducal
Palace was already progressing. Secretaries at their desks were
preparing papers for discussion, while their assistants came and went
with messages from the various departments of the great body of workers
within the palace; they were too absorbed to look up as this Chief of
the Ten passed them, so oblivious were they of anything but their duty
that the stir about them left them serene and undisturbed, not even
penetrating the realm of their consciousness.

"There is no more learned nor devoted body of scribes in the world,"
said Giustinian, with pride; "they have not a thought beyond their
papers, and most wonderfully do they sift and prepare them for the
Council, working often far into the night."

"It is machinery, not life!" Marcantonio exclaimed, hastening beyond the
portal.

The great courtyard, under the wonderful blue of the sky, was aglow with
color; the palace facades, broken into irregular carvings, seemed to
hold the sunshine in their creamy surfaces; the superb wells of green
bronze, magnificently wrought and dimmed as yet by little
weather-staining, offered a treasury of luminous points. Here, in the
early morning, the women of the neighborhood gathered with their
water-jars, but now the court was filled with those who had business in
the Ducal Palace--red-robed senators and members of the Consiglio
talking in knots; a councillor in his violet gown, a group of
merchant-princes in black robes, enriched with costly furs and relieved
by massive gold chains, absorbed in discussion of some practical details
for the better ordering of the _Fondachi_, those storehouses and marts
for foreign trade peculiar to Venice; some grave attorney, more soberly
arrayed, making haste toward the gloom of the secretary's corner; a
sprinkling of friars on ecclesiastical business, of gondoliers in the
varied liveries of the senators waiting their masters' call; here and
there a figure less in keeping with the magnificence around him, too
full of his trouble to be abashed, going to ask for justice at the
Doge's feet--the heart of Venice was pulsing in the court, and under the
arches came the gleam and shimmer of the sea. Up and down the splendid
stairway that opened immediately from the Porta della Carta the
Venetians came and went--nobles old and young; the people, bringing
wrongs to be adjusted, or favors to be granted, or some secret message
for the terrible _Bocca di Leone_; the people, rich and poor, in
continuous tread upon this Giant Stairway, guarded by the gods of war
and of the sea; the winged Lion enthroned above, just over the landing
where the elected noble dons the rank of _Serenissimo_--this
kaleidoscopic epitome of the life of the Republic was bewildering.

"How was it possible that all these people could take part in it without
emotion?" the young patrician asked himself, forgetting that in this
familiar scene the emotion only was new for him.

At the head of the landing on the Giant Stairway the Senator arrested
his son with a gesture of command. "Welcome," he said, "to the
Consiglio, Marcantonio Giustiniani. Thou wilt not forget that thou
comest of a house which has held honors in Church and State. May this
day be memorable for Venice and for thee!"

The influences of their surroundings were strong upon them both; but the
young fellow, in his bounding life, craved something more than this
formal induction into the official life of his sumptuous state--he
longed to feel the human throb beneath it, that the sense of its weight
might be lifted; but he could not find his voice until they had passed
through the loggia and reached the chambers of the _Avvogadori_, where
sat the keepers of the Golden Book.

He stretched out his hand wistfully and touched the elder man.

"Father!" he cried, in a voice not well controlled. And again, more
steadily, though no answer came, "Father, I will not forget!"

The finding of his name among the birth records of the nobles of Venice,
the registration witnessed by the three solemn Avvogadori,--those
officers of the law whose rulings in their department were
inexorable,--the act of confirmation before the Imperial Senate,
whither, in grave procession, they immediately fared, preceded by the
sacred "Libro d'Oro," upon which the oath of allegiance was sworn with
bended knee--the ceremony was soon over, and Marcantonio stood enrolled
among the ruling body of the great Republic.

As they returned through the splendid halls of the palace, Giustinian
paused frequently to exchange a greeting with some old senator who came
forward to welcome the young noble to the grave circle of rulers, and
they were followed with glances of interest as they passed through the
Piazza. For it was whispered in the _Broglio_ that there were
reasons--valid and patriotic, as were all the arguments of Venice--for
the fact that no member of that ancient and loyal house had worn the
highest honor of the state. "_The Ca' Giustiniani was too old, too
wealthy, too influential--too much a part of Venice itself_."

"Like the Orseoli!" said Morosini Morosini, who was a friend of the
Giustiniani, and who, like many another strong-brained Venetian, knew
the taste of unsatisfied longings, yet kept a brave heart for the
records of the Republic. And as he spoke there came to some of them who
knew their annals well a stinging memory of the tale--which was no
legend--of that pathetic group in their island sanctuary--the brothers
who were left, after the death of Otto, the exiled Doge, and of Orso,
the noble bishop-prince, all of the house of Orseoli, who, with their
abbess-sister Felicia, were wounded to the heart because for the crime
of too great love and service the jealous and unrequiting Senate had
banished them forever from the Venice so loyally served--had decreed the
extinction of a family to whom, as Doge and Patriarch, the Republic owed
the wisest and most self-sacrificing of her rulers!

"Nay," said another speaker quickly, a friend to Morosini the
historian--for the Broglio had been known to have a voice as well as
ears, and the subject was a dangerous one, not honorable to
Venice--"Nay, there are no Orseoli. But it is for honor to the
Giustiniani that none hath been chosen for the Serenissimo. He is
strong, grave, and very silent; but most wise in council, most prudent
in resource. He is needed among the _Savii_."

"And the coronation oath hath grown over straight since the days of the
Michieli," responded Morosini. "The Giustinian is not a man for our
_promissione_ which, verily, fitteth ill with the dignity of our
Prince--a man of spirit may well find it hard to assume the beretta
under such restrictions!"



IX

With the nonchalance that concealed a skill all Venetian the gondoliers
of the Giustiniani guided them gracefully through the floating craft
moored to the stakes which rose in sheafs before their palace,
announcing the colors of their noble house. Barges bearing flowers and
decorations for the fete, fruits and game, were unloading on the broad
marble steps, and through the wrought open-work of the splendid gates a
scene of activity was disclosed in the nearer court which served as an
office for the various departments of the household; while the
house-master had come down the steps from his cozy lodge beside the
entrance, and stood dispensing orders to a group of eager domestics.

In the deep shadow of the entrance-court the open one, through which the
light streamed radiantly, seemed far distant, and when the great bell
sent clanging echoes from court to court, gondoliers in undress
liveries, who were lazily lounging and chatting, sprang to a show of
activity over all those finishing touches of polish and nicety which had
been achieved long before; and the lithe figures coming and going,
throwing themselves into graceful attitudes over their semblance of
labor, exchanging joyous sallies in anticipation of the evening's
revelry, awoke a contagious merriment. Marcantonio rallied from the
heaviness of the morning and felt young again, as he yielded to their
influence and wandered among them, tossing compliments and repartees
with Venetian freedom.

In the midst of this harmless trifling the voice of Giustinian
Giustiniani sounded sternly.

"Marcantonio, these ancient arms have been burnished in honor of this
day; I have a moment to remind thee of their history--if thou hast
forgotten."

He was calling from across the open court, where the sunshine seemed
suddenly less, and Marcantonio hastened to respond.

The seneschal called for lights, for the workmanship of these heirlooms
was too fine to be appreciated in the gloom which pervaded the far inner
court; two or three iron lanterns were brought and hung up, and
link-boys flashed flaring torches upon the pieces on the wall near which
their master stood.

"Surely thou dost recall this breastplate of the General Taddeo
Giustiniani, who forced the Austrians to surrender Trieste, when Venice
laid siege to the city in 1369? It was wrought in the East, no doubt,
and the inlaying is of gold and precious; but not for this do we keep it
chained. It is a priceless jewel in the history of our house, for
Trieste meant much for Venice."

He raised the heavy chain that fastened it, and the links fell,
clanging, against the stones of the wall; for this hall, which served as
an armory, was like a prison in its construction,--as strong and as
forbidding,--and here, among the ancestral relics, were kept the arms
which every nobleman, by Venetian law, was required to hold in readiness
to equip his household against uprisings of the populace, who were, by
this same law, debarred these means of self-defense.

At a sign from the Senator a young squire came forward, proudly bearing
a sword with a jeweled hilt, in an intricately wrought scabbard.
Giustinian drew it from its sheath, displaying a blade exquisitely
damascened with acanthus foliage, as he turned to his son.

"This is especially thine own," he said, "in honor of this day--thy
maiden sword. So far as the handiwork of Cellini may make it worthy of a
son of our house, it hath been worthily chosen for thee. Yet, unless
thou leavest it to those who come after thee, enriched by the name of a
Giustinian who hath wrought of his best for Venice, it will be all
unworthy of a place among these trophies."

The torch-bearers flashed their lights over it, and the squires of the
household pressed forward to admire it, but Giustinian cut short the
enthusiastic chorus of the young men-at-arms and Marcantonio's eager
words of appreciation, crossing the sombre hall with stately steps; for
to his mind this important day held many ceremonies yet unfulfilled, and
the pomp with which he chose to surround them was not a circumstance to
be dilated on.

"This," he said, as he touched a quaint dagger, "belonged to thine
ancestor, Marco Giustiniani, Ambassador to the Scaglieri; there were
other envoys of our name in other Italian provinces, in England and the
Papal Court, for we have been great in statescraft as well as in war.
But I wrong thee in _seeming_ to think thou knowest not the history of
thine house. Perhaps, in these latter days, a man may best distinguish
himself in statesmanship, for the mind is a weapon not to be
slighted--when it is builded with strength, sharpened with careful use,
and so wielded"--his gaze fell full upon Marcantonio for a weighty
moment--"so wielded that it hath no pliancy save at the will of its
owner. For sometimes it chanceth"--again he paused for a moment--"that a
mind hath more masters than one, and Venice brooks no rival."

His father had been pointing out one heirloom after another while he
spoke, and the pauses which Marcantonio found irritating, because they
seemed to indicate hidden meanings to be unraveled, might proceed only
from his effort to carry several trains of thought at once; but it was a
habit of the elder Giustinian which held not a less share in the
education of his son because it was distasteful to him.

To-day the young patrician almost resented this persistent marshaling of
the shades of his ancestors, though at heart he was proud of them, and
the prestige and luxury of his surroundings suited him well; but he
chafed under his father's scrutiny, which, it seemed to him, unveiled
the differences of their temperaments to an almost indecorous degree.
The thought of Marina was tingling in his pulses, but he would not yield
it up until the propitious moment came; and the strong consciousness of
this sweet new queenship made the constant assertion of the sovereignty
of Venice not easy to endure. But the remembrance of his vow of
allegiance, just rendered before the Senate, returned to him rather as
the public investiture of his rights as a man than as a claim of
self-surrender; and he vowed to himself to use that right, in all
possible conflict between himself and the Republic, in questions
personal and dear; for the pleasant freedom of his life thus far had
left him less in awe of the senatorial majesty than Giustinian
Giustiniani would have deemed possible. But how could he hope to win his
father's consent to any unpatrician alliance!

He passed the elder Giustinian hastily and paused beyond the next group
of armor--battered breastplates, casques, and shields of the twelfth
century--but his thoughts were elsewhere.

"These," said the Senator, inexorably recalling him, "were of the famous
siege of Lepanto, where, but for the favor of the Holy Father, our house
had been extinct."

The young fellow's soul stirred within him, for he knew the story well.
How was it possible for a Giustinian to pause before this great stand of
antique trophies of prowess and not call to mind visions of heroism and
suffering in which the Giustiniani of those days--_every one who
belonged to Venice_--had yielded up his life in this great struggle with
the Turks!

Yes, every one who belonged to Venice. For the young Nicolo, the last
survivor of their ancient name, was already set apart from the world by
his priestly vows, amid the quiet groves of the island of San Nicolo. It
was a pretty romance--all those noble councillors, trembling from fear
of the extinction of this most ancient and princely house, framing
humble petitions to the Holy Father; the youthful monk, leaving the
tranquil solitude of his island sanctuary, unfrocked with honor by a
Pope's decree, to don the crimson robe of senator and wed the daughter
of the Doge! And later, when sons and daughters many had risen up to
call them blessed, the old haunting charm of the convent reasserting
itself, the return of the Giustinian--this solitary link between the
long lines of his noble house, before and after--to his lonely cell on
San Nicolo; the retirement of the Lady Anna from the sweet motherhood of
her home to reign as Lady Abbess in the convent of Sant' Elena; the
nimbus of sainthood for the pair when their quiet days were closed--it
was a pretty story, leading easily to thoughts of Marina.

"To-morrow," said Giustinian Giustiniani, as if in answer to his
thoughts, "at dawn of day, there will be Mass in the capello Giustiniani
on Sant' Elena; and later we must visit the shrines of San Nicolo and
San Lorenzo. For in the Church also we have had our part. A Giustinian
was first Patriarch of Venice; a saint was father to our else broken
line--we have had our share in Church and State, and it behooves a
member of the Consiglio to remember the honors of his house."

He stood for a moment looking up at the shield on which were blazoned
the arms of the Giustiniani, as if he missed something that should have
been there; then, slowly turning back to the central court, now flooded
with sunshine, he began the ascent of the grand stairway which led to
the banqueting hall. The gleaming marble panels bore a fretwork of
sculptured foliage with symbols entwined--the mitre, the cross, the
sword--in richest Renaissance; but in all the decorations of this lordly
palace, of the most ancient of the Venetians, not once did the mighty
Lion of St. Mark appear.

When they had reached the landing opening into the banquet hall the
Senator, turning in the direction of his own apartments, released his
son with a motion of his hand toward the great, splendid chamber from
which issued ripples of girlish laughter; and Marcantonio stood for a
few moments under the arches which opened into it, looking on
unobserved, for here it seemed that the fete was already reigning.

The noble maidens who attended the Lady Laura, fresh and charming, were
knotting loops of ribbon in pendant garlands or grouping flowers in
great vases between the columns which crossed the chamber from end to
end--darting up the stairway to the gallery to alter a festoon in
garland or brocade. Sallies of laughter, snatches of song, and pelting
of flowers, like a May-day frolic, made the work long in the doing, but
full of grace; and now and again, as if any purpose were wearying for
such light-hearted maidens, they dropped their garlands and glided over
the polished floor, twining and untwining their arms--a reflex in active
life, and not less radiant, of the nymphs of Bassano on the painted
ceiling, between those wonderful, gilded arabesques of Sansovino.

There was a little shriek of discomfiture as they suddenly perceived the
young lord of the day, but the Contessa Beata Tagliapietra came saucily
toward him as he was escaping.

"The Lady Laura hath charged me to ask the Signor Marcantonio whether
the garlands be disposed according to his liking."

She swept him a mocking reverence, so full of grace and coquetry that
the maidens all flocked back from their hiding-places to see how the
young signor would receive it.

"I know not which pleaseth me best," he answered lightly; "the grace of
the garlands, or the grace of the dance, or the grace of the _damigelle_
who have so wrought for the beauty of this fete. Nay, I may not enter,
for the Lady Laura will await my coming."

"Is this day then so full of gravity that one may not steal a moment to
dance at one's own fete, Signer Consigliere?" she retorted, mockingly.

But the Lady Laura herself was coming toward them, with slow, stately
steps, hiding her impatience--for the morning had seemed long.

At sight of her Marcantonio bent his knee with the knightly homage still
in vogue, and gave his hand to conduct her to her boudoir.

"Signer Consigliere,"--she began, with a stately congratulation, when
they were quite alone in her own boudoir; she had been planning, during
the long morning, a speech that should be of a dignity to suit so great
an occasion, but the words died away upon her lips; for once she forgot
Venice and the Ca' Giustiniani, and the mother was uppermost. She folded
her arms about him closely, and rested her head upon his shoulder in
delicious abandon.

"Marco, my boy!" she murmured.

His heart overflowed to her in unaccustomed endearments, so rarely did
she express any emotion, and to-day the rebound from the morning's
repression filled him with hope and gladness. All fear of winning her
aid was lifted. "_Madre mia_!" he cried, his face radiant with
happiness.

"This day is not as other days," she said, half in apology for her
weakness, as she recovered herself.

"I have a gift for thee, madre mia; let me bring it."

"I need no gift, Marco; for now hast thou everything before thee--every
honor that Venice may offer to a Venetian of the Venetians! Forget it
not, my Marco."

But he had already flown from her, with impatient, lover's footsteps.
Now that the moment had come he could not wait.

"Mother!" he cried, with shining eyes, as he placed the costly case upon
a table and drew her gently toward it.

She stood in mute astonishment before the faultless gift, this perfect
bit of Beroviero crystal,--opalesque and lucent, reflecting hidden
rainbow tints, enhanced by the golden traceries delicate and
artistic--the beautiful young face framed in those sea-gems dear to the
Venetian heart, each pearl a study of changing light.

"There is none like it in Venice!" she exclaimed; "nor hath there ever
been. Thou hast treated me like a queen, my Marco!"

"I wished it so," he answered impatiently, for he could not wait. "And
the face----"

"Never hath there been a more exquisite! It is the Titian's work?"

"Nay, of the Veronese; for the goblet is of mine own designing. And the
master, for my sake, hath spent himself upon the face."

"He will be here to-night, and we will thank him," she answered
graciously. "And for thee--thou hast excelled thyself."

But Marcantonio answered nothing to her praise; his eyes were fixed upon
the miniature of the Veronese.

"If Paolo Cagliari findeth none so beautiful among the noble damigelle
who will grace thy fete to-night as this face which he hath painted, we
will forgive him," she said playfully. "But thee, Marco, we will not
forgive. The time hath come when thou shouldst choose; thy father and I
have spoken of this."

She came close to him and folded his hand caressingly. "The Contessa
Beata Tagliapietra hath a wonderful charm; and there is the Lady
Agnesina Contarini--a face for a Titian!"

"Mother! I pray thee----" Marcantonio interrupted.

"Nay, Marco--to-day it is fitting; for thy wedding should follow soon
upon this fete. Thou art no longer a boy, and Venice looks to us to help
thee choose a fitting bride; for there is none other of this generation
of thy name, and thou,--I will not hide it from thee since thou needest
heartening,--thou wilt be a fortunate wooer with these maidens, or--or
elsewhere. But my little Beata is charming-----"

"Mother," said Marcantonio, flushing like a boy, yet drawing himself up
proudly, "I have already crowned her who shall be my bride with pearls;
and for her face--thou hast named it exquisite." Then, unbending, he
threw his arms around her and kissed her on the forehead.

The Lady Laura stood as if petrified.

"I know her not," she said, when she could speak. "Name her to me." Her
voice was hard and strained.

"Do not speak so, madre mia! Love her--she is so charming! And she will
not come to me unless thou love her too."

"How, then--if she is thy bride?" The words seemed to choke her.

"Nay, but my _chosen_ bride--holding my vows with my heart; yet, unless
thou plead with me for my happiness she will not wed me--she is so
proud."

"Name her," the Lady Laura repeated, unbending slightly.

"Marina Magagnati."

She stood listening, as if more were to follow, then she shook her head.
"I know not the name, unless--but it is not possible! She is not of
Venice, then?"

"A Venetian of the Venetians, my mother, with the love of Venice in her
soul--but not----"

"Marcantonio, explain thine enigma! How should there be a name of all
our nobles unknown to me?"

"There are nobles of the 'Libro d'Oro,' my mother, and--nobles of the
people, and she is of these."

"How canst thou name a mesalliance to me--Marcantonio Giustiniani,
Nobile di Consiglio--on this day, when thou hast given thy vows to
Venice! Thou dost forget the traditions of thine house."

"Nay, mother; Venice and the Ca' Giustiniani I am not likely to forget,"
he answered, with sudden bitterness. "One thing--quite other--am I much
more likely to forget; but for this have I sworn, that which my heart
teaches me for noble will I do, and she whom I love will I wed--or none
other."

"Marco!" the word seemed a desperate appeal.

"That do I swear upon this sword which my father hath given me to prove
my knighthood--'to enrich,' he hath said, 'the records of our house.'
And thou wilt help me, my mother, for I love thee!" His voice had grown
tender and pleading again.

"I also love thee, Marco," she answered more gently, for none could
resist his voice when this mood was upon him; "but I may not help thee
to undo thyself and forget the honor of thine house."

"Mother," said Marcantonio, sternly, "charge me with no unknightly deed!
To love Marina is to love a woman nobler than any of thy maidens; thou
knowest her not. I would bring her to thee to win thee, but she will not
come. It is thou, she saith, who must send her sign of favor."

"I fear me it must be long in going, my Marco; yet I love thee well. How
should I send my favor to a daughter of the people!"

"Those are the words of Marina Magagnati."

"She is wise then; she will help thee to forget."

"The vow of a Giustinian is never broken; that hast thou taught me, my
mother, from the legends of our house. This sword, upon which I have
sworn it, I lay at thy feet. Bid me raise it in token of thy favor and
of thine aid in this one thing which I ask of thee."

They stood looking into each other's faces, her pride melting under the
glow of the beautiful new strength in the face of the son whom she had
thought so yielding; yet it was she who had striven to teach him
knightliness.

She hesitated,--"If I cannot aid thee, what wilt thou do?"

"I must wait and suffer," he said; "for Marina will not yield."

"It is new for a maiden of the people to know such pride," she answered,
scornfully.

"It is because none are like her, and her soul is beautiful as her face!
My mother, there are none prouder in all this palace; the little
Contessa Beata is a _contadina_ beside her! Yet, it is not pride, I
think, but love and care for my happiness," he added, grown suddenly
bold. "She will not come to bring me sorrow; and she hath said that my
duty being to Venice, she can wed me only with the consent of our house.
And Messer Magagnati----"

"There is a father, then, who would treat with thee?"

"Mother--use not that tone; thou dost not understand! Ask the Veronese.
Messer Magagnati knows not of this; for so tenderly doth his daughter
care for him that, to save him pain of knowing that she suffers for lack
of thy welcome, she hath not told him. Shall the Veronese plead with
thee better than thine own son? For he knoweth the maiden well; and the
father, who is most honorably reported in Venice for the wonder of his
discoveries in his industry of glass. He is of the people--of the
'original citizens'--for of the days before the _serrata_[1] hath his
family records; but he might well be of the Signoria, so grave he is and
full of dignity. And his name is old--_Mother_!"

  [1] An important constitutional act, limiting the aristocracy to those
  families who had at that period, sat in the Council; always referred
  to as an era in Venetian history.

"Nay, Marco, lift thy sword; how should it lie there for lack of thy
mother's favor? I will not have thee suffer, if I can give thee aid. But
one may suffer in other ways--quite other--which thou hast no knowledge
of, for to thee there seemeth to be, in all the world, nothing worthy
but this wish of thine! But it is no promise; one must ponder in so
great a matter, my boy!"

They broke down in each other's arms, clasping the sword between them.

The Senator's firm step resounded on the marble floor; they had scant
time to recover themselves; but his eyes fell at once upon the
magnificent goblet, and there was pleasure in his stern face.

"This, then, is of thy designing, Marcantonio," he exclaimed, as he
stooped to examine it in its case of satin and velvet. "A veritable
gift-piece! And already thou hast won the favor of the Senate, since it
hath been reported to them by our Chief of the Ten, who hath the
industries of Murano in charge, that at the exhibit given yestere'en a
goblet more sumptuous than that prepared for his Majesty of France was
of thy designing. The Secretary will bring thee this night a summons
from the Ten to appear before them on the morrow to receive their
congratulations, because of the inspiration thou hast given to our most
valued industry.

"It is a rare mark of favor that it hath been confided to me,"
Giustinian continued, still examining the goblet with pride, "since
custom doth require that one should withdraw from the sitting of the
Council when any matter touching his house is treated. But Morosini, by
grace of the Signoria, hath been with me for a moment, that there may be
no misgivings of fear upon this fete-day of our house. And to-night this
summons to favor shall be presented, to honor the youngest member of the
Consiglio. Marcantonio, I am proud of thee; the Ten will be here--every
one! And verily the goblet is beautiful. It shall be well displayed in
the great banquet hall."

"Here, in my boudoir, where my boy hath placed it," said the mother
quickly, as the Senator would have lifted it, "since it is my gift. And,
Marco"--She turned to him a face softened and beautified by the
struggle, which had been very great, and her eyes were deep with a light
which bound him to her forever.

"Marco mio, it shall be well displayed. For I will bid my maidens circle
this table whereon it rests with a wreath of roses--white and very
beautiful--in token of thy mother's favor."



X

Marina, under the yellow glare of the lamp in the dark oak cabinet,
worked fitfully, with broken, lifeless strokes, at the designs before
her; while her father, feigning absorption in some new drawings which
lay spread out within touch of his strong-veined hands, watched her
furtively from the other side of the table.

"Thou art restless," he said, suddenly and sternly; "what aileth thee?"

Her lip quivered, but she did not look up, while with an effort she
steadied the movement of her hand and continued her work. "My hand hath
no cunning to-night, and it vexeth me, my father."

"It is poor work when the heart is lacking," he answered, in a tone
charged with irritation. "I also have seen a thing which hath taken my
heart from me."

The color deepened in her cheeks and the pencil strokes came more
falteringly, but she answered nothing.

"Nay, then!" he exclaimed, more brusquely than his wont, as he stretched
out his hand and arrested her movement. "What I have to say to thee
importeth much."

She flushed and paled with the struggle of the moment, then a beautiful
calm came over her face; she laid down her pencil and, quietly dropping
her hands in her lap, she turned to him with a smile that might have
disarmed an angrier man--it was full of tenderness, though it was
shadowed by pain.

It relaxed his sternness, and, after a moment's hesitation, he came
around the table and sat down beside her.

"To-night is the fete at Ca' Giustiniani, for the young noble of their
house."

He waited for her to speak, but she did not tremble now, though he was
searching her face.

"Yes, father, I know."

"And, Marina--I do not understand--and it is a grief to me----"

She nestled to him closely and tried to slip one of her slender hands
between his, which were tightly strained together in a knotted clasp, as
if he would make them the outlet for some unbearable emotion.

The previous evening was the first they had not passed together since
the death of Zuanino; her father had sent her word that he had matter
which would occupy him alone, and all day Marina had been heavy-hearted,
going at matins and at vespers quite alone to the Madonna at the Duomo,
that she might take comfort and counsel.

Girolamo did not respond to her caress, though his tone softened a
little as he proceeded with his tale and her arm stole round him.

"Yesterday, at the stabilimento Beroviero, we were summoned by a call of
our Capo of the Ten to witness the approval that should be passed on the
exhibit of that stabilimento; we all, of the Guild of Murano, were there
as always. And foremost among the productions, most marvelous for
beauty, was a fabric of their lucent crystal--thou knowest it, Marina?
My child--how came thy face there? _Thy_ face, Marina--set round with
lustrous pearls!"

He folded her to his breast with sudden passion, and stooped his head to
her shoulder for an instant, lifting it quickly that she might not feel
the sobbing of his breath which, even more than his broken words,
betrayed his anguish.

"Dearest father, it was because I loved thee so much that I would not
have thee suffer from my pain, that I told thee not. Never again will I
hold aught from thee."

"Thy pain, Marina? and thy face--and for the young noble, Giustiniani? I
do not understand."

"Father, because I could grant him nothing and he would give me
everything, and because--because God sent the love and the Madonna hath
made me feel that it would be sweet, I granted him only this--my
portrait--because he pleaded so one could not resist; and because he
said it would win the consent of all to see that he treated me like a
queen!"

"Nay; one comes not in secret to steal the love of a queen."

"My father," answered the maiden proudly, for he had drawn away from
her, "there is no stealing of that which I would gladly yield him, if it
were thy pleasure and that of the Ca' Giustiniani! And there would have
been no secret; but I--to spare thee pain of knowing that I suffered--I
would not let him come to plead with thee."

"Why shouldst thou suffer?"

"It is hard to lose thy love when only I told thee not because I would
spare thee pain! Father--I have only thee!" Her courage broke in a quick
sob.

"Nay, then--nay, then," he faltered softly, stroking her bowed head; "he
is no man to love, if he would let thee suffer; he should take
thee--before them all--if he would be worthy----"

The low, intense, interrupted words were a brave surrender.

"Ay, my father, it is like Marco to hear thee speak!"

"Then let him come and make thee Lady of the Giustiniani, like a true
knight!" exclaimed the old man fiercely.

"Ay, father, so would he; but I have told him that thou and I are not
less proud than those of his own house, and without their consent it may
not be."

"Nay, I care not for their house--only for thy happiness; he shall wed
thee, and my home is thine; I have enough for thee and him; he shall not
make thee suffer."

They were close together now, father and daughter--a beautiful group in
the yellow lamplight against the dark background that surrounded them
like an impassible fate; her face was a study of happiness, tenderness,
suffering, and strength; her father wrapped her close in his protecting
arms, and thus she could bear everything. They were silent for a while:
he trying to accept the revelation in its strangeness, she planning how
she should make him understand.

"I am glad thou knowest it, dear father," she said at length, very
softly. "I have thy love--I can bear everything."

"Nay, thou shalt have nothing to bear! Thou shalt be Lady of the
Giustiniani--what means the portrait else?"

"It is like Marco again!" she cried, with a little pleased laugh. "He
said--because I would make him no promise until all consented--that he
would take me thus before all the world, and that should make them
consent."

"Nay, let him come out from his house and take thee! I also, of the
people, bear an ancient name, and I have kept it honorable. Pietro, the
earliest master of our beautiful art, was thine ancestor. The Giustinian
stoops not in taking thee."

"He is noble enough to be thy son, my father--and chivalrous as
thou--but we are too noble to let him do aught unbefitting his noble
house; for thou knowest the Giustiniani are like princes in Venice, and
Marco is their only son. He oweth duty to the Republic; and this day, in
the Ducal Palace, hath he sworn his oath of allegiance."

"First should it have been to thee!"

"Ay, first it was to me," she answered serenely; "he would not have it
otherwise; it is only _my_ promise that is lacking. This will I not give
until the Giustiniani make me welcome, or there would be no happiness
for Marco. He shall not lose, in loving me. The Signor Giustinian
Giustiniani is so stern--and one of the Chiefs--I would not vex him and
bring down the displeasure of the Ten; I would bring my Marco
happiness--not pain."

"Oh, the courage of young hearts!" the old man exclaimed with a thrill
of pride and amazement. "Never had Giustinian a prouder bride. And
already thou hast won my heart for this lover of thine, who hath hope
of taking thee from thy old father, yet stays at thy bidding."

"He hath said that he would be here ere the fete began," she answered
timidly, "since already, through the portrait, thou must know the truth;
and it would seem unknightly, or as if he feared thy displeasure, if he
came not this day to pay thee his duty. Father, methinks there is
already a stir below----"

"Thou shouldst make thyself brave!" her father exclaimed, with a quick,
anxious glance at her simple home toilette. "He will pass from thee to
many noble ladies in the palazzo Giustiniani--all in bravery of
festival."

"Nay, my father, so he found me; I would not hold him by devices, of
which I know naught. There will be much to suffer, and these trifles
cannot enter into anything so deep and real. I would rather he should
change to-day--if he could be light enough to change. Besides," she
faltered, with a quick, charming blush, "I think it is already his step
without; and to-night he will have so few moments to spare me--Marco!"

Coming forward through the shadow of the doorway, the young
noble--deferent, masterful, unrenouncing--was a suitor not easily to be
baffled by any claims of Venice.

Girolamo turned quickly to his child, then looked away, for her face
made a radiance in the room; he, her father, who had loved her through
all the days of her maiden life with a great tenderness, had never known
the fullness of her beauty until now; the soft folds of the simple robe
flowing away from her into the surrounding shadow left the pure young
charm of her head and face in luminous relief, as the brilliant young
noble, in embroidered velvet and silken hose and jeweled clasps--a type
of sumptuous modern day Venice--stepped forward into the little circle
of light, bowing before her with courtly deference.

The vision of those youthful faces made it easy to forget the outward
contrast--a mere accident of birth.

Girolamo Magagnati had promised himself that he would be a true knight
to his beloved child; he would question and prove this bold young noble
who claimed, with such presumption, so great a prize--not humbly suing,
as he should have done; he would make him tremble and wait; he should
learn that his daughter was not to be the more easily won because she
was of the people! Then, with the fullness of his vow upon him, and with
a heart loving indeed, but brave as proud, he had raised his eyes and
beheld a vision in which neither nobles nor people held part--only a
maiden, glorified by her love and trust; and a lover--prince or peasant
it mattered not--for on his face it was luminously written that in all
the world there was for him none other than she. And the vision, like an
apprehension of Truth--rare and very beautiful--conquered Girolamo,
because he was strong enough to yield.

"It is but a moment that I have for this dearest claim of the day," said
Marcantonio Giustiniani, turning to the older man with winning courtesy;
"and sooner should I have come to the father of Marina to crave the
grace I cannot do without, but that she bade me tarry. Yet now--she
herself hath spoken?"

He looked from one to the other questioningly.

"There are no secrets between us," Girolamo answered with dignity, while
weighing some words that should welcome his daughter's suitor with
discretion and reserve.

But the maiden broke in timidly: "And he is not angry, Marco mio!"

"Nay, my favor is for him who truly honors my daughter and proves
himself worthy; for her happiness is dear to me. But the difficulties
are great, as she herself hath told me."

"A little time and there shall be none!" cried Marcantonio, joyously.
"For to-day, when first I have taken my seat in the Council, not more
solemnly have I sworn allegiance to the Republic than I would pray
Messer Magagnati to bear me witness that Marina--and none other--will I
wed!"

"Give him thy hand, my daughter, for thy face confesseth thee; and
to-day his lady should grant him so much grace."

"Yet, Marco--for thy sake--I make no vows to thee. Only this will I tell
thee," she added, in a voice that was very soft and low, as he sealed
his lover's vow on her fluttering hand. "For me, also, there is no
other!"

"And I bring thee a '_boccolo_,' Marina, since thou art of the people
and wouldst have me remember all thy traditions," he cried gaily. "Yet
this one hath a fragrance like none other that hath ever blossomed on
the festa of San Marco--my blessed patron!--for I culled it from the
garland which my mother bade her maidens for a token make about the
table where thy portrait is displayed."

He raised the rosebud to his lips before he placed it in her hand.

"And the Senator Giustinian Giustiniani?" Girolamo questioned, in his
grave, deep voice, concealing his triumph.

But Marcantonio had already answered to the timid question of Marina's
eyes, with a ringing tone of assurance.

"And for my father--we must have courage!"



XI

The summons from the Ten had been presented with ceremony on the night
of the fete at Ca' Giustiniani, and Marcantonio was grateful for the
strong support of Paolo Cagliari's friendly presence, as they went
together to the Sala di Collegio in the Ducal Palace; for this seemed to
the young noble an opportunity, that might never come again, of
presenting his petition to ears not all unfavorable; and there was a
thrill of triumph in the thought that his maiden speech before this
august body should be his plea for Marina's admission to the favor of
the Signoria. Already fortune had been kind to him beyond his hopes,
and, with the daring of youth, he was resolved to claim the possible.
The Veronese alone knew of his intention, and as to his father--he could
only put him out of his thoughts. If the Senate listened to his petition
there would be no difficulties, but he would not weaken his courage by
any previous contest, unavailing as it must be.

Meanwhile there was the remembrance of the roses of the Lady
Laura--fragrant with her great renunciation.

The honor of this summons was reflected in the increased dignity of the
elder Giustinian, and in a tinge of urbanity new to him, as he parted
from Paolo Caghari and Marcantonio, who remained standing on the floor
of the hall, to take his seat among the senators in the seats running
around the chamber, as on the previous day, instead of the one
rightfully his own among the higher Council who were to pronounce the
laudatory words.

The industries of Murano had always been dear to the senatorial heart,
but of late years the fostering care of the Republic had been increased
to an unprecedented degree, and the stimulus thus given to the workmen
of Murano had been evidenced in a series of brilliant discoveries, so
that the marvel of their fabrics had become as much a source of jealousy
to other nations as of revenue and pride to the Republic.

Thus the affair of this gift-piece of crystal was deemed of quite
sufficient importance to occupy the attention of the senators, who
prepared themselves to listen with every symptom of interest to this
report of the exhibit of Murano, which had been read on the previous day
before the Ten.

It had chanced before that these reports had been followed by words of
commendation, but it had rarely happened that a young noble had been
summoned before the Collegio to receive such a testimonial, and the
occasion lost none of its interest from the fact that many of those
present had witnessed the presentation of the summons in the banquet
hall of the palazzo Giustiniani.

The famous goblet, by order of the Senate, was also present, as a proof
that the laudatory words pronounced by the Secretary of the Ten at the
close of the report were well deserved.

It was not often that a member won distinction on the day of his
entrance to the Gran' Consiglio; the favor shown by the Senate was
great; the position of the Ca' Giustiniani among the proud Venetian
nobility was beyond question; and some of the fathers of the young and
noble ladies who had graced the banquet watched the young Giustinian
with a quite personal interest.

"It was time," they said, "that the handsome young patrician should
choose a bride."

"And once before, in the history of the Republic, as now," suggested
another, "there was but one of the Ca' Giustiniani."

There was a sympathetic and ominous shaking of heads, for the story was
well known.

"But to none of those golden-haired maidens who danced at his fete would
he show favor, though upon his birthnight. And when the Lady Beata had
asked him shyly why he wore a white rose in his doublet, he had told her
saucily, 'The meaning of the flower is _silence_.'"

These and other trifles bearing upon the ceremony of the morning were
discussed in pleasant asides, while the report had been read and the
note of approval had been proclaimed to Marcantonio, who dropped the arm
of his friend and came forward to receive it.

"My Lords of the Senate, the Collegio and most Illustrious Ten!" he
responded, with a courtly movement of deference which included them all,
"I thank you! In that it graciously pleaseth you to bestow upon me your
favor for a trifle of designing which was the pastime of an hour, and
made for the pleasure of the giving in homage to the noble Lady Laura
Giustiniani. But the praise of it should not be mine; it is rather to
the stabilimento which hath shown perfection in its workmanship. But
first to him, the master, who hath given it its crowning grace. I pray
you, let me share the unmerited honor of this commendation with Paolo
Cagliari, _detto Veronese_, without whom my little had been nothing!"

The chivalry and grace of the young noble elicited a murmur of
approbation, as he courteously indicated his friend.

The Veronese, to whom this _denouement_ was unexpected, and who had long
since been crowned with highest honors by the Republic, did not move
forward, but, acknowledging the tribute of his pupil with a genial
smile, he stood with folded arms, unembarrassed and commanding, scanning
the faces of the assembly, well pleased with the effect produced by the
words of Marcantonio, whom, at all hazards, he intended to befriend. He
realized that the atmosphere might never be so favorable.

"The crowning grace of that goblet, my Lords of Venice," he said boldly,
"is lent it by the face of the most beautiful maiden it hath ever been
my fortune to paint--than whom Venice hath none more charming."

There was a murmur of surprise from the younger nobles, who were
standing in groups about the hall of the Gran' Consiglio; they had
supposed the face to be merely a dainty conceit of the artist's fancy,
and those nearest gathered about the case with sudden interest.

But the face of Marcantonio betrayed him, while he stood unabashed in
the circle of the senators, though with mounting color, his hand, under
shelter of his cloak, resting upon the jeweled hilt of the sword upon
which he had sworn his first knightly vow.

Giustinian Giustiniani rose to his feet. "Her name, Messer Paolo
Cagliari!" he thundered.

But it was the young Giustinian who answered to the challenge--"Marina
Magagnati!" with an unconscious reverence, as he confessed his lady's
name.

"Is no face found fair enough among all the palaces on the Canal Grande
to charm thy fastidious fancy?" cried the angry father, losing all
self-control. "It were fitter that the name of thine inamorata were
first declared elsewhere than in this presence!"

"Not so, my father," Marcantonio replied, undaunted. "For I first would
ask a grace of our most illustrious Signoria,--the which may it indeed
please them to grant,--or never shall I bring a bride to the Ca'
Giustiniani. As I have sworn a noble's oath of allegiance to Venice, so
faithfully have I vowed to wed none other than Marina Magagnati! And it
is my father who hath taught me to hold sacred the faith of a Venetian
and a Giustinian. But my lady is not _called_ of noble blood."

"She is daughter to Messer Girolamo Magagnati,"--it was the Veronese who
spoke,--"than whom, in all Murano, is none better reputed for the
fabrics of his stabilimento, nor more noble in his bearing; albeit, he
is of the people--as I also, Paolo Cagliari, am of the people."

The words had a ring of scorn; the Veronese folded his arms again and
looked defiantly around him--a splendid figure, with the jeweled orders
of France and Rome and the Republic flashing on his breast. His gaze
slowly swept the faces of the assembly, then returned to rest upon the
great votive picture which filled the wall from end to end above the
Doge's throne--_his work_--like the glory of the ceiling, which declared
the artist noble by genius, if not by birth. "I also am of the people!"
he repeated, in a tone that seemed a challenge.

"Most Illustrious Signoria!" cried Marcantonio; "once, in the history of
our Republic, hath it pleased this most gracious Senate to declare its
favor to a daughter of a master-worker of Murano, in a decree whereby it
was provided that the maid should wed a noble of most ancient house, and
if there should be children of the marriage, each name should stand
unprejudiced, with those of the nobles of Venice, in the 'Libro d'Oro.'
If I have found favor in your sight--I beseech you--that which the
Senate hath once decreed is again possible."

The senators looked at each other in consternation, awed at the boldness
of the petition and the wit of its presentation.

The young patrician slowly ascended the steps of the dais, and closed
his appeal with an obeisance to the Doge, full of dignity.

The Councillors who sat beside the Doge were holding grave discussion,
for the few words of the young noble had touched upon weighty points;
they had been presented with a simplicity which veiled their diplomatic
force; he was a man of growing power who must be bound to the service
of Venice, even were he not the last of a princely line which the
Republic would fain see continued to her own latest generation. So
unabashed in such a presence, he would be tenacious of his purpose and
hold to his vow with unflinching knightliness.

Venice and his lady were included in his sworn allegiance, and to seek
to make them rivals would be a danger for the Republic.

Never before had appeal been made to this decree; it was not fresh in
the minds of the Savii and the six most venerated Councillors without
whose acquiescence the mandate of the Doge was powerless, and they had
listened to the bold declaration with a surprise not unmingled with
resentment, that so young a man should make, in their presence, an
assertion touching matters of State which they could neither affirm nor
deny! At a sign from one of the chancellors, one of the three
counsellors at law of the Avvogadori di Commun, who had the keeping of
the Golden Book, had been immediately summoned from adjoining chambers
in the Palace and had confirmed the statement. Such a marriage had
indeed taken place in the latter half of the fourteenth century; the
number of the decree authorizing the full nobility of the children had
been noted in the Golden Book, the original decree could therefore be
found, within the archives, upon demand of the Savii.

The case had changed from a matter of gracious policy to one of
unquestioned importance in the minds of the gravest counsellors of the
Republic--in spite of the glamor of romance which threatened to lessen
its dignity by winning the enthusiastic support of the younger members
of the assembly and the jealous opposition of the older senators, who
were tenacious of the privileges and restrictions of the ancient
nobility of Venice. The faces of many among them were dark and
threatening. One of their number high in authority, whose seat was near
the Savii on the dais, and who was known to be of the strictest
oligarchical proclivities, risked the words, "_Remember the Serrata
Consiglio_," in a clear undertone, but was immediately repressed by a
terrible glance from more than one of the commanding Savii.

Giustinian Giustiniani was alone kept silent by the force of conflicting
emotions which left him only strength enough to realize that he was too
angry to advise with dignity, though he was one of the Chiefs of the
Ten. He had been outwitted in the presence of the Maggior Consiglio by a
son who had shown an astuteness and courtliness of which any Venetian
father might be proud, together with a knowledge of the point upon which
he based his appeal, which required the summoning of the Avvogadori di
Commun, though it was uttered in the presence of the six supreme
Councillors of the Republic! He could not interpose to demean his
ancient lineage by consenting to this unpatrician alliance; he would not
accept the alternative for his only son--the last of the Giustiniani!
Nor could he urge a Giustinian to break a vow of honor made before the
highest tribunal of the realm. He was trembling with wrath and filled
with admiration, while he sat speechless, awaiting the issue of a
question which so deeply concerned the interests of the Ca' Giustiniani.

The impression was profound, and a silence fell upon that magnificent
assembly through which the rulers of the ship of state seemed to hear
the throbbings of a threatened storm. They were men of power, and they
realized that it was a moment when action should be prompt and positive.

A yellowed parchment, with the great seal of the Republic appended, was
brought in state from the adjoining chambers of the Avvogadori and laid
before the Doge, who passed it, in turn, to each of his Councillors.

The silence was breathless. All eyes turned instinctively upon the young
noble, who had withdrawn to the side of his friend, and stood,
unconscious of their gaze, radiant with his hope of Marina.

"Nobles of the Gran' Consiglio of our Most Serene Republic," said the
Doge at last with deep impressiveness, "this record is the original
decree of this Senate, of the fourteenth century, given under the Great
Seal of the Republic in 1357. It hath been duly laid before our
Councillors in your presence and unanimously confirmed by them. And they
do unanimously consent to this our ruling in favor of the petition which
hath this day been presented before this Council by the noble
Marcantonio, of the ancient and princely house of Giustinian. Since in
this sixteenth century our Republic, by grace of God and favor of her
Rulers, is not less enlightened than in those earlier days to perceive
when graciousness may promote her welfare, in granting favor to a noble
house which hath ever shown to Venice its valor, its discretion, its
unfailing loyalty."

A cry of exaltation rang through the house like an electric thrill; the
senators started to their feet.

"My life, my faith, my strength--the might of all my house for Venice!"
shouted the young Giustinian, with his sword held high above his head,
like an inspired leader.



XII

The permission of the Maggior Consiglio, under favor of this imperious
government, was equivalent to a command and a public betrothal, and for
a few ecstatic days the heir of the Ca' Giustiniani went about in a
state of exaltation too great to be aware of any home shadows--the
slumbering anger of the Capo of the Ten and an inharmonious atmosphere
wherein each was intensely conscious of an individual estimate of the
great event which touched them all so nearly.

For suddenly the betrothal of this only son of an old patrician family
had assumed almost the proportions of a State marriage; and a young
fellow for whom time-honored observances of the realm could be set
aside, and who had won so extreme a proof of favor by his own wit and
grace, was surely a figure that might well occupy public attention.

But the decree would soon be a state paper; it was already an accepted
fact in the halls of the Council and in the salons of the nobility, and
the disappointed great ladies from the neighboring palaces were calling,
with curious questions decorously dressed in congratulatory form.

"When should they have the pleasure of welcoming the _new_ Lady of the
Giustiniani?"

"Was it not true that the Lady Marina--that was to be," there was always
some little stinging emphasis in the gracious speech, "had given a
votive offering to the convent of the Servi? She was a devote
then--quite unworldly--this beautiful maiden of Murano?"

"What a joy for the Lady Laura that so soon there would be a bride in
the Ca' Giustiniani!"

"The Lady Laura had never been more stately," they told each other when
they entered their gondolas again, "nor more undisturbed. There were no
signs of displeasure; it must be that the lowly maid was very
beautiful."

"Was it a thing to make one sad, to have a son who could twist the
rulers round his little finger, and break the very laws of the Republic?
Nay, but cause for much stateliness!" said a matron with two sons in the
Consiglio.

"The bridal must be soon," said the Lady Laura to herself, as she sat
alone in her boudoir, "for the ceasing of this endless gossip." And,
because she could think of nothing else, she was already weary with the
planning of a pageant which made her heart sick.

But Giustinian Giustiniani had no words, for the case was hopeless--only
a face of gloom, and much that was imperative to keep him in the Council
Chamber.

For these few blissful days the lovers had heaven to themselves,
floating about at twilight on the shores of the Lido, where there were
none to trouble the clear serenity of their joy by the chilling breath
of criticism. "That white rose which I brought thee was in sign of my
mother's favor," Marcantonio reminded Marina more than once; "and for
the rest--all will be well; and for a little, we can wait."

Ah, yes, they could wait--in such a smiling world, under a sky so
exquisite, gliding over the opal of the still lagoons at twilight.

But old Girolamo, sure now of the decree which should number his
daughter among the patricians of this Republic where, through long
generations, his family had made their boast that they represented the
people, was in a feverish mood--grave, elated, sad by turns, unwilling
to confess to the loneliness which was beginning to gnaw at his heart,
for Marina was his life; he did not think he could live without her; he
_knew_ he could not live and see her unhappy beside him; and he was old
to learn the new, pathetic part he must play--the waiting for death,
quite alone in the old home.

And those others,--in the sumptuous palace on the Canal Grande,--would
they prize the treasure which was the very light of his life, that he
should break his heart to yield her up?

He could have cried aloud in his anguish, as he sat waiting for the
happy plash of the returning gondola, the princely gondola of the Ca'
Giustiniani, bringing those two before whom life was opening in a golden
vista; but as the slow ripples breaking over the water brought them
nearer, his heart girded itself again with all his chivalrous strength,
lest he should dim the glad light in his beloved one's eyes--lest he
should seem ungenerous to the brave young knight who had dared the
displeasure of his house and of the Republic for the love he bore his
daughter.

And the shadows in that other home, the palazzo on the Canal Grande, in
these days of waiting, were colder, hasher,--born of selfishness rather
than love, of disappointed ambition perhaps,--but they were very real
shadows nevertheless, obscuring the clear-cut traditions of centuries,
out of which one should struggle through increase of pride, the other
through the broadening of a more generous love.

Meanwhile the gondola floated in light--between shadow and shadow--so
slight is the realization of the throes by which joy is sometimes born;
and the pathos of the change which made their gladness possible was for
the two young people still an unrecognized note.

But waiting was now over; more positive steps must be taken. Two
Secretaries had been sent from the Senate to bring the news of the
filing of the decree.

"Madre mia!" cried Marcantonio eagerly, when they were gone; "it has
come even before our hope!"

"Even sooner than thy hope," she echoed, feeling dreary, though he was
sitting with his arm around her, as if for a confidential talk.

But he was too happy to interpret her tone.

"The token!" he pleaded; "for Marina--and thou wilt come to see how
beautiful she is!"

She looked at him searchingly. He did not mean to urge her; he seemed
too happy to understand.

She rose and going slowly to her cabinet brought him her token--a string
of great Oriental pearls.

"These," she said, sitting down beside her son and opening the case,
"have I made ready for thy bride, since thou wert a little lad--at one
time one pearl, at another more, as I have found the rarest lustre. Some
of these, they say, have been hidden in Venice since the time of John of
Constantinople, who left them for his ransom; it may be but a tale, yet
they are rare in tint; and I have gleaned them, Marco, since thou wert a
little lad, not knowing who should wear them--not knowing, Marco----"

She broke off suddenly, touching the gems wistfully, endearingly, with
trembling, tapering fingers.

He laid his firm young hand upon hers lovingly. "How good thou art, my
mother; how good to think of thy boy through all these years! But thy
pearls are superb--they will almost frighten Marina. Later thou wilt
give them to her. Mother, dearest, let me take this rose which thou hast
worn, with thy little word of love--sweet mother----"

"They are fit for a princess, Marco," she said, still toying with the
pearls, apparently unheeding his request; "I chose them with that
thought--since they are for thy bride."

"And she will wear them worthily," Marcantonio answered, flushing, "and
like a queen, for none hath greater dignity, else could I not have
chosen her--I, who have learned a lady's grace by thee, my mother!"

She drew him to her with sudden emotion, for these days had been very
hard for her. "My boy--my boy! Does she love thee well for all thy faith
and devotion--for all that we are yielding her?"

"Madre mia, thou shalt see, if thou wilt let me take thee to her!"

"I had not thought--" she said, and stopped. "Would she not come with
thee?"

Marcantonio walked suddenly away to a window and stepped out on the
balcony for a breath of air; he was beginning to comprehend the under
side of his great joy, and it had come with a shock, on this very day
which he had thought would have been filled with a rush of gladness. He
grasped the cool marble of the parapet and tried to reason with himself;
he suddenly foresaw that many days of reasoning had entered into his
life, and always he must be ready to meet them with cool wisdom, since
enthusiasm was one-visioned. It was like taking a vow against youth, but
he himself had chosen it for his lot in life; his love was not less to
him, but the sudden realization had come that it was hard to fight
against the traditions of centuries. Yet how bravely she, his mother,
was trying to surrender her social creed for his happiness; it was not a
little thing that he had asked of her, but it seemed to him that her
soul had been nearer to her eyes than ever before during these days when
she had been suffering. At all costs these women--his dearest in the
world--must love each other, must bless each other's lives.

He went back with some comprehension of the barrier he had thought so
lightly to remove, with a vow in his soul to be more to each; because of
it neither should lose aught for his sake. He seemed suddenly older,
though his face was very tender.

"That which seemeth best to thee, my mother, in the matter of the
meeting, Marina would surely do; for it is thou who must guard for us
these little matters of custom, which none knoweth better. But her
father--never have I known one more courtly, nor more proud----"

"Marco, it is much to ask that we should think of him!"

"Ay, mother, it is much. Yet if thou knewest him thou wouldst
understand. For Marina is all the world to him, and I would take her
from him. Yet so he loveth her that never hath he said me nay. Naught
hath he asked for her of gold nor jewels, but only this--that she shall
not come unbidden to our home."

He spoke the last words very low and with an effort, as if they held a
prayer.

"And so--?"

"And so, sweet mother, none knoweth half so well as thou how best to
greet her whom I long to bring to thee, that she may know and love thee
as she doth love her father--with a great love, very beautiful and
tender."

She looked up as if she would have answered him, but she could not
speak.

"More than ever I think I love thee, now that I am grieving thee," he
added after a pause, in a tone so full of comprehension that it smote
her.

"Nay, Marco--nay," she said, and drew him closer, clasping her hand in
his. But they sat quite silent, while the mother's love intensified,
displacing selfishness.

He raised her hand to his lips with a new reverence. "In all this have I
asked so much of thee I think thou never canst forgive me, madre mia,
until--until thou knowest Marina!"

She touched his hair with her beautiful white hand caressingly, as she
had often done when he was a little child; but now, in this sudden
deepening of her nature, with a new yearning.

"Marco, when thou wert a babe," she said, "there was little I would not
give for thine asking. And now, when my soul is bound up in thine, I
seem not to care for the things I once sought for thee--but more for
happiness and love. Yet, if I go with thee--I seem to know thou wilt not
change to me--?" She paused, wistfully.

"Save but to prove a truer knight!" he cried radiantly. "So more than
gracious hast thou been!"

"Nay, it will be sweet to have part in thy happiness," she cried
bravely. "To-night, at sunset, will I go with thee, quite simply, in thy
gondola, to bid my daughter welcome--as our custom is. I will not fail
in honor to my Marco's bride! And since it is love that her father
asketh, I will give her this rose, for thy dear sake. But the bridal
must be soon, to make this endless talking cease. And before we leave
her--for she will learn to love me, Marco mio, and she will not take
thee from me?--I will give her the token that is fitting for a daughter
of our house."

       *       *       *       *       *

Among the members of the Senate, meeting by twos and threes in the
Broglio, Marcantonio's name was often heard. "It would be well when this
marriage was over, for verily it was likely to turn the heads of
Venice--the pageant, and the beauty of the maid, and the favor of the
Collegio----"

"Nay, not that," said an older senator, resentfully; "those are but
trifles. But the young fellow himself is the danger; too positive and
outspoken, revolutionary and of overturning methods, withal
persuasive----"

"He would be a power in an ambassade," suggested another, "for he hath a
gift in diplomacy and law which, verily, did astound the old Giustinian.
The eloquence of his great-uncle Sebastiano hath fallen upon him.--If he
were not so young--! Here in Venice he is rolling up influence, and the
charm of his inamorata is also a danger; and already in the Consiglio
all eyes are upon him."

"For a secretary to an ambassade is the age not set," answered the other
warily, "and the office hath space for diplomacy, which, it were better
for our privileges, were used elsewhere than in Venice. And the honor of
it would blind the eyes of his partizans--for the boy is young."

The winds, wandering through the Piazza, sometimes blew lightest
whispers from the Broglio into the Council Chambers of the Republic; and
so it was decreed that when the beautiful wedding pageant should be
over, just as the whole of Venice would have laid itself at the feet of
the charming bride--would have made the young nobles of the palazzo
Giustiniani the idols of the hour--these dangers to Venice should be
honorably removed by the appointment of Marcantonio Giustiniani, di
Maggior Consiglio, as Secretary to the Venetian Resident in Rome, with
the gracious permission of the Senate for the Lady Marina to bear him
company.

"It is well," answered Giustinian Giustiniani, as the Lady Laura made
her little moan on hearing of the appointment which the Senator reported
with such pride. "Marcantonio hath the head of a diplomat and the
bearing of a courtier. It is the way of distinction for such a man."

"That is justly spoken," said the mother; "and nobly hath our boy
fulfilled our hope. In Venice, or elsewhere, must he ever win
distinction. But to keep them in their palazzo near us--of this and of
their happiness was I thinking--the sight of it is so beautiful."

The filing of the decree of the Senate had acted like a charm upon our
Capo of the Ten: the importance thus accorded to the Ca' Giustiniani
soothed every vestige of wounded pride, while the beauty and grace of
his prospective daughter-in-law had filled him with a triumph which only
the frigid stateliness of his habitual demeanor enabled him to conceal,
so great was the revulsion from his former state of feeling.

"I tell thee, Lady Laura," said her husband, coming nearer and speaking
low, "we may well be proud. All this trifling in art and knickknacks in
which it hath pleased the boy to spend himself, like so many of his
hose,[2] hath fluttered off from him like silken ribbons hanging
harmless in the wind, and hath left him with a head quite clear of
nonsense for the Senate's work. _That day_"--he had referred to it so
often that it had become an acknowledged division of time--"_that_ day
when he made his speech not one arose to answer him; for the cunning of
it was so simple one listened, fearing naught, until the end was
reached; and the words of it were so few that the end was a surprise;
and, lo! the Counsellors were confounded by the weight of his demand,
and the reason for the justice of it, and the wit of its
presentation--lying folded in a sentence scarce long enough for a
preamble! And the boy! Holding himself like a prince and winning them
all by his grace, as if he were a child! Nay, but I do forget he is a
man, wearing honors from his country!"

  [2] The young nobles were called "the gay company of the hose."

"Giustinian, I fain would keep them here!"

"That is the woman's side of it," said the Chief of the Ten, easily
dismissing her plea. "But for Marcantonio the appointment is good. When
the late-returned Ambassador to His Most Christian Majesty did render
his report before our Maggior Consiglio--an oration diplomatic and of
weight--I noted many of our graver men with eyes observing Marcantonio
closely, as they would mark how he weighed the speech of the old
diplomatist."

"And Marco?"

"He seemed not to take note of them. Or it may be a grace that he hath,
that he seemeth not to see; for he weareth the 'pensieri stretti e viso
sciolto'[3] meet for a Venetian councillor--age could not teach him
better to guard his thought, but it would make the wearing of his
careless face less easy. Or it may be that his mind hath space for the
speech only--one knows not! Save that all things come easily to
him--even the most beautiful bride in Venice, raised from the ranks of
the people to suit his whim!"

  [3] Close-locked thoughts and open countenance.

"Giustinian! She will be our daughter, and none need question her
dignity and grace."

"My Lady Laura, none knoweth better of her beauty and none so proud of
her as I, who had thought to hide my head for the disgrace of it! But
the daring of this son of ours doth make me gay! I am ready to give thee
a compliment on thy bringing up, which often I had feared was over
frivolous. And now, he hath the Republic before him, where to choose."

"Giustinian?"

She rested both hands on his shoulders and looked full in his eyes with
the gravity of her question which was the dream of his life, and was
often tacitly touched, when they conferred together in confidence.

"Ay," he answered, "even that, the highest--by favor of San Marco--he
may win. For the grace of him maketh his head seem less."

But the shadow of the coveted Lion's paw had suddenly overclouded him
and changed his mood.



XIII

When the first faint flush of dawn was waking in the east, the fair,
sweet face of Marina of Murano was outlined for the last time, vague as
some dream memory, against the deep shadows of the interior, between the
quaint columns that framed her window.

Birds were twittering in the vines of the pergola not far away;
honeysuckles were pouring forth their fragrant morning oblations; and
the salt sea-breeze wafted her its invigorating breath as the early
tide, with slow, increasing motion, brimmed the channels that wound
through the marshes on the borders of Murano and overflowed till the
lagoon was a broad, unbroken vista of silver-gray, in whose shimmer and
radiance, when the tide was at its full, the morning stars died out. But
still they glistened dimly in the twilight of the sky to which she
raised her questioning, believing eyes. Life was always beautiful to her
loving soul; for when the shadows held a meaning deeper than she could
solve, her answer was faith; and now, that her new joy was to grow out
of a deep solitariness for the father so tenderly beloved, it was he who
upheld her courage.

"Life may not be," he said, "without some shadow; this is the shade of
thine, which, without it, were too bright. Heaven hath some purpose in
its sending, but not that it should darken our eyes to miss the joy."

"The day will be o'er-lonely in this home, my father."

"Nay, Marina, let love suffice; so shall we be always together! Shall I
not go to thee? And thou wilt come to me, bringing thy new interests and
holding thy dear heart ever pure and loyal to Venice, and thy home, and
thy God--not forgetting. For thou hast chosen with thy whole heart, my
daughter?" since she had not answered. "Thou dost not fear thyself?"

"Dearest father," she had said, hiding her face in his tender embrace,
"all of my heart which is not thine is wholly his--only my happiness is
too great."

"Nay, daughter, since it is of God's own sending; take all the joy and
grieve not."

"Only at leaving thee."

"I would not keep thee here, to leave thee mourning and alone when my
days are closed."

"Father!"

"Not to sadden thee, my child, but to show thee that life is linked to
life--God wills it so. Thou and I are bound to that which has been and
to that which is to be. We do not stand alone to choose. The sweetness
of our life together should make it easier for me to yield thee to the
fuller life which calleth thee. We must each bear our part in the beauty
of the whole. For perfect love, there must be sacrifice."

She was thinking of these things as she stood in the gray dawn waiting
for the beauty of the on-coming day, quite alone with her thoughts and
with her God, the giver of this beauty; and often as she had stood there
with her morning offering of trust and adoration, never before had the
day-dawn seemed so full of mystery and promise, nor the new life which
the morning held within its keeping so full of hope and beauty. The very
tide, flowing round her island home, brought thoughts of her home that
was to be, as it swept through the channels of the City of the Sea, past
the palace where her lover was waiting, bringing murmurs and messages of
liquid harmony. The marsh grasses swayed and yielded to its flow,
lending new depths of color to the water-bed, as they bowed beneath the
masterful current--so the difficulties which had seemed to beset their
hopes had been vanquished by the resistless tide of his love and
constancy.

The stars were lost in the deep gray-blue of the sky; a solemn
stillness, like the presage of some divine event, seemed for a moment to
hold the pulses of the universe; then a soft rose crept into the shimmer
of the water and crested the snows on the distant Euganean Hills, the
transient, many-tinted glory of the east reflected itself in opal lights
upon the silver sea, then suddenly swept the landscape in one dazzling
glow of gold--and the joy-bells rang out. For to-day a festa had been
granted in Murano.

Then, wrapping herself closely in the soft folds of her gray mantle,
falling Madonna-wise from her head and shrouding her figure, she glided
for the last time over the _ponte_ and down past the sleeping homes of
Murano; for it was yet early for matins, and she would have the Madonna
all to herself as she knelt with her heart full of tenderness for the
dear life this day should merge in that other which beckoned her with
joyous anticipation--yet stilled to serenity by the golden glory and
promise of the dawn, and the beautiful, self-sacrificing, upholding
faith of the great-hearted Girolamo.

He had followed her and folded her passionately to his heart, as she
crossed the threshold of their home on her way to San Donato. "I must be
first," he said, "to bless thee on thy bridal day. Fret thee not, for
thou art bidden to a mission, since thou goest forth from the people to
the highest circle of the nobles. And love alone hath bidden and drawn
thee. Forget it not, Marina! So shall a blessing go with thee and rest
upon thee!"

She had brought a gift to the Madonna of San Donato--an exquisite altar
lamp of ivory and silver--and from the flowers which she had laid upon
the altar while she knelt in prayer, she gathered some to scatter over
the grave of the tiny Zuane.

When Marina returned slowly through the little square, Murano was awake;
the painted sails of the fishing-boats were tacking in the breeze, the
activities of the simple homes had commenced, women with their
water-jugs were chatting round the well, detaining little ones clinging
to the fringes of the tawny mantles which hung below their waists; a few
stopped her with greetings; here and there a child ran to her
shyly--their mothers, from the low cottage doorways, calling to them
that "the donzel Marina had given them festa."

Yes, there was to be festa in Murano. Girolamo had obtained from the
Senate the grace of providing it. For now, since his daughter would have
no need of the gold which his industry had brought him, he might spend
it lavishly on her wedding day to gladden the hearts of the people whom
she was leaving; for to him this bridal had a deeply consecrated meaning
which divested it of half its sadness.

The workmen of Murano were to have holiday, and a great feast was spread
for them by Girolamo in the long exhibition hall of the stabilimenti,
for which it had been needful to procure permission of the Senate; but
for once it suited well the humor of this august and autocratic body
that one of the people should, for a day, make himself great among them.
Thus for the inhabitants of Murano--men, women, and children--there was
a welcome waiting the day long in the house of the bride, where they
should come to take her bounty and shower their blessings; for this time
only Murano had no voice for _critica_--it was too busy in
congratulation.

When Marina reached her home she found it garlanded from column to
column with festal wreaths of green, while the maidens from the village
still lingered, veiling the walls between the windows with delicate
frosts of fruit-bloom from the gardens of Mazzorbo. And closely
following this village tribute came a priest from San Donato with the
band of white-robed nuns who formed the choir of the Matrice, bearing
perfumes of incense and benediction for the home of the bride, that all
who passed beneath its portal, going out or coming in, might carry
blessing with their steps.

In Venice also there were joy-bells ringing; and to overflowing tables,
spread in the water-storey of the Ca' Giustiniani, the people of Venice
were freely bidden by silken banners floating legends of welcome above
the open doorway. But now the expectant people were thronging the
Piazza; the _fondamenta_ along the Riva was alive with color, balconies
were brilliant with draperies, windows were glowing with vivid shawls,
rugs, brocades--tossed out to lean upon in the splendor that became a
fete; above them the spaces were crowded with enthusiastic spectators in
holiday dress; the children of the populace, shouting, ecstatic,
ubiquitous, swarmed on the quay below.

The splendor of the pageant which brought a bride from Murano to the
highest patrician circle of the Republic--to that house which held its
patent of nobility from those days of the seventh century when an
ancestor had ruled as tribune over one of the twelve Venetian isles--was
long remembered, almost as a royal wedding fete, and for days before and
after it was the talk of Venice.

They were coming over the water to the sound of the people's native
songs and the echo of their laughter, the young men and maidens of
Murano, in barks that were wreathed with garlands and brilliant with the
play of color that the Venetians love.

  "Maridite, maridite, donzela,
    Che dona maridada e sempre bela;
  Maridite finche la fogia e verde,
    Perche la zoventu presto se perde."[4]

  [4] Marry, maiden, marry,
        For she that is wedded is ever fair;
      Marry then, in thy tender bloom,
        Since youth passeth swiftly.

By the port of the Lido many a royal pageant had entered into Venice,
but never before had such a procession started from the shores of
Murano; it made one feel fete-like only to see the _bissoni_, those
great boats with twelve oars, each from a stabilimento of Murano,
wreathed for the fete, each merchant master at its head, robed in his
long, black, fur-trimmed gown and wearing his heavy golden chain, the
workmen tossing blossoms back over the water to greet the bride, the
rowers chanting in cadence to their motion:

  "Belina sei, e'l ciel te benedissa,
   Che in dove che ti passi l'erba nasse!"[5]

  [5] Beautiful thou art, and may Heaven bless thee,
      So that in thy footprints the grass shall spring.

A cry rang down the Canal Grande from the gondoliers of the Ca'
Giustiniani, who were waiting this sign to start their own train from
the palazzo; for the bridal gondolas were coming in sight, with _felzi_
of damask, rose, and blue, embroidered with emblems of the Giustiniani,
bearing the noble maidens who had been chosen for the household of the
Lady Marina, each flower-like and charming under her gauzy veil of
tenderest coloring. It was indeed a rare vision to the populace, these
young patrician beauties whose faces never, save in most exceptional
fetes, had been seen unveiled beyond their mother's drawing-rooms,
floating toward them in a diaphanous mist which turned their living
loveliness into a dream.

The shout of the Giustiniani was echoed from gondola to gondola of the
waiting throng, from the gondoliers of all the nobles who followed in
their wake, from the housetops, the balconies, the fondamenta, mingled
with the words of the favorite folk-song:

  "Belo ze el mare, e bela la marina!"[6]

  [6] Beautiful is the sea, and beautiful the marsh.

It was like a fairy dream as the bridal procession came floating toward
San Marco, in the brilliant golden sunshine, between the blue of the
cloudless sky and the blue of the mirroring sea, each gondola garlanded
with roses, its silver dolphins flashing in the light, and in the midst
of them the bark that bore the bride. The stately pall of snowy damask,
fringed with silver, swept almost to the water's breast, behind the
felze of azure velvet, where, beside her father, sat the bride, in robe
of brocaded silver shimmering like the sea--a subtle perfume of orange
blossoms heralding her advance.

Once more the shout went up--the quaint love-song of the people--

  "Belo ze el mare, e bela la marina!"

and then a breathless silence fell, for the bark of the ministering
priest of San Donato had taken the lead, the white-robed nuns of the
Matrice grouped about him, chanting as they approached some ancient
wedding canticles of benediction. The bissoni parted and came no
further, having brought their maiden from Murano with every sign of love
and honor; the barges of the people fell back behind them, and through
their ranks the bridal gondolas followed the bark of the priest of San
Donato to the steps of the Piazzetta, where the train of the
Giustiniani, in a magnificence that was well-nigh royal, had just
disembarked, and Marcantonio stood bareheaded among the nobles to
receive his bride.

But it was only for a moment of recognition in the sight of the
thronging people, for messengers were arriving with greetings from the
Doge, which this bride, whom the Senate had taken from the people to
bestow upon a noble, must receive from the lips of the Prince himself
before the wedding ceremony should take place; so the train of
Giustiniani, with all the nobles of Venice--who, from immemorial custom,
had come together to witness and rejoice over this great event in the
life of one of their number--entered San Marco by the great doors of the
Piazza; while the bride, obeying the gracious summons of the Doge,
passed through the gate of the Ducal Palace on the seaside, into the
great court where the Signoria were descending the Giant's Stairway on
their passage to the ducal chapel.

The ceremony of presentation to the Serenissimo was quickly over, and
the bride and her maidens, with Girolamo Magagnati, in sign of the
Prince's favor, followed the Doge and suite into the golden looms and
shifting twilights of this place of symbolism and wonder, where the vast
throng waited in a solemn hush.

The gloom was broken by countless tongues of flame from lamps of silver
and alabaster burning in the farther chapels, while wandering lights
streaming through the openings of the dome filled it with wonderful
waves of color--only half-revealing the treasures of ivory and jewels
and precious marbles and mosaics, wrought with texts and symbols, but
wholly making felt the mystery and beauty. The vague perfume of those
faint mists of floating incense, crossing and recrossing the scattered
rays of sunshine, mingled with the fragrance of the orange blossoms from
which the light tread of the bride-maidens seemed to crush a breath of
benediction.

Coming out of the sunlight into this still, beautiful, holy place--the
chant sweet and sacred accompanying her steps, with the Cross repeated
again and again in the heights of the domes, with the dear familiar form
of the Mother Mary on every side lifting adoring eyes to the crowning
figure of the Christ, while the saints who graciously leaned to her from
their golden backgrounds in the great vaulted spaces above recalled the
legends inseparably linked with their intimate friendly faces and
brought back the atmosphere of her own Matrice--her mother church--this
maiden of Murano felt suddenly at home.

The Patriarch with his pomp, the Signoria and Senate in their robes of
state, the nobles and the pageant were all forgotten. In the sacramental
lights of the ceremonial candles of the great altar, flashing back from
the marvelous _Pala d'Oro_, she saw only Marco waiting for her--to whom
her father, beloved and trusted, was leading her with her heart's
consent.

How should she falter on the path from love to love!



XIV

But even in Venice--the magic city--there were days of mists, silvery
and gray, when life took on the indistinctness and indecision of a
dream; as there were days less lucent, when sea and sky melted in an
indistinguishable line and the chameleon tints of the marshes mellowed
into a monotonous gray surface--when the wonted brilliancy of the sunset
clouds, and the glittering domes and campaniles were only faint gray
shadows on the gray whiteness of the waters. And gondoliers came
suddenly into vision, parting the mists with thin, black, swaying
outlines, as quickly fading in the near, gray distance when they passed,
while the shipping loomed like phantoms on an immediate horizon,
vanishing, vision-like; and even the sounds of life came muffled over
the still lagoon, like ghostly echoes from a city wrapped in dreams.

These were days of dim forebodings, too, for the anxious men of action
who ruled the Republic. In the Broglio there was more often silence than
speech, as the older senators gathered in knots, with faces the more
expressive because of much reticence in words; the sense of approaching
contest increased their mental restlessness and made them outwardly more
stern. Each looked into another's stormy, resolute face, so passing many
a counsel whose echoes he feared to start under the rambling porticoes
of the Piazza, where friars of every order mingled freely with the
crowd, and idlers carried tales into dark, basement recesses, and one
knew not which was friend or foe. Meanwhile the Winged Lion, with those
terrible, jeweled, glaring eyes, and the primitive patron San
Teodoro--each high on his column, in a Nirvana of quiescence--kept
solemn semblance of vigil over that dread space where sometimes a horror
of which one dared not speak scattered the sunshine high in air between
those silent wardens of San Marco. Yet the horror of those figures
swinging lifeless, with veiled faces, was met in silence by a people
trained to suffer this secret meting out of penalty for transgressions
in which justice and vengeance stood confused.

The ceaseless chains of elections had begotten bribery, corruption, and
strife; the over-weening luxury had fostered unworthy ambitions--it was
a time of much lawlessness. Under the shadow of the embassies infamous
intrigues were planned by bands of idle men, who shrank from no deed of
evil which held its promise of gold; the water-storey of some splendid
palace might be a lurking-place for unprincipled men--spies and
informers by profession--who wore the liveries of noble families whose
secrets they would unhesitatingly consign to that merciless _Bocca del
Leone_, for favor or vengeance of those they secretly served. For
underneath the glitter and the pomp of these latter days of Venice--its
presage of decay--a turbulent mass of malcontents, foreigners
disappointed in intrigue, Venetians shut out from power, grasped and
plotted for its semblance,--sold murder for gold, treason for
gold,--escaping justice by the wiles they so deftly unveiled, or by the
importance of the deposition it was in their power to make. Secret,
swift, relentless, absolute--Venice had work for men who did not court
the sunlight; and such a nucleus drew to its dark centre intriguers from
other courts, and gathered in and strengthened the worthless within its
own borders, until the evil was growing heavy to deal with.

Causes of discontent between Church and State were alarmingly on the
increase; and while in no other dominion, save that of Rome alone, were
ecclesiastical possessions so rich, or their establishments more
splendid than at Venice, nowhere were the lines of power so jealously
defined and guarded as in the government of this Republic from which
ecclesiastics were rigorously excluded,--although no least ceremonial
was held complete without the presence of the Patriarch and priests who
evidenced the devotion of Venice to the Holy Mother Church,--though
every parish kept its festa, and the religion of Venice was an essential
part of the life of its people. But if the priests had no visible seat
in the splendid Council Chambers of the Republic, they boasted at Rome
that their sway over the consciences of these lordly senators was well
established by virtue of the confessional and that, in the event of
contest, there would be many votes for Rome.

The _ridotti_, the informal clubs of Venice in those days, were
important centres of influence--political, legislative, and literary;
and there was a certain palazzo Morosini, well known to many of the
senators who gathered in the Broglio, where questions of vital interest
to the thinkers and rulers of Venice were discussed with the degree of
knowledge that might have been expected from so eminent a company as
that which made the home of the distinguished senator Andrea Morosini
the scene of its ridotto, and where freedom of speech was much greater
than seemed wise in the candid sunshine of the Piazza.

Of its present numbers all, at some period of their lives, held high
office under the Republic--they were senators, secretaries of state,
ambassadors--and three among that little group of thirty lived to wear
the beretta. It represented essentially the patrician culture of Venice,
and Morosini himself was already eminent as an historian; but the chief
literary centre was still acknowledged to be that quaint house in Campo
Agostino, of Aldo Manuzio, _il vecchio_, bearing, as in his day,
shield-wise, its forbidding inscription, "Whoever you are, Aldo
requesteth you, if you want anything, to ask it in few words and depart;
unless, like Hercules, you come to lend the aid of your shoulders to the
weary Atlas. There will always be found, in that case something for you
to do, however many you may be." But in this Aldine mansion only the
most-learned men of letters gathered, and Greek was the sole language
permitted in its discussions.

One of the _habitues_ of the Aldine Club was chief among this noble
company of the Morosini. He was a grave, scholarly man who listened and
questioned much out of a seemingly inexhaustible fund of historic,
legal, and ecclesiastical knowledge--a man who had the power of
stimulating others, and whose rare word, when uttered, was of value. He
had opinions gathered at first hand from influential minds of every land
and creed to contribute to the talk when it flowed in narrowing
channels; and he himself came thither for refreshment from abstruse
studies, out of a quiet cell in the convent of the Servi, while
seemingly unaware that many a stranger begged for an invitation to the
palazzo Morosini in the hope of an introduction to this "miracle of
Venice."

Perhaps this grave friar, apparently so careless of his distinction, was
the unsuspected intellectual thread which bound, as it were, together
the various influential circles of Venice; for in every centre, plebeian
or patrician, where there was anything new to be mooted or anything of
value to be discussed, he was a visitor so welcome and so frequent that
he might well have exerted a steady, unifying influence upon Venetian
thought.

At the sign of the "Nave d'oro," in the Merceria, where the vast
commercial interests of Venice were the absorbing theme, and strangers
from every clime and merchants just returned from distant ports were
eager now, as in the days when Marco Polo had so valiantly entertained
the goodly company, to rehearse the tale of their adventures--it was
neither merchant nor noble who stood forth on the bizarre background of
brilliant baubles and gold-woven tissues as the centre of this ridotto,
but a friar, learned in languages and sciences, of whom it was
pleasantly affirmed that "he was the only man in Venice who could
discuss any subject in any tongue!"

As this friar, unattended and on foot, turned out of the narrow calle
from San Samuele into the Campo San Stefano, the Giustiniani, father and
son, were just landing from their gondolas in the midst of a gay
retinue, on the steps of the palazzo Morosini; other gondolas of other
nobles were floating in full moonlight before the quay; and to Fra
Paolo, who did not share the Venetian love of color and of art, the
elaborately frescoed facade of an opposite palace--an extravagant freak
of the Veronese's which the Venetians were already beginning to cherish
as the work of their great artist who would paint no more--seemed an
impertinence unworthy of that dazzling illumination.

Marcantonio Giustiniani had but lately returned from Rome, where, during
his residence as Secretary to the Venetian Ambassador, the affair of the
Venetian Patriarch Zani, which had roused such indignation in Venice,
had taken place. The matter was still of interest in official quarters,
because the death of Zani had caused a new vacancy, to which Venice,
according to her ancient right, had appointed the successor; and this
new Patriarch Vendramin should never go, as Zani had done at the request
of the Holy Father, to receive his benediction and be met with that
perfidious announcement that he had "examined and approved the Venetian
candidate," whom he now confirmed as Patriarch to the Most Serene
Republic!

At the thought of the manner in which they had been entrapped and
outwitted--denuded, as it were, before the Roman Court of some
semblance of their ancient privilege of appointing their own
Patriarch--there was fresh indignation among these proud patricians. The
secretary Marcantonio Giustiniani had been present at the audience
granted by Clement to the Venetian Patriarch. "He would know if it had
been possible--even with the most favorable intentions toward
Rome,"--they were crowding round him and questioning with jealous
eagerness,--"even with the feeling which loyal sons should possess for
their Mother Church--to interpret that rude cross-questioning of his
Holiness, so unexpected and unexampled and contradicting his own
explicit promise--otherwise than as an examination--_an examination
which prejudiced the ancient right of Venice_?"

A scarcely perceptible smile flitted over the young secretary's handsome
face--they were so venerable and eager, so careful of shadows of
form!--and in a sudden side-light a hint of a question obtruded itself
on his consciousness, as to whether there could be a slightly farcical
aspect to such an episode between two most Catholic and Christian
governments? He saw them both fired with feelings of very human
strength, both dealing only with shadows of reality--the Sovereign
Pontiff grasping at a semblance of power in insisting that this
candidate, named by Venice to a see within her gift, to which he, the
Pope, would dare present no other, was invested by _his_ examination and
approval; and the Republic, receiving back its own appointee, confirmed
with the papal benediction, jealously aroused to unappeasable
indignation by the empty form of questioning which had preceded this
singular ceremony.

But the dignified company were pressing the young secretary for his
answer, and one of them anxiously repeated the keynote, "_An examination
which prejudiced the ancient right of Venice_?"

"Courtesy and wisdom would render any other opinion inadmissible,"
Marcantonio replied,--"in Venice."

The elder Giustinian had detected the slight pause which preceded the
last two words. "Wherefore 'in Venice'?" he questioned, with some heat.
"It is a question not of locality, but of justice and judgment."

"It is a question of judgment," Marcantonio echoed suavely, "upon which,
it hath been told me, the Senate hath already passed a law that shall
keep our Most Reverend Signor Vendramin from such a fate."

"Ay, never again may our Patriarch leave the Republic for confirmation
of the see which she alone may grant. The law is just," said the Senator
Leonardo Donate.

"In the days when his Holiness was but an Eminence, it hath been said,
he gave our ambassador a chance to prove his temper?" Morosini
questioned of Donato, who had been ambassador in Rome while Paul V, who
had but just ascended the throne, was still Cardinal Borghese.

"It was in the matter of the Uscocks," Donato answered, after a moment's
hesitation, seeing that some were waiting for the story. "And it was the
second time that half-civilized tribe hath provoked disputes between two
most Christian nations. 'If I were Pope,' said the cardinal, 'I would
excommunicate both Doge and Senate!'"

Fra Paolo scrutinized the faces of the listeners, and fixed his gaze
searchingly on the speaker. There was an uneasy movement among the
company, but Leonardo Donate did not flinch.

"May they not know your answer, most noble Signor?" Morosini urged.
"For, verily, it was of a quality to illumine a page of history."

"The words were few," said Leonardo, with dignity. "'_If I were Doge, I
would trample your edict under foot_.'"

There was a sudden hush, in which those who had not been listening
became intensely conscious of the words just uttered by the aged and
illustrious Cavaliere Leonardo Donate, for there had been of late an
abiding undercurrent of suppressed excitement ready to awake at any
mention of Papal supremacy. The Republic had always jealously guarded
against any transference of temporal power from prince to prelate, and
many events which seemed linked in a chain that might lead to the most
deplorable results had succeeded to the election of Camillo Borghese as
Paul V; the desire evidently manifested by Clement during his latter
days to encroach on the perquisites and possessions of the minor Italian
States was crystallizing into a fixed purpose of ecclesiastical
aggrandizement on the part of the new Pope.

"He was brandishing Saint Peter's sword before he had been knighted,"
remarked the Signor Antonio Querini, who was deeply interested in all
disputes between Church and State.

"But not before he had received strenuous training," responded the
grave, clear voice of the friar. "For five years he hath held office as
Auditor of the Apostolical Chamber, the style of which is written thus,
_'Universal Executor of censures and sentences recorded both in Rome and
abroad'_--a duty which he may be said to have discharged more faithfully
than any of his predecessors, as one cannot recall in any previous fifty
years as many thunderbolts and monitions as were launched during those
five years of his office!"

Some romance could but attach to the unswerving judicial attitude of a
friar who had friends in high favor at the Court of Rome--who had known
a Bellarmino and a Navarro, and yet pursued, unchanging, the calm tenor
of his critical way. It was rumored that Sixtus V had been known to
leave his coach to converse with him, and would have given him, at his
mere request, a cardinal's hat; that Urban VII, as cardinal and pope,
had been his devoted friend; that Cardinal Borromeo--the saintly San
Carlo--had wished to attach him to his cathedral; and many were the
instances reported when marks of special appreciation had been granted
him from Rome, in lieu of denunciations which those jealous of his rapid
advance had sought to bring upon him. Even the late Pope Clement had
expressed admiration for his learning, while it was, nevertheless, well
known that Fra Paolo's counsels to the Senate, in certain troubles
arising out of Clement's attitude at Ferrara, had brought him the
refusal of the bishoprics of Candia and Caorle; but, whatever the
occasion, he was invariably discreet and fearless.

However pungent the tone, the words of this man could no more be
attributed to personal bitterness than they might be influenced by
personal interest; and although the opinion which they indicated was a
surprise to some of the company, instinctively they felt the situation
to be graver than they had feared, and the evening's talk drifted as
wholly into the current of Church and State as if this ridotto were a
commission appointed by the Ten to prepare resolutions upon the
situation. And the list of grievances now reviewed, which had occupied
the Senate during the closing years of Clement's reign, was, in truth,
long. Vast differences of opinion concerning the Turks and the piratical
tribes who infested the shores of Italy and the uses their villainy
might be made to serve; troubles at Ferrara, teasing and undignified,
temporarily brought to a close by the sending of the galleys of the
Republic to prevent the seizure of their fishing-boats by agents of his
Holiness; questions of boundaries and taxes; attempts to divert the
trade of Venice, to arrest improvements redounding not only to the
advantage of the Republic but to that of the neighboring country; to
forbid, under pain of excommunication, all commerce with countries
tainted with heresy. These were matters meet for discussion by temporal
sovereigns touching the balance of power--so viewed and strenuously
resisted by the clear-headed Venetians, with much deference of form,
whenever practicable--as became loyal sons of the Church; but
occasionally, when nothing might be expected from temporizing, with a
quiet disregard which proved their consciousness of strength.

From time to time, as the informal summary progressed, there was an
outburst of indignation.

"Could an aggression be more palpable than that _Index Expurgatorius_
demanded by Rome in 1596, when the ruling doctrine of exclusion involved
no question of morality or irreligion, but solely concerned books
upholding rights of consciences and rulers!"

"It was a contest honorable to Venice, and one which Italy will
remember," responded a secretary of the Senate, who was a regular member
of this ridotto. "I am proud that it was my privilege to transcribe for
the records of the Republic the papers relating to that Concordat which
secured so great a measure of freedom for our press."

There had been a short truce between Rome and Venice since the accession
of Paul V, who had been so immediately concerned with a certain prophecy
foretelling the death of a Leo and a Paul that his fears were only set
at rest by a further astrological announcement, judiciously arranged in
the palace of his eminence the brother of the Pope, to the effect that
"the evil influences were now conquered." Whereupon Paul had undertaken
in earnest the work which he conscientiously believed to be the highest
duty of a sovereign pontiff, had recalled all nuncios not in full
sympathy with his views of aggrandizement, and had replaced them with
envoys whose notions of authority were echoes of his own; and, as an
opening move, had made the demand, so resented by Venice, that the new
Patriarch Vendramin should be sent to Rome for examination before he
could be allowed to take possession of his prelacy.

"But what hath Venice to fear from a Pope who is paralyzed for the first
two months of his reign by a reading of a horoscope!" exclaimed one of
the company scornfully.

"Nay, then," said Donato, who had seen much of the world; "it is a petty
superstition of the age; it is not the fault of the man, who hath
sterling qualities. And by that same potency of credulity have his fears
been set at rest. It is a proof of weakness to undervalue the strength
of an adversary--for so at least he hath recently declared himself on
this question of temporal power, by his petty aggressions and triumphs
in Malta, Parma, Lucca, and Genoa."

"I crave pardon of the Cavaliere Donato," Antonio Querini responded
hotly. "May one call the action at Genoa _petty_?--the compulsion of the
entire vote of a free city, the placing of the election of the whole
body of governing officials in the power of the Society of Jesus?"

"And it was under threat of excommunication, which made resistance a
duty from the side of the government," Giustinian Giustiniani asserted
uncompromisingly.

"But impossible from the Church's point of view. It is the eternal
question," Leonardo Donato answered gravely.

"_The solution is only possible by precisely ascertaining the limits
within which each power is absolute_," the friar announced, with quiet
decision.

A momentary hush fell upon the company, for the words were weighty and a
surprise.

"It is well to know the qualities we have to fear," said Andrea
Morosini, "and we have listened in the Senate to letters from our
ambassador at Rome which bespeak his Holiness of a presence and a
dignity--save for over-quickness of temper--which befit a Pope; and that
he hath reserved himself from promises, to the displeasure and surprise
of some of those who created him."

"It was rumored in Rome," said the younger Giustinian, "that the learned
Bishop Baronious, in the last conclave, by his persistence found means
to save the Consistory from the election by 'adoration' of another
candidate whose life would bear no scrutiny and who never darkened the
doors of his own cathedral! By this election the Church hath verily been
spared a scandal."

"Therefore, let it be known," said Fra Paolo, with deep gravity, "lest
the nearness of such a scandal should breed confusion--and I speak from
knowledge, having been much in Rome--we have now a Pope blameless in
life; in duty to his Church most faithful and exemplary and concerned
with her welfare, as to himself it seemeth; of an unbending conscience
and a will most absolute; moreover, of marvelous reading in certain
doctrinal writings which seem to him the only books of worth, and with
the training of a lawyer wherewith to assert them. This is the man with
whom we have to contend."

"Are there no faults?" thundered Giustinian Giustiniani, while the
others listened disconcerted. "A soldier seeks for weak spots in the
armor."

"I know him," said Leonardo Donato, "and there _is_ one fault. It limits
his power to achieve; it increases his absolutism. It is
near-sightedness--smallness of vision."

"Draw him strongly," said Giustinian, in a tone of concentrated wrath.
"Let us measure our foe before we meet."

"There are no books Borghese hath not read; there is no point of view
but that which he doth teach, no appeal from the law as he interpreteth
it. _It is a fault of unity_. One power--the Church; one duty--its
aggrandizement; one prince--temporal and spiritual alike; one unvarying
obedience. All is adjusted to one centre; it is the simplification of
life!"

There was an ominous silence and an evident wish to change the theme,
and the company readjusted itself by twos and threes. The Senator
Morosini turned graciously to Marcantonio. "It hath been told in
Venice," he said, "that the Lady Marina was received in Rome with marks
of very special favor."

"The introduction of our Reverend Father Paolo had preceded her," the
young secretary answered lightly, bowing in the direction of the friar,
who sat apparently lost in thought. But Morosini repeated Marcantonio's
speech with some amusement, for the scholarly friar had never been known
to have a friend among the women--old or young.

"I do not understand," he said, with no perception of any humor in the
situation.

"It was the gift of the Reverend Father Paolo to the chapel of the
Servi," Marcantonio explained. "The Madonna del Sorriso was well known
in Rome."

"Ah, I recall now the face of your lady, though I have not known her,"
the friar responded courteously, yet he hesitated a moment before
accepting the seat which the secretary rose to offer him. "If it is the
face which the Veronese hath painted, her spirit must be fair. It should
make a home holy," he added, after a moment's pause.

Marcantonio's face flushed with pleasure. The friar was still regarding
him with a gaze so penetrating, yet apparently so guiltless of
intentional rudeness that it ceased to be an impertinence, and amused
the young Venetian by its unconventionality. "Is there anything it would
please Fra Paolo to ask of me?" he inquired affably.

"If there are children--" the friar pursued quite simply.

"Our little son was baptized in Saint Peter's in Rome; he had sponsors
among the cardinals and a private audience and benediction from his
Holiness, Pope Clement," the young nobleman replied, trying to repress a
pleasurable sense of importance. "It was a pleasure to the Lady
Marina--she is devoted to the Church, and his Holiness was always most
gracious to her."

"As was fitting for the lady of a Venetian representative, and due to
Venice," the elder Giustinian hastened to explain, "his late Holiness
was ever courtly and a gracious diplomat."

He had been aware from his little distance how the talk had turned, and
he was alert to give it the coloring he liked best. For while the young
people were still in Rome, Signor Agostino Nani, watchful as an
ambassador well might be of the interests of so princely a house, had
confided to the "Illustrissimo Giustiniani," in a private and friendly
letter, that courtesies so unusual had been extended to this noble
young Venetian lady--so devoted to the Church, so gentle and
unsuspicious, so incapable of counter-plotting--that it would be wise to
guard against undue influence by a too prolonged stay at the Roman
court; and the honorable recall of the Secretary Giustiniani had soon
thereafter been managed.

The friar's face had grown stern, but he did not resume the conversation
until the elder Giustinian had strolled away with his host. Then he
turned to Marcantonio, speaking earnestly. "Simplicity is no match for
subtlety," he said, "and much favor hath been shown to her. You will
pardon me, Signore, not because you are young and I am old, but because
the face of your lady hath moved me with a rare sense of unworldliness.
There should be no flattery in an act our Lord himself hath taught by
his example, and an old man like Pope Clement might well bestow his
blessing on your little child. But the times are not free from danger;
the home is best for the little ones--do not send him from his mother to
the schools."

"He is but learning to speak," the young man answered, smiling at the
friar's earnestness; "only his baby word for his mother's name."

"There are schools for the sons of noblemen in which he will forget it,"
said the friar bitterly; "where they teach disloyalty to princes and
unmake men to make machines--and the mainspring is at Rome. Gentle women
are won to believe in them by the subtle polish of those who uphold
them, and the marvelous learning by which their teachers fit themselves
for office. And among them are men noble of character and true of
conscience--but bound, soul and body, by their oath; the system of the
Jesuit schools in Venice is for nothing else but the building up of
their order--at all costs of character or happiness. Let her keep her
little son, for her face seemed wise and tender; the favor which hath
been shown her may have a meaning."

"Will not my father some time come to the palazzo Giustiniani? The Lady
Marina would make him welcome."

"Nay, I thank you," the friar answered, instantly resuming his habitual
reserve. "Such gentle friendships form no part of my duty. I spake but
in friendly counsel. We, from without, see how the home should be more.
The orders are many to maintain the Church--they need no urging--but the
home hath also its privileged domain of childhood to be defended."



XV

With the return of the young people from Rome, gala days had once more
dawned for the Ca' Giustiniani, and the two sumptuous palaces which met
at the bend of the Canal Grande were scenes of perpetual fete. The
palazzo Giustinian Giustiniani had been chosen from all the princely
homes of Venice as best fitted, from its magnificence, to be offered as
a residence to Henry the Third of France, when that monarch had deigned
to honor the Republic by accepting its prodigal hospitality. In the
banquet halls, which had been prepared with lavish luxury for his
reception, the few years that had passed had but mellowed the elaborate
carvings and frescoes, while the costly hangings--of crimson velvet with
bullion fringes, of azure silk embroidered with fleurs-de-lis, of
brocades interwoven with threads of gold--had gained in grace of fold
and fusion of tints.

If there were no halls of equal splendor in the palace which had been
prepared for Marcantonio and his bride, it displayed in all its
appointments an elegance and fitness which the stately Lady Laura was
eager to exhibit to the critical appreciation of the fastidious upper
circle of Venice.

Marina had had no share in its decorations, and when consulted before
her marriage had expressed but one wish. "These cares of rank are new to
me," she had said, with gentle dignity; "but thou wilt best know how to
choose the elegance befitting Marco's home; for my father hath warned me
that in these matters there is a custom which I, more than others, may
not break. Dear Lady Laura, for Marco's sake forget that I am of the
people, yet, remembering it, to choose but so much of splendor as
seemeth needful, lest the palazzo be too costly for a mistress not noble
by birth, and so"--she hesitated--"and so win Marco's friends to love me
less."

"Marina, Marco hath told me, with a very lover's face, that some are
noble by birth who are not so by name."

"Dear Lady," the girl answered, with a charming flush, "had Marco not so
plead with me there could have been no question of this home."

The eyes of the great lady beamed with a new and tender pride; in
nothing that her boy had ever done for her had he offered her so much as
in this love of his which had threatened to part them, but had stirred
instead the mother depths of her soul, which had become clouded by years
of luxury and artificial life and the knowledge of the ceaseless
ambitions and selfish scheming which her husband--for the intellectual
stimulus she gave him--had been accustomed to confide to her. And now
Marco was not less to her, but more, as he had promised; and if the
uncertain hope of that dim, distant, ducal coronet moved her less, it
was not that she would not still do her possible to help Giustinian to
his ambition--but it had become a smaller peak in the distance since the
home life had grown broad enough to bear her calmly when the proud
Senator rehearsed some failure or disappointment, with disproportioned
bitterness.

Thinking of these things she smiled at Marina with new appreciation; the
girl's gentle face seemed to her more lovely and her rare calm and grace
of spirit more truly noble than the Venetian vivacity of charm in which
at first she had found her lacking.

"Thou hast a way of winning," she said, "which many might envy thee; and
in seeming not to ask, thou shalt be served for love. It is the grace of
one born to rule. But hast thou _no_ wish? Is there no one place I may
make all beautiful at thine asking, within thy palace, to prove, sweet
Marina, how thy Marco's mother loves thee?"

She parted her soft hair and kissed her forehead, but neither of them
noticed that it was a first caress.

"I should like the oratory to be beautiful!" Marina cried, clasping her
hands with sudden enthusiasm; "very beautiful--like a gift to the Holy
Mother!"

"And it shall bring a blessing on thy marriage," the Lady Laura answered
her.

So when the secretary and his young wife had returned to Venice and
their palace was thrown open to guests, the private chapel of the Lady
Marina was discovered to be a marvel of decoration--with superb Venetian
frescoes set in marvelous scrollwork by Vittoria, with carvings of
mother-of-pearl from Constantinople, with every sumptuous detail that
could be devised; for, during the three years of their absence, the Lady
Laura had not wearied of her gracious task nor stayed her hand. And into
this incongruous setting--costly, overloaded, composite, and destitute
of true religious feeling, a very type of the time in Venice--Marina
brought the redeeming note of consecration, a priceless altar--ancient,
earth-stained, and rude, almost grotesque in symbolism--as a great prize
and by special dispensation, from an underground chapel in Rome. Also
the rare and beautiful ivory crucifix had its history; the malachite
basin for holy water had been a gift to the infant Giustinian from his
eminence the cardinal-sponsor on the day of his baptism; there were
other treasures, more rare and sacred still, within the shrine of the
oratory, and there was a gift from his Holiness Pope Clement VIII.

There was no banquet hall in the palazzo Marcantonio Giustiniani, but it
was not needed, for the two palaces were like one.

The Lady Laura was radiant. If there had ever been a question of the
place that Marcantonio's bride should occupy in that patrician circle,
the distinction conferred upon her by the Senate had sufficed to
establish it. There could be no jealousy of one who occupied the highest
place, of one so gracious and equal to her honors, only of those who
should win her favor. So all came in the hope of it, and all were won;
but there were no partialities, no intimacies; for all ambitions of the
young and newly created patrician, the fullness of the home life
sufficed to her.

Marina had grown more beautiful out of the joy of loving and the
increased satisfaction of her religious life, to which she was more than
ever devoted; her passion for beauty expressed itself by delight in
sumptuous ceremonial, while her love of romance and her unquestioning
faith were alike nourished on the legends of the saints which had become
far more to her during her stay in Rome, where every hour had been
happiness. These three years of absence had made some subtle difference
in the Lady Marina; there was more mystery about her with less reserve,
and a certain calm acceptance of the position all conceded had given her
courage to discuss religious history and opinions in a serious way that
was quite charming to the older prelates who mingled in Venetian social
circles, where simple earnestness of soul was a quality so rare that it
might have been mistaken for a depth of subtlety; but the Lady Marina
talked or listened only because the themes were of vital interest for
her. Besides, she had now her child to guide and she must know; and the
learned men who gave their lives to the study of higher things were
those, above all others, from whom she could learn the most; and with
this unconscious flattery a little court, of a character somewhat
unusual in Venice, had gathered in her salons. Her husband, coming in
late from the Council Chamber one evening, rallied her upon it, saying
that her receptions might be mistaken for those of a lady abbess--there
were so many friars and grave ecclesiastics among her guests. His light
tone concealed a little uneasiness, for the friar's warning had more
than once recurred to him.

But it was impossible to convey anything to Marina by a half-concealed
thrust, her nature was so essentially ingenuous, incapable of imagining
intrigues of any sort.

"Yes, it is indeed an honor!" she answered, with her ready, trusting
smile. "It is good of them, they are so much more interesting than the
others; and to-night the talk was quite delightful! I would thou hadst
been here, my Marco! Life is so much more beautiful since we have been
to Rome! _Everything_ that was delightful came with our marriage," she
added, turning her radiant face toward him.

He smiled, too, quite disarmed by her beauty and candor, and a little
amused that this life of a Venetian princess should be so lightly
included in this "everything" which marriage had brought to this maiden
of Murano; but he could not help thinking how easily she wore her
honors, and how she graced them; all Venice was at her feet, and she
preferred the dull talk of a few ecclesiastics to the vivacious
gallantry of the brilliant young nobles who thronged her salons--the
more anxious to please this queen of the day, that their efforts won
only the dignified and gracious, yet reserved, recognition that was
extended to all her guests alike. She was the very reverse of Venetian
in character and manner, but since she had been so honored by the
Republic that difference was recognized as her distinction and charm.

"I doubt not," Marcantonio said, laughingly, "that if nuns might take
part in our social functions thou wouldst prefer them also to thine own
maidens and all the noble ladies of the Canal Grande. But who held part
in this interesting ridotto to-night?"

"Truly, Marco, I think some day perchance I may get a dispensation and
have all the nuns of San Donate for baby's festa in the oratory--would
it not be beautiful to hear them chanting in our own palazzo! But that
is only a dream; I know not if it may ever be."

She came toward him, in her shimmering festal robes, with the
unconscious, happy grace of a child, dropping into a low seat close
beside him, leaning back and letting her hands fall in an attitude of
complete repose, while she gave him, without effort, the detail of the
evening's talk. He was a little surprised at the way in which she made
this graphic recital of a discussion he would have supposed beyond her
comprehension--or at least beyond her concern--and he was not wholly
pleased. He had quite forgotten that one of the charms of Marina upon
which he had insisted in the days when he had made much of this maiden
to his patrician mother was that in capacity for thought and in force of
character she was far above the maidens of ancient lineage, from whom
the Lady Laura would have had him choose his bride.

Marina had named, among others, Fra Francesco, her own spiritual
director, a Servite friar of gentle and winning demeanor, who was much
beloved both in his convent and in other circles where his duties called
him. He was a man of simple habits and the most exemplary life, whose
whole force lay in his extreme devotion to duty and his passionate love
for the Church; his sole anxiety was for her glory, and he would have
been supremely happy in the life he had chosen, were it not for his
growing anxiety lest from her own sons she should receive dishonor. He
was always a welcome visitor at the palazzo Giustiniani, and already
the little prince of the household had a special smile for him.

"Ah, Fra Francesco, of course!" said Marcantonio, in an indulgent tone;
"our own friars and ecclesiastics are welcome. But, carina, these
foreign priests are often of a different way of thinking; and Don
Fernanzo Lillo, that fluent Spaniard--verily I would have thee don thy
most freezing dignity when he comes again."

"But, Marco mio, thou doest him injustice; he is most interesting; he
was telling about the frescoes of the Michelangelo in the Sistine
Chapel; he knoweth them well, yet I think he liketh them little."

"It matters not," said Marcantonio, a little disdainfully; "thou hast
already seen them; thou canst have thine own opinion of their merit."

"But to hear all the allegories explained and all the illusions to the
history of our Holy Church is _most_ interesting," Marina pursued
calmly; "for the dear padre of San Donate had but little instruction; I
must know about all these things for baby's sake--he is growing so
fast."

"He is not going to be an artist," his father answered shortly; "and if
he were, we could find a better person to instruct him than a Spanish
member of the Jesuit College."

"_Marco_!" exclaimed his wife, with a long note of surprise; "is not our
Holy Church one? and are not her sons scattered over the whole world? I
knew not he displeased thee," she continued, in a changed tone, after a
little pause. "Of course I will not see him again. But is it Don
Fernanzo Lillo himself, or--or--Marco--it cannot be the order! Thou
canst not be so narrow!"

"At this time, Marina, with matters thus between Venice and Rome, I do
not care to entertain any of their order or any foreign priests in our
home; they do not place things in the proper light, and we have always
held a special position of loyalty toward Venice. When she is in
difficulties all the Ca' Giustiniani should seem to remember it; it
could make no other difference."

"I do not understand," she answered, looking at him with perplexed
brows.

"Why shouldst thou!" he exclaimed, glad to change a distasteful topic;
"such weariness is not needful for thee. I will not bring the worries of
the Council Chamber into thy boudoir."

"Nay, Marco, it would please me," she answered eagerly, rising instantly
from her languid attitude to come and stand over him, laying one hand on
his shoulder, half in caress and half in command. "Thy father tells
these matters to the Lady Laura; and for baby's sake I should understand
these troubles which touch our Republic. He will ask me questions very
soon."

"Well, then," he consented ungraciously, "what is it thou wouldst ask?"

She laughed at his reluctance, pressing her hand with a firmer and yet
more loving touch on his shoulder. "Because I am a Giustinian," she
began, with a plea which invariably won him, "tell me about this
question of Vicenza which occupies them all so much--I could not
understand. Who is this Abbott of Nervessa?"

At her first words he had folded her caressing hand in his, but he
dropped it in immediate displeasure and walked quickly away from her,
speaking indignantly. "They talked of this in thy presence?"

"They said an abbe was imprisoned in the Piombi; they said it was
against the law to imprison ecclesiastics except by the authority of the
Pope. Oh, Marco mio, I am afraid he will be very angry!"

"What else did they tell thee?" he questioned doggedly.

"They said there was a Canon Saraceni also--both imprisoned in Venice.
Marco mio, it is an insult to our Holy Father!"

"What else?"

"Nothing more--but only about some law of Venice that I did not
understand; I wished to ask thee."

"And Fra Francesco was here and heard them talk?"

"Nay, Fra Francesco stays never long; and this was but a few moments
before thy coming. I left the Sala Tiziana to see if all were going well
in this little salon, and they were speaking of Vicenza, and I asked
them. Wherefore art thou angry, Marco? What kept thee so late to-night?"

She had never seen him in such a mood; he had persistently refused to
meet her beseeching glance; but now he drew a quick breath of relief,
and came back to her side.

"It was this miserable matter of Vicenza that detained the Council in
such lengthy session," he said, "and it was not fit to have been
mentioned in thy presence, my sweet wife; I might well be angry. But
since thou wert not there, I can pardon them."

"Yes, it was I who questioned them," she repeated eagerly, anxious to
shield her guests from her husband's indignation, though she did not
understand it. "They were talking of the Abbot of Nervessa and of his
Holiness, and when I came they rose to do me honor; and I also, to be
not lacking in courtesy, said, 'Le prego, Signori--I beg of you,' and
bade them continue the talk in which they had seemed full of interest.
Marco, in the Senate--do they know that the Pope is angry about the
Abbot of Nervessa?"

Her eyes were full of the eagerness of her question. If they but knew
all would be well, she thought; she had so wished for Marco to be there
and hear them talk!

"Marina, this whole matter is a question for the government to decide;
it is not for ecclesiastics to discuss--they know nothing of any laws
but their own. This is a civil case."

"Would they not understand things better if they were allowed
representation in the Senate?" she persisted. "And what is this law? And
why is the subject not fit for Venetian nobles to discuss, since it
touches them so nearly?" She was growing disturbed, for she feared some
injustice, since Marco had not been indignant at the strange condition
she had unfolded to him, and she had thought it must suffice only to
name it to him.

The young patrician looked at her in amazement. Fra Paolo was indeed
right, yet he had been almost indignant at the suggestion.

"The subject cannot be discussed," he said, in quick, hard tones,
"because the Abbot of Nervessa hath committed crimes so atrocious that
thou would'st shrink at the bare naming of them. And for Saraceni--the
Canon of Vicenza--there came one day to the Senate a noble lady of
Vicenza, young, and very beautiful, and in great trouble, casting
herself at the feet of the Serenissimo, imploring protection from
disgrace that the canon would bring upon her--a scandal I had never
thought to name to thee. And there are other charges."

"It cannot be true!" she cried, flushed and trembling. "Dear Marco, they
are priests!"

"The truth will be decided by the integrity of the law," he answered,
severely; "they shall have justice at our courts; but it is a question
for the civil courts, since the people also cry for justice, and the
ecclesiastical law is not to deal with heinous civil offenses--though
committed by one in priestly robes. It is a just law of Venice--ancient,
and only now reaffirmed."

"This is the law they spake of, Marco?"

Now that she dimly understood there was some great trouble coming on the
people, she must know the right at any cost--even that of her husband's
displeasure; it was her duty to him, and she had put her question
firmly.

"This--and another," he answered, unwillingly. "Listen, Marina, for I am
weary of thy questions. The law to forbid new foundations of church or
monastery, or the introduction of new religious orders without the
sanction of the government--also an ancient law, and but now
reaffirmed--is doubtless that of which they spake."

Marina stood confounded, with flashing eyes; how could the Republic
dare to question the liberties of the Church! "Thou meanest, Marco, that
the Church, which is the head, must ask the Doge what she may do when
she would increase her own religious institutions--when she hath need of
buildings for her holy work!"

"Thou hast an understanding quicker than I had believed," he answered,
with irritation; "and listen further, Marina--'since a Giustinian should
know the reason for the matters which concern the government,' that was
thy word, if I remember--the half of the territory of Venice hath
already passed into the hands of the clergy. Is that not ground enough
to hold their establishments, that thou wouldst grant them more? And for
the value of these possessions--for nowhere is a government more
generous to the ecclesiastics than the Republic hath been--it hath been
rated that a fourth part of the entire realty of the dominion--nay, some
count it a third part--is already the property of the Church. Shall we
nobles of Venice turn paupers and humbly beg of the clergy a pittance
for our children?"

He laughed and kissed her hand as he rose. "Since thou hast asked it,"
he said lightly, "I have given thee the law--and there is an end of it.
But let it not fret thee; Venice will know how to care for her own."

But Marina had suddenly grown very pale. "Marco," she gasped, detaining
him, "will it be a war?--a war between Venice and--and----"

She broke off; she could not speak the word which seemed a sacrilege.

"Think of our child!" she whispered, as he gathered her in his arms, and
tried to soothe her. "Marco, are we not a Christian nation? And our
Patriarch--does he know about the displeasure of the Holy Father? What
will become of us?"

"There will be no war," Marcantonio declared, with assurance. "Thou
see'st, carina, these matters are not for women to discuss; they cannot
understand; they are questions for the government alone; and well it is
for us that the clergy are out of it, or we might have the spectacle of
a Senate drowned in tears! There will be no war," he declared again,
mistaking the self-control for which she had bravely struggled as an
outcome of his attempts at consolation. "And now, since thou art thy
sweet self again, hath the boy not made the day richer for thee with
some tale of wonder thou wouldst unfold?"



XVI

There was no longer any doubt as to the intention of his Holiness toward
the rebellious spirit of the Most Serene Republic; the Ambassade
Extraordinary which had been appointed to convey to the Holy See the
dutiful congratulations of her devoted Venetian sons, on the accession
of Paul V, had few amenities to report in those lengthy dispatches to
which the Senate listened with a dignity which disdained to show the
least outward trace of irritation or forgetfulness, in a presence so
exasperating as that of the Papal Nuncio, Orazio Mattei.

Day after day the Senate sat, in solemn state, to hear its delinquencies
rehearsed in the words of Paul V, by the graphic pen of his Excellency
Agostino Nani, Ambassador from the Republic to the Holy See, with
ceaseless repetitions of demand on the part of the Sovereign Pontiff;
with ceaseless repetitions of refusal, most deferently couched, from the
courtly representative of the offending power; with threats of that most
dread compeller of obedience which none but a sovereign pontiff may
wield; and very clearly phrased, that all might understand, the
declaration in the words of his Holiness himself, that he had determined
to "mortify the over-weening audacity of the secular rulers of the
world."

With a patience which bore its fruit in a more rigid determination to
conquer, they listened, also, to many violent speeches from the Nuncio,
explanatory of papal authority, founded upon the dicta of a Gregory,
"_That none may judge the Pope. That all princes should kiss the feet of
the Pope_," and invariably sustained by this axiom of Mattei, delivered
as a refrain--so sure were the college of its repetition, "I am Pope
here; I want no replies, only obedience," and the reiterated assertion
that "Christianity depends upon the acceptance in its entirety of the
doctrine of papal supremacy, and that he has heard much of the vaunted
piety of the Venetian Republic, of which he fails to find evidence."

In vain the Senate pleaded that on such a point there might be differing
views, and that men should be known for Christians by their faithfulness
in duty, by their practice of almsgiving and of the sacraments and of
all other good and Christian works; but the answer came swiftly, "Naught
else availeth."

It was a relief to the stately and grim Giustinian to lose his temper in
the sanctity of his home, since that freedom was beneath the dignity of
a Venetian ruler in the company of others who were chafing like himself
from insults they would have rejoiced to hurl back in the face of the
speaker; and he was the less inclined to view favorably the efforts
toward conciliation of the embassy to the Holy See, because it would
have pleased him to have been named among those six of this Ambassade
Extraordinary, on a mission so important, as an honor due to his ancient
house.

"It is repetition _ad nauseam_," he insisted hotly, "of demands for
abrogation of those laws, for yielding up of those two reverend
criminals to the ecclesiastical courts, of Nani's soft replies to the
quick speeches of his Holiness--an unending farce!"

"Giustinian," said the Lady Laura quietly, "the difficulties are great.
How can the Holy Father yield a point which touches the honor of the
Church?"

"Verily, my lady, I believe thou art not responsible for thine own
foolishness!" her husband exclaimed angrily. "If that prelate cousin of
Saraceni comes again to thy salon, let him be refused! He shall not
prate to thee of 'law' and 'supremacy,' who hath sought for this
occasion to embroil us with the Holy See. For the Senate hath learned
to-day, through the trustworthy open mouth of our watchful Lion, with
evidence irrefragable, that it is this reverend father who hath carried
the tale to Rome."

"Tell me the right of it," she said again. "How may the honor of the
Church be saved, yet the dignity of Venice be maintained? If there be a
way, we women should speak for it."

"Is the honor of the Church maintained by standing as a shield to crime?
It is Venice who would save the Church; the civil ruler shall purge her
sacred courts of such iniquities and leave her the purer for her sons to
love. Such is the law--ancient and just--and a right Venice cannot
yield. And more than this," he continued impressively, "all Europe is
waiting on the issue, for the real contest is on the rights of civil
rulers, and these imprisoned ecclesiastics are but the pretext for a
quarrel; and ill-judged, verily, on the part of the Holy Father, since
if the cases were less heinous there might have been occasion for
confusion of judgment. But now, who will dare assert that the honor of
the Church is concerned in protecting men who disgrace mankind!"

"The Republic is then sure of her ground?"

"So sure we are of right that letters are already sent to every
Christian court of Europe, announcing the causes of this quarrel and the
stand of Venice."

"Marina is greatly troubled," said the Lady Laura, with a sigh.

"Let her go often to San Marco and pray for us--the child is good for
nothing else since this trouble came."

"She hath more comfort at San Donato; and the mother superior is a noble
woman and beloved by her."

"Ay, it is all one--so that she wear not out the patience of Marcantonio
by her importunities. The Senate will stand firm on the issue, and not
one of the Ca' Giustiniani shall flinch."

"Is there no possible doubt of the ending?" the Lady Laura questioned,
after a little troubled silence. Her heart was very sore for Marina, who
slept but little, and was constantly fasting.

"Only of that which lieth between; the end is triumph for Venice,"
Giustinian declared. "Tell that to Marina, and calm her fears. Also, let
it not be known that she is so weak in courage; it would be held against
Marcantonio, to whom the suspicion of being wife-ridden would do an
infinite injustice. And bid Marcantonio himself tell her of the vote
that hath passed the Senate, without dissent of a single voice, for
letters to be sent to the imperious Paul to make an end of his demands,
declaring that Venice recognizeth for the temporal government of her
states no superior, save God alone."

Meanwhile in Rome, to the Ambassador Agostino Nani, Paul had already
superbly made answer, "We are above all men, and God hath given us power
over all men; we can depose kings and do yet more than that. Especially
our power is 'quae tendunt ad finem supranaturalem.' (Over those things
which tend to a supernatural end.)"

All thoughts of festivity in the City of the Sea were over; the strength
of her patricians--men and women--was concentrated on this momentous
quarrel with the Holy See, which they would indeed have put off were it
possible, but which, having come upon them, they would bear with
conquering pride. All through those dark December days the pressure
tightened; there were mutterings of the coming storm, against which the
rulers of Venice were planning defense; there was an oppression, like a
sense of mental sirocco, in the air--a vague terror of the unknown among
the people, gathering like the blighting breath which precedes some
fierce tornado--while in the palace of San Marco, the Doge, Marino
Grimani, Chief of the Republic in revolt against the Holy See, lay
dying!

The Lady Marina Giustiniani had forgotten how to smile. When her little
one lifted his rosy baby face to hers she smothered him in caresses,
that he might not see her tears; and her husband failed to note the
change, for the Senate sat in unbroken session and the permitted
absences from the Council Chambers of the Republic barely sufficed for
sleep. Daily in the oratory of her palace Mass was said, and Marina
passed long hours there on her knees alone, tracing the coming horror to
its most dread issue, trying to understand it wholly, that she might
pray with all her soul against it--this _Curse_ which was to blight the
lives of all she loved, and of which her dearest seemed to feel no
dread! She scarcely ate nor slept--watching, for the morning, when a new
intercession for mercy should rise from the oratory in her palace;
waiting for the evening, when she might go with her maidens to vespers
in San Marco. And still the days darkened in threats--had God forgotten
to be gracious?

And on this Christmas morning, when the Doge of Venice lay dying in his
halls of state, the nuns of San Donate, won by the prayers and gifts of
the Lady Marina, were making a procession to all the shrines of Murano,
praying, if by any means, God would stay this curse from falling upon
Venice.

No joy-bells rang to usher in the sunrise Mass of this memorable
Christmas day. The royal standards of the mighty Lion drooped at
half-mast before the dimmed magnificence of San Marco, their glowing
gold and scarlet deadened to shades of mourning steel; and low, muffled
tones, like the throbbings of the heart of a people, dropped down from
the campanile through an atmosphere still and cold as a breath of dread;
while from the embassies, the homes of the senators and Signoria, the
Patriarch and bishops of Venice, gondolas by twos and threes loomed
black against the gray-dark of the winter dawn, hurrying noiselessly to
the steps of the Piazzetta; and dark, stately figures, each heralded by
its torch-bearer, glided like phantoms under the arcades of the Ducal
Palace, up between the grim, giant guardians of the stairway, and on to
the galleries adjoining the apartments of the Doge, to await the hour of
Mass.

An edict, more unanswerable than any ever issued by Republic or Curia,
had gone forth, and in solemn state Venice awaited its fulfilment.

In that hush of reverent waiting, before the first faint saffron streak
had glimmered in the east, up through the flaring torches of the lower
court, unbidden and unwelcome, came the single figure in all that throng
which seemed to have no part in the solemn drama. To-day was like other
days for the nuncio, who was no member of the court of Venice, but a
figure without discretionary privilege, sent to keep in perpetual mind a
higher power. By his peremptory instructions he requested at once a
formal audience to deliver a message from his Holiness Paul V, which
could brook no delay.

"Behold!" said he, after due grace of apology, when the senators had
withdrawn to the Sala di Collegio and taken their accustomed places,
"here are two briefs which, by the imperative instructions of our
Sovereign Lord the Pope, I must at once deliver to your Serene
Highnesses."

They were sealed with the sacred seal of the Curia, and each bore the
inscription:

"A Marino Grimani, Duce; e alla Republica Veneta."

There was but a moment's consultation among the Signoria.

"The Serenissimo is _in extremis_," the most venerable of the Ducal
Councillors announced, "therefore these briefs which, in the name of the
Serene Republic of Venice, we receive, cannot be opened until the solemn
ceremonials of the death and the election shall have been concluded,"
and so dismissed the bearer of the Papal message to return to the
audience of the greater king.

Meanwhile there was no arresting of that other message, which came
swiftly, and the placid old Grimani--wise, beloved, and regretted--laid
down his sceptre of state in the moment of the greatest need of Venice,
and passed on to a Court of Inquiry whose findings are inalterably just.

Calmly, as if they knew not the contents of the unopened briefs, or like
men never to be surprised into forgetfulness, the Signoria and
councillors assisted at the crowded ceremonials of the days that
followed, when the Serenissimo lay in state in the _chapelle ardente_,
which was prepared in one of the great chambers of the Palace, with
twenty nobles in ceaseless attendance, the people thronging silently to
pay their duty to their Prince--when, by night, in solemn procession,
with torches and chanting of requiems, they carried him to the church of
San Zanipolo, their gondolas draped in mourning, their banners furled in
crepe, the imposing insignia of the state he had put off forever borne
before him to the giant baldichino before the high altar, where,
surrounded by innumerable candles, he lay until the morning should bring
the closing pomp of the last solemn Mass.

Not one honor had been omitted, not one ceremonial abridged because of
those briefs upon which the seal of the Vatican was still unbroken; and
when the imposing obsequies were over, and there was no longer a prince
to lift the weight of the gold-wrought mantle and the ducal beretta in
the sight of the people, the ship of state yet bore herself superbly,
steering as serenely through the troubled sea as if each man still read
his signal in the face of a beloved commander.

And now the singular strength of the Republic and the perfection of the
machine of government was evidenced, as, without a moment of indecision,
the officers proceeded to discharge the duty allotted to the hour,
according to the forms prescribed in those endless volumes of the "Libri
Ceremoniali," which provided for every function of life or death of the
punctilious Venetian court.

No leader, however loved and revered, was individually great, but only
as he contributed to the greatness of Venice--the one deathless entity;
her noblest were content to give of their greatness and be themselves
nameless; and against the less great, for whom self-effacement was
impossible--men strong in gifts and eager for power--the jealous
Republic had provided a system of efficient checks, based upon an astute
understanding of the fears and claims of self-interest. Venice knew no
hiatus in rule; all were leaders to point the way of that inviolable
constitution when the supreme voice was temporarily silent, for it was
the voice of an impersonal prince, and not of the man--who had
absolutely put off individuality when he assumed the insignia of
royalty.

In this hour of adversity the men of Venice rose to their greatest,
forgetting their rivalries and standing breast to breast in phalanx
around their vacant throne, that Venice might meet trouble with
increased strength when the eyes of the world were curiously turned upon
her.

Inexorably, though no voice had been raised against Grimani, they
appointed that commission of inquisitors to review every official act of
the last wearer of this crown which now lay idly waiting on the golden
cushion; as sternly elected, those five "correctors" of the coronation
oath so soon to be administered to a new wearer of the ermine, and
without pause for praise or strife, proceeded to the cumbersome choice
of the ducal electors whose word should suffice to create a new Venetian
prince.

Meanwhile, against the barred doors of the Council Chambers, where those
grave Signori were balloting and re-balloting with exemplary patience
for the golden balls, the nuncio knocked again, breathless with his
latest message sent in haste from the Holy See: "_The election of a new
prince would be void, being made by a people under censure_."

But the law of Venice was ready with its decorous shield, and the
message could not pass beyond. The punctilious Signoria might give no
audience in the days that intervened between Doge and Doge, except to
receive that message of condolence which it had not entered the heart of
his Holiness to frame, and the nuncio appealed in vain to other
authorities in Venice to win him audience for the delivery of his
sovereign's mandate.

With whatever burnings of heart and secret hopes and ambitions those
forty-one elected nobles, after days of weary, patient tossings of gold
and silver balls--a mere intricate child's play had it not been for the
greatness of the prize--saw themselves closed within the chamber from
which they might not issue forth until there was again a prince in
Venice; with what vividness a Giustinian foresaw his own stern visage
stamped on the coin of Venice in that moment when his name appeared on
the first folded paper drawn from the fateful urn; with what dignity he
concealed his baffled hope and watched, from under frowning eyebrows, a
Morosini and a Ziani pass, in turn, through the fierce ordeal of
relegation to obscurity--the annals of that secret council do not
reveal.

But in this stress of Venice the electors quitted themselves like true
men, and when the noble Cavaliere Leonardo Donato--full of dignity, of
wisdom, and of honors, skilled in diplomacy and experience, and bold as
wise--came forth to scatter his coronation gift of coin in the Piazza,
and after solemn religious ceremonial was shown from the pulpit of San
Marco as Prince of Venice, well might the people shout in acclamation,
"_Provato! Provato_!" ("Approved!") and the watching courts of Europe
hasten to express, through their resident ambassadors, eager
congratulations that one so fitted to fill the position with distinction
had taken his place among the rulers.

But Orazio Mattei brought no message of congratulation from Rome.



XVII

Giustinian Giustiniani had been among the electors and had listened to
that strict canvassing of acts, both private and official, which
preceded the final vote for the Prince of Venetia.

"Venice hath taken stand before the courts of Europe with a leader who
feareth naught--save not to do the right," he magnanimously assured the
Lady Laura one evening when, according to their wont, they were
discussing the theme which never failed in interest. "Nay, not even
that; for Donato hath courage in himself, and in his own rulings faith,
and more a man needs not."

"Then wherefore hath the Signoria created this office of _Teologo
Consultore_, and appointed thereto this friar of the Servi, of whom they
tell such marvels--as if the Collegio, with all our learned chancellors,
were not enough!"

"Leave thou these matters to the Signoria, who, verily, know how to
rule--ay, and how to choose; for the man is like none other."

"What uses hath the Senate for this cloistered scholar, skilled in many
sciences and master of tongues," the Lady Laura persisted, "that it
should create an office--which since the _serrata_ it hath not been
known to do--and appoint a friar over the heads of our nobles who have
loyally served the Republic since our ancestors first sat in the
Consiglio? There are the halls of Padua for our scholars, where already
his friend, the master Galileo, holdeth high honors, by favor of the
Senate; and if Fra Paolo were named Rector Magnifico, and put at its
head----"

"Nay, nay, the Senate is wise," her husband interrupted, not ill pleased
at her vehemence and the patrician pride which prompted it. "And if the
Republic hath no present need of the Consultore's mastery of sciences,
the fame thereof hath made a hearing for any speech of his. But he hath
no mind to any social pleasures--how, then, my lady, hast seen him, or
knowest thou the quality of his learning?"

"Fra Francesco is never weary of telling of his wisdom; they have been
friends since boyhood in the Servi. The master Galileo, if one may
believe him, can do naught without consulting Fra Paolo, and together
they are building some strange tunnel that shall bring the stars nearer!
It is like a fable to listen to these marvels of his friend, who for his
discoveries might well hold all the chairs in Padua if Fra Francesco
might decree his deserts! But Fra Francesco is simple-minded. Tell me,
Giustinian, how doth the Consultore appear to thee?"

"To me and to all men like one who betrays no secret and speaks no idle
word."

"Once," pursued the lady meditatively, "I had sight of him, going with
Marco to the convent to see our Madonna of the Veronese, and Fra Paolo
ministered in the chapel of the Consolation; very quiet and simple he
seemed, like the other frati. I had not thought him great, nor a leader
of men. Are there no statesmen in Venice who might better fit the
dignity of so great an office?"

"Think not to teach subtlety to the Signoria, my Lady Laura! Is not
every noble a statesman trained, and every one at the service of the
Republic? But there is no greater theologian at the Court of Paul V, nor
any ecclesiastic among them all more familiar with the writings of their
authorities; and he hath a memory so astounding that he beareth the
meaning of all their codes on the end of his tongue wherewith to confute
the fallacious arguments of Rome."

"Giustinian!"

"It is like a woman to ask a thing and cry out if the answer be not
smothered in sweets!" the old Senator retorted irritably, resenting her
accent of reproof. "It is small marvel if the Consultore seemeth not
great to thee; the power of the man is in the clarity of his vision and
the brevity of his speech."

"Who named him to the Signoria?"

"Donato knew him well, and Morosini and all our ablest men; and his
knowledge of the ways of Rome, where he hath been much in legislation at
the Vatican, is a power in the Senate--which hath no mind to be taken in
argument, nor to fail in courtesy, nor to show ignorance in its demands.
It is much to have a judge whose opinion our adversary must respect."

"The Senate will be cautious--will not forget the reverence owed to the
Holy Church?" she asked, in warning, troubled at his bold use of words.

"Nay, but the Republic will first remember the duty owed to our prince,
since it is a matter that toucheth the State," he answered,
uncompromisingly, "and for our duty to the Church--leave that to our
frate, than whom none is more devout."

She was too keenly interested not to put the further question:

"Is it safe for Fra Paolo to lead this controversy? Is it pleasing to
his order?"

Giustinian gave a contemptuous laugh.

"Thou mayest well ask! Fra Paolo also would not hear of it at first,
foreseeing where it might lead. But from urgency of the Senate he
yielded--if the consent of the general of the Servi were first won.
Wherefore it was granted one knows not; but the purple robe had,
perchance, some weight in the argument,--being a pleasing honor,--though
one may dare assert that Fra Paolo himself gave it not a thought, having
gathered honors all his life with no care for any greatness they might
bring."

"Nay, it was not this that won them," said the Lady Laura, with
decision, "but their hope that Fra Paolo would support the claims of the
Holy Father; it could have been nothing else."

"A hope most reasonable, were he a man of less remarkable force,"
Giustinian answered confidently. "But, as if he held a divining-rod, he
findeth at once the heart of a matter, and Venice hath no fears."

No, Venice had no fears. If there had been heartburnings, they were all
forgotten; her rulers were one in determination while they calmly
weighed the balance between Church and State, and confidently awaited
the issue. The briefs had been opened and the chief Counsellor, the new
Teologo Consultore, had given an opinion which filled the Senate with
admiration.

"Two remedies might be found: one, material, by forbidding the
publication of the censures and preventing the execution of them, thus
resisting illegitimate force by force clearly legitimate, so long as it
doth not overpass the bounds of natural right of defense; and the other
moral, which consisteth in an appeal to a future council. But,"
continued this sagacious Counsellor, after a word explanatory of the
"future council," "it were better to avoid this appeal in order not to
irritate the Pope more than ever; and also because he who appealeth
admiteth that the goodness of his cause is doubtful, whereas that of the
Republic is indubitable."

Such was the opinion, brief as positive, to which the senators listened
in undisguised satisfaction on that memorable day in January, 1606; and
although those briefs, "Given in Saint Peter's, in Rome, under the Ring
of the Fisherman, on the 10th of December, 1605," darkly threatened
excommunication unless these dearly beloved sons of Venice withdrew from
the stand they had taken, yet with a Doge who "would laugh at an
excommunication," and a learned Counsellor who assured them that the
cause of the Republic was indubitable, well might the shadows lessen in
the Senate Chamber; while in calm assurance the Savii[7] prepared the
reply to these communications from his Holiness, which the Signor
Agostino Nani presently delivered in an audience at Rome.

  [7] These Savii, or _wise men_, had charge of the diplomatic
  despatches of the Republic.

But the task of the courtly Nani was not an enviable one, deferent as
was the form of the epistle in which these devoted sons declared that
nothing could have been further from the thoughts of Venice than to
prejudice the rights of the Church--humbly as they implored the Holy
Father to recall the many acts of loyalty by which Venice had shown her
love and reverence. Had she not been foremost in the Crusade? Was the
Church anywhere more magnificently supported in temporal weal? Earnestly
as they assured him of the harmlessness of those laws which he condemned
as hurtful to their souls, quietly announcing that the Republic had
transgressed no right in making laws for her own independent civil
government,--and gracious and diplomatic as were the ways of Nani,--his
Holiness declared the letter to be "frivolous and vain," and dismissed
the ambassador with temper, assuring him that unless the Republic found
means to retract those laws "the gates of hell should not prevail" to
deter him from inflicting the utmost threatened penalty.

It was a frank contest of wills, in which each opponent conscientiously
believed himself in the right; but it was, nevertheless, not an equal
contest; for Paul, conceiving that his duty in the exalted position of
head of the Church which had been so unexpectedly thrust upon him, lay
in its mere temporal aggrandizement, while consciously turning all his
powers in that direction, misnamed the struggle a _spiritual_ one. But
Venice not only believed but confessed it to be merely a question of
civil rights of rulers, and, strong in the sense of the justice of her
cause, used every grace of trained diplomacy in asserting it--upon an
understanding of civil law which was beyond the attainment of the lawyer
Camillo Borghese, and with the aid of specialists whose knowledge of
canon law equaled that of his Holiness.

Among the important matters touched upon in those days in the Senate the
question had been broached, not without anxiety, as to whether Rome
would have recourse to force of a less spiritual nature, and a secret
commission had been appointed to examine and report from the frontiers
any accession of papal troops, while envoys were sent to Ferrara on the
same furtive errand: and the more serious Venetians were already
discussing the possibility of war as one of the aspects of this quarrel
with the Holy See.

One day, through the swift and secret mouth of the Lion, an unusual
message reached the Ten, standing strangely out amid a mass of darker
matter--denunciations, sinister information, hints of intrigues; the
reason for the choice of this mysterious messenger was stated in the
preamble: "To the end that this may, without circumlocution, immediately
reach your noble body and be acted upon in your discretion--being
secretly dismissed, if this seemeth wisest in the interests of the
State." It was a brief offer on the part of Girolamo Magagnati to equip
and maintain, at his expense, in the event of war with the Holy See, a
war-galley of the largest size, as a gift to the Republic in the name of
his little grandson, the infant Giustinian.

Venice, being more munificent in expenditure than her unassisted
treasury would warrant, was at all times ready to receive and encourage
private bounties from her wealthy citizens; and the promptness and
generosity of Magagnati's gift, the first which had been offered in this
emergency, seemed in the interests of the government to demand some
adequate public recognition, modestly as it had been proffered. Haughty
as was the attitude of Venice in the face of the threatened
excommunication, the occasion was one of peril to which she was not
blind, and the danger was greatest among the people--the _popolo_--who
were more under the influence of the priests, and who still included in
their beliefs many superstitions which were not likely to deter the
disciplined body of nobles from acquiescence in the decisions of their
chiefs.

It was therefore a moment for diplomacy, when Venice might fitly show
magnanimity in her acceptance of so princely a gift from one of the
people, as this master-worker of Murano was still esteemed; and Girolamo
Magagnati was invited to appear before the Senate and receive the
acknowledgment of the Serenissimo, who had already been informed by the
Councillors that while the spontaneous offer of a galley so maintained
had no precedent in the annals of Venice, the reward which the Senate
proposed to bestow had, in fact, in early historic days been offered by
the Republic as a stimulus to such a gift.

Girolamo Magagnati, a grave and venerable figure,--with white locks
falling from under his round black cap, and a full gray beard flowing
over the long merchant's robe of stiff silk, and wearing the insignia
of his calling, a golden chain which by its weight and numerous links
was also an indication of his wealth,--might have been one of the
Signoria, as he stood among them to receive their thanks--unabashed, as
became one of his dignity of character and age, unattended, as befitted
one of the people.

The Doge himself made a gracious speech of acceptance on behalf of the
Republic, to which Girolamo briefly answered: "Most Serene Prince and
Noble Lords of the Council, in the name of my grandson Giustinian, I
thank you," and with a grave obeisance he would have retired; but it was
signified to him that he might not yet withdraw.

"Yet one thing remaineth, most esteemed Messer Magagnati, by which this
Republic would testify her appreciation of such loyalty and forethought,
by reason of which--as for the esteem in which this Republic hath ever
held the ancient house of Magagnati, which from the earliest times hath
been foremost in our industry of Murano--we propose to confer nobility
upon thine house, and to give thee an immediate seat of right in the
Maggior Consiglio."

The honor was so unexpected that the body of grave Councillors had risen
in congratulation before Girolamo Magagnati could frame other response
than his profound and grave obeisance.

But there was no hint of indecision in the deep, measured tones with
which he made reply:

"Most Serene Prince and Lords of the Council, I beg you to believe in my
deep appreciation of the honor you would bestow. But let it rather be
said of me that I--being still of the people, as all of my house from
the commencement of this Republic have ever been--have yet received such
favor of my Prince that he accepts from one of the people this token of
loyal service to the government. And more I ask not."

"Also," he proceeded calmly, taking no note of the consternation on the
faces of his auditors, "is it not fitting for old men to receive favors
from children, rather for them to bestow--as I, this galley, in the name
of the boy; the which--were I to accept in return the munificence of the
Senate--would be the offering of my galley as so much base coin,
wherewith to purchase an honor not mine by birth. Let it not be said in
scorn that Girolamo Magagnati hath bought the nobility with which his
birth hath failed to endow him!"

"Is it better, Messer Magagnati, that some should now say 'it is for
arrogance that this noble son of the people refuses a seat among the
nobles of Venice'?" the Doge questioned coldly.

"Not so, Most Serene Prince; each man is rather noble if, in that place
which God hath assigned him, he doeth nobly the duty belonging thereto;
as ye, my Lords, Nobles, and Councillors of the Republic, each in the
seat appointed you by birth, serve, without wearying, the interests of
Venice. I am already old and the last of my race, for those of my blood
who come after me, by the favor of Venice, are inscribed in the 'Libro
d'Oro.' If I have deserved aught of your bounty, be gracious when some
right of the people is in danger of being forgotten; and let my
grandson, among the nobles, ever serve nobles and people alike--as
Venetians--without distinction of interests. But let me die as I have
lived, among the workmen of Murano--Magagnati, of the Venetian people."

"Never before, in the annals of the Republic, was one known to refuse
the gift of nobility," Giustinian explained, as he described the scene
to the Lady Laura. "And, verily, one saw that the displeasure of the Ten
was great; the more so that in the interests of the government the
return they would have made may not be kept from the knowledge of the
people. Yet our senior master of Murano was suffered to depart with a
gracious word of regret from this consummate Donate, 'that a new noble,
so loyal in sentiment, should not be numbered among the councillors of
Venice.' Truly this grandsire of our little one lacketh not pride, and
his bearing became him well, though the Senate would have had it
otherwise. His gift was generous; but verily he needeth little for the
maintenance of the state he keepeth!"

"Giustinian, it was a noble act! And already the Republic is more
beholden to our baby than to any child in Venice; it will bring gladness
to the face of our sad Marina."

"Nay, guard thee from speech of it; perchance she may not hear thereof,
being thus concerned with grief for this quarrel--womanlike; and she
hath not strength to bear the thought of war. Verily, the reverend
father confessors in Venice have much to answer for; I would thou
couldst find means to keep Fra Francesco from his ministrations in her
palace."

"Fra Francesco--so holy and gentle--a man to trust!"

"Ay, I have naught against him, save that he is trained in the school of
Rome, having a conscience to uphold their claims, and with no thought or
care for anything but the Church--no wisdom to discover any right of
princes. Such confessors make trouble among the people. I doubt not our
daughter trusteth the word of Fra Francesco beyond thine or mine. Do thy
possible to keep him from her; there is no knowing what Marcantonio may
do at her bidding, and in this crisis there shall be no stain upon our
house."

"Thou, then, Giustinian, speak with Marco."

"Nay, I dare not name Marina to him under such suspicion; it might be
the forcing of the very thing we fear. He hath a way with him of hearing
all and saying naught, save some gay, facile word, courteous to the
point one can find no fault; and underneath he hath perhaps some scheme,
and never can one get a promise from him."



XVIII

The Lady Marina was wan from fear and fasting but very resolute, though
her face showed traces of tears, as her husband entered the oratory of
the palace, whither she had implored him to come to her before he went
to the Senate Chamber--a dignity to which he had but just been elected.

"Why hast thou summoned me hither?" he asked somewhat coldly; for, like
most light-hearted people, he disliked scenes, and differences between
himself and his wife were the more intolerable to him because he truly
loved her.

"Oh, Marco, my beloved!" she exclaimed imploringly, "thou lovest Venice
as much as I, and thy little word can save her from this great horror,
for thou art in the councils of thy people."

"Nay, Marina, thou dost not understand," he answered deprecatingly,
softening at the sight of her trouble. "I have but one vote; it is as
nothing in the Senate--it would but draw indignation against our house.
It is not possible to fail in loyalty to the Republic on this first
occasion of moment."

"Thy father might be won, if thou hast but courage. Thou art a
Giustinian; it is thy duty to speak in time of peril, and thy words
would make others brave to follow thee. Thus shalt thou save Venice."

"If thou didst but know, carina, how the Senate and the Ten are set
against this wish of thine! I should not speak of this matter to thee,
for it is secret--but to calm thee and help thee understand."

"How shall it calm me to know that the people and the city are rushing
under the ban? If this terrible resolution passes, if our child--our
tender child--were to die to-morrow he would go without burial--a little
wandering soul! Marco, thou lovest our child?"

Her pauses and her desperate struggle for control were full of
inexpressible horror.

"Calm thyself, my darling; it shall not be," he answered, reassuringly.

"Oh, Marco mio! And thou wilt give thy vote against it? And thou wilt
use thine influence in the Council? Promise me!"

She clung to him, sobbing and exhausted.

He soothed her for a moment silently; should he leave her under such a
misunderstanding? It would be easier for them both, but he had intended
no untruth. How was it possible to make such a woman understand? She was
quiet now, and he was stealing away from her with a kiss on her
forehead.

"Promise me!" she insisted, following him and clasping his arm with
sudden strength.

"Marina, they are very set; and the Ten--thou dost not know their
power."

"And shall all Venice brave the wrath of our most Holy Church because
the Senate is afraid of the Ten? Are the Ten more powerful than the Holy
Father and all the priesthood and sacraments of the Church? Marco, my
beloved, how shall I save thee?" "Carina, these things are not coming
upon Venice; thou dost not understand the law of Church and State."

"No, Marco," she answered boldly, "it is rather thou who dost not
understand. There will be no services, no marriage for our people, no
burial, no consolations of our holy religion, no sacraments--if this
excommunication should come upon us."

"If we had sinned, Marina, and laid ourselves open to interdict, then
these things should come--not otherwise."

"Ay, but we _have_ sinned--by rebellion against the Holy Church. Marco,
it is not easy for men to submit; but Father Francesco says the women
shall save Venice."

"The women of Venice are priest-ridden!" the young Senator cried
angrily, breaking away from her. "If there is trouble, it is the priests
who have brought it. They cannot be a separate power within Venice!"

"Not a separate power, Marco, only the representative of the Church,
which is the supreme power."

"These things are not for women to discuss," he exclaimed in
astonishment that she should attempt to reason on such a subject.

"Not for women, and not for men," she answered quietly. "The power of
the Holy Father is by _divine_ right."

"Marina, if thou canst say so much, thou _shalt_ understand the rest!"
he cried desperately. "So also is the power of temporal princes by
divine right--if not even more, as some of the authorities would have
it. But the temporal prince hath right only to that within his own
jurisdiction. Granting the divine right to the spiritual prince, it
lieth only within his own province. Paul V hath exceeded his rights.
Leonardo Donato, Serenissimo of the Republic, is not guilty in
self-defense."

She quivered as if a knife had been thrust through her; then,
controlling herself by force, she dipped her fingers in the basin of
holy water that stood upon the little altar. "It is sacrilegious to
speak against the Holy Father," she said in a low, grieved tone, as she
made the sign of the cross upon his breast. "May God forgive thee, my
dear one--it is not thy fault. But in the Senate they are misleading
thee!"

"My sweet wife," he answered, much troubled, and folding her closely.
"Do not grieve. All will be well for Venice. We shall not bring harm
upon her."

But she detected no yielding in his tone. She lifted her head from his
breast, and moved slightly away from him.

"Marco," she asked firmly, "when is the vote to be cast?"

"To-day, before sunset, and I must not linger. It would bring misfortune
upon our house if I were to be absent in an affair of such moment. Else
would I not leave thee."

She did not seek to detain him.

"Promise me that thou wilt be reasonable," he said, looking back, as he
parted the draperies of the doorway; "thou wilt not grieve."

"A promise for a promise, Marco; thou hast given me none, and may the
Madonna have mercy upon us!"

After a long, lingering look at the drooping figure of his wife he
dropped the curtain and descended to his gondola, sombre in spirit
because of the work that awaited him in the Senate Chamber; his
footsteps lagged wearily upon the stone floor of the long, dark passage,
and the brilliant outer sunshine flooded him with a sense of desperately
needed relief.

When Marina moved it was to throw herself before the altar, resting her
head upon her clasped hands, in an agony of supplication.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the midst of an excited debate, immediately preceding the final vote,
the door of the Senate Chamber was suddenly thrown open by the keeper,
who announced in an awestruck tone:

"A citizen claims the right of the humblest Venetian to bring before
Messer the Doge a message of vital import in the question under
discussion."

He uttered the words tremblingly, as if he had been taught them, and the
interruption at such an hour, though not unprecedented, was at least
unusual enough to cause consternation. The flood of words ceased; there
was an uneasy movement among the senators, then a hush of suspense.

Without waiting for the customary consent of the Doge, a procession of
white-robed, white-veiled women passed through the open doorway, moving
slowly and solemnly to the Doge's throne. The leader stepped forth from
her group of maidens and knelt at the foot of the dais.

This sudden arrest of action by these white-robed gliding figures, at a
moment when the Senate was about to defy the authority of the Church,
brought a superstitious thrill to many hearts within that chamber.

Among the younger senators it was whispered, in unsteady tones, that a
message delayed for the death of a prince was likely to bring
trouble--messengers, perchance, from another world--when forced again to
discussion. They listened breathlessly for the message; but the figure
still knelt in silence.

The group of Councillors on the dais swayed and parted against that
wonderful background of Tintoret, the dead Christ and the two Doges
reverently kneeling in proof of the devotion of this Most Serene
Republic. Around the vast and sumptuous chamber, where the proud
Signoria assembled, like a council of kings, Venice had chronicled her
triumphs and her religious humility in endless repetition and intimately
blended, as became her faith; the Doges Priuli, kneeling in prayer;
Venice, mounted defiantly on the Lion of Saint Mark; other portraits of
other doges, in attitudes of devotion; other pictures of the Christ, of
the saints, always symbolic; but over all,--triumphant, beautiful,--with
its irresistible sea-tones, cool and strong, Venice, Queen of the Sea,
compelling the homage of her rulers, from the ceiling's height.

Twice the Doge essayed to speak, but the faces of the younger men warned
him of the danger of such an interruption at a moment when the entire
vote had seemed sure, and so filled him with wrath that he dared not
speak until he could control his voice, lest its tremor be mistaken for
fear. The moment seemed an hour.

"Reveal thyself!" Leonardo Donato commanded at last; "and rise!"

The supplicant slowly rose, throwing back her veil, and revealing a face
that was spirit-like in its pallor and beauty, with deep eyes,
unfathomably sad. Her maidens gathered close about her, as if to support
her, for she trembled as she stood.

A low murmur arose. "The Lady of the Giustiniani!"

In all that vast Council Chamber there was no movement, save the slight
commotion among a group of red-robed senators farthest from the throne,
who were forcibly detaining the Senator Marcantonio Giustiniani, and the
imperative gesture from the dais which had waved him back and hushed his
involuntary exclamation of horror. Among the Savii, Giustinian
Giustiniani sat livid with anger, close under the eyes of that one calm,
terrible Counsellor whose gaze, fastened upon him, rendered speech
impossible.

"My daughter," said the Doge, in a tone full of consideration, "this is
not fitting. At another moment we will listen to thy request. Thou
mayest withdraw."

"Serenissimo, Prince of Venice!" Marina cried, stretching forth her
hands, "be gracious to me! _Now_ must I speak my message, or it will be
too late--and it hath been granted me in a vision, for the welfare of
the people of Venice. _If the Ruler of this Republic will win the
consent of the Senate and the Council to comply with the admonitions of
the Most Holy Father, the day shall be happy for Venice_."

"Take her away--she is distraught," commanded one of the Chiefs of the
Ten, starting forward.

There was a movement of irresolution among those immediately surrounding
the Doge; but the Lady Marina, like one commissioned for a holy emprise,
had no fear.

"Nay, for I claim my right, as citizen of Venice, to bring my grievance
to the Doge's throne!" she answered proudly. "I am mother to a son who
shall one day take his seat among the nobles of this Council; I am
daughter to a man of the people,--beloved by his own class and honorably
known, in the records of the Ten, among the industries of Venice,--who
hath but now refused the seat of honor they would have granted him, that
he might more truly serve the interests of the people; I am wife to a
noble whose ancient name hath been written again and again in records of
highest service most honorable to the Republic. My grievance is the
grievance of Venice--of the nobles and the people!"

She spoke with the exaltation of inspiration, and there was a hush in
the chamber, as if she had wrought some spell they could not break.

Presently into this silence a voice--low, clear, emotionless--dropped
the consenting words, "Speak on, that justice be not defrauded by the
half-told tale."

Instinctively the eyes of the senators turned to the face of the Chief
Counsellor, whose opinions had ruled the debate for many days past; but
he sat serene and unmoved among his violet-robed colleagues, with no
trace of sympathy nor speech upon his placid and inscrutable
countenance. If the words were his they were simply an impartial
reminder of duty--they concealed no opinion; the senators were to be the
judges of the scene, and justice required them to listen.

They gave a quickened interest.

"I plead for the people, who have no representatives here--for the
people, who are faithful to the Church and dutiful to the Holy Father;
let not this undeserved horror come upon them. Leave them their heaven,
who have no earthly paradise!"

The lady's strength seemed failing, for the last words had come more
painfully, though with a ring of passionate indignation.

Again Marcantonio Giustiniani broke from his detaining colleagues in an
attempt to reach his wife; and a second time the hands of the
Councillors waved him back.

"Spare us this anathema, most gracious Prince!" she cried. "I speak for
the mothers of all the babes of Venice. And oh, my Lords,"--and now the
words came in a low, intense wail, as she turned instinctively and
included them all in the beseeching motion of her hands,--"if you have
no mercy on yourselves, at least have mercy on your tender little ones!
Do not bring damnation on these innocent, helpless children by your own
act. Be great enough to submit to a greater power!"

"It is unseemly," murmured another of the Councillors, yet low, as if
afraid of his own judgment in a case so strange.

Leonardo Donato had been in possession of the supreme ducal authority
but a few weeks, not long enough to unlearn the tone of command and the
quick power of decision which had distinguished him as ambassador, when
he had been chosen with the unanimous approval of this august assembly,
to conciliate the court of Rome in the hour of the Republic's great
emergency. His presence of mind returned to him; the scene had lasted
long enough, and the situation was critical. The noble Lady Marina must
be retired without disgrace, for the honor of the Ca' Giustiniani; but,
above all, that she might not heighten the impression which her presence
had already created. And she must be placed where she could exercise no
further influence, yet in a way that should awaken no commiseration; for
she was beautiful and terribly in earnest, and in her deep eyes there
was the light of a prophet, and all Venice was at her feet.

The Doge spoke a word low to his Councillors, who sat nearest him on
either side, and they, with decorous signs of approval, passed it on to
the others. Thus fortified he rose, descended the steps of the ducal
throne, and addressed her with grave courtesy; the whole house, as in
custom bound, rising also while their prince was standing.

"We do not forget, most noble Lady Marina Giustiniani, that more than
many others thou art a daughter of the Republic, being especially
adopted by the Act of the Signoria; and thy love for Venice wins
forgiveness for the strangeness of thy fear that we, her loyal rulers,
could work her harm. But thou art distressed and needing rest, from the
pain of the vision which thou hast confided to us. We will care for
thee, as a father should.

"Let the noble Senator Marcantonio Giustiniani approach and conduct his
lady to private apartments within our palace, where she may rest, with
her maidens, until she shall be refreshed. One of our secretaries shall
show the way and remain to see that every aid is bestowed."

The secretary whom the Doge had designated by a glance had approached
and received a rapid order, spoken in an undertone; Marina had fallen,
almost fainting, upon her husband's arm, as he reached her after the
permission so intolerably delayed, yet he dared not move in that
imperious presence without further bidding. His hand stole over hers to
comfort her. She had suffered so much that he could not be angry.

Leonardo Donato's eyes quickly scanned the faces of the senators,
seeking the two least sympathetic.

"The Senators Morosini and Sagredo will escort them," he said, "and will
return in haste with the Senator Giustiniani to do their duty to the
Republic."

At the door Marina turned again, rallying her failing strength with a
last desperate effort, but the words came in a broken, agonized whisper:
"O Santissima Maria Vergine! Mater Dolorosa! because thou art the
special guardian of this Virgin City--and here, in her councils, none of
thy reverend fathers may plead for thee--be merciful, Madre Beatissima!
Save us from our doom!"



XIX

As the door closed upon the retreating cortege the attitude of the Doge
grew stern. He turned as if about to address the still standing Senate,
when, remembering that he had already assumed the initiative to an
unusual degree, and having so recent a recollection of that formidable
coronation oath whose slightest infraction would be visited upon his
nearest of kin, he mounted in silence to his seat and consulted with his
Councillors until the senators were in their places. Then, in a tone of
authority, he proclaimed:

"That which hath just occurred within this hall of the Senate shall be
for those who have witnessed it as if it had not been, and the
secretaries of the day shall not transcribe it upon their records, since
it hath already more than sufficiently consumed our time. This vision of
the lady was doubtless wrought by unwise tampering, being a vision of a
nature that may gain credence with women--dependent and timid and
unversed in law--but with which men and rulers have nothing to do."

An expression of relief slowly grew upon the faces before him while the
Doge was speaking; noting which his words were allowed to produce their
full effect during the few moments of relaxation and informal talk,
which, as was immediately announced by a secretary, would occupy the
time until the return of the three senators--all meanwhile keeping their
seats that no moment might be lost in resuming the important interrupted
debate.

The strain had been so great, both during the discussion and the visit
of the Lady Marina, that there was a willingness among the senators to
unbend, to throw aside serious impressions and make light of all dread,
as womanish and weak, accepting the Doge's words as leaders. For in
those days the faith of many of the gravest walked only a little way
from the borderland of superstition; and it was long since any of their
princes had held so great a reputation for judgment and diplomacy as
Leonardo Donato.

"The Senate now being complete," the Doge solemnly announced,
immediately upon the return of the three senators, "the interrupted
speech will be concluded, and before the final vote is taken there will
be presented once more before this august body that argument of our most
learned and venerated Counsellor, Padre Maestro Paolo, upon which the
decision of the Ten hath been based, and upon which the College, the
Senate, and the Great Council will presently be called to vote."

This marshaling of the entire ruling body of the Republic could not fail
to exercise a steadying power, and neither fear nor irresolution were
revealed to the impressive, penetrating, and commanding gaze of
Leonardo, when the Senator Contarini resumed the speech which had been
so strangely interrupted. The enthusiasm and determination of the
morning had returned; the words fell upon a receptive and positive
atmosphere. The opinions of the distinguished Senator carried great
weight, so loyal and catholic was he known to be; and above the portal
of the Contarini many times the Lion of St. Mark had proudly rested.

"We are loyal sons of the Church," he said, "but no highest
ecclesiastical court--though with authority from Rome itself--may rule
that any decree of this imperial Senate of Venice, bearing upon Church
and State alike, can be set aside by Church alone."

"We have not subjected ourselves to being put out of the body of this
Church, which we revere, by any failure of duty on our part--duty being
a rendering of that which is owed.

"As citizens of this Republic, our duty in things temporal is owed to
our Prince--by right divine; as men, our duty to our Church, by right
divine, is in things spiritual alone--which we render; but in things
temporal God gave not the Church rule over us. If, at any point, these
two dominions may seem to touch and intersect it is our Prince who
disentangles, by his decree, the twisted thread. For he is Lord over us,
who are Venetians and not Romans."

The words had a ring of victory; enthusiasm spread from face to face,
and the house rose in a tumult of approval to express its loyalty,
unchecked by any sign of dissent from the dais at a demonstration so
unusual.

But the Contarini saw his advantage and broke in upon the wave of
feeling, while an imperative motion from the Chief Counsellor restored
order for the hearing of an important legal point upon which it was
desired that action should be based.

"These laws--whose abrogation the Holy Father doth demand--are ancient
rights of Venice, acknowledged by many previous popes, and reaffirmed,
in these our own days, after wise and learned scrutiny of our
chancellors, in the light of modern, civic requirements, as needful to
the healthful administration of this realm; as binding upon our Prince,
who hath ever in mind the welfare of Venice; and to be upheld by our
people who believe in the divine right of princes. They are by these
reverend Councillors also declared non-prejudicial to the spiritual
authority of our Most Holy Church, which this Serene Republic of Venice
doth ever reverently acknowledge. The question is of civil and not of
spiritual rights."

An enthusiastic senator made a motion for the casting of the final vote,
as an expression of the sense of the chamber. The speech of the
Contarini and the manner of its reception gave pleasing assurance of the
general temper of the Senate; the faces of the Doge and of his Savii
recorded the sense of security with which it was needful to impress the
assembly, and wore, if possible, a more dignified calm. Nevertheless
Leonardo, with his statesman's eye, detected here and there a face that
was set in an opposite opinion or likely to yield from fear, and his
pride decreed that the vote, when cast, should be unanimous.

Again the Doge consulted his Councillors.

"The nations will owe us much," he said, "if our unanimous vote shall
record the sentiments expressed in this speech of the noble Senator
Contarini as the faith and will of this Republic. Never hath there been
a greater opportunity to win a triumph for the liberty of princes.

"Therefore, because the question is weighty, we will request our most
learned Counsellor and Theologian to the Republic to give us an
exposition of the law as it doth appear at this latest moment of our
discussion to his judicial mind."

All Venice knew that Fra Paolo's nerve and knowledge were the central
forces of the resistance of the Republic in this crisis.

As he moved slowly forward and stood before this magnificent assembly
with the same simple dignity that had characterized him among the friars
of the Servi,--after the splendors of the ducal costume, the scarlet,
the ermine, the beretta, the gold-brocaded mantle,--the plain folds of
the violet robe of the Counsellor seemed almost austere. His lineless
face was so fresh in color that it looked youthful, though of singular
gravity and refined asceticism. Yet men of force were drawn to him
because of his strength, his broad grasp of duty, and his absolute
fearlessness.

As he stood for a moment perfectly still before them, his eyes--blue,
penetrating, and unrevealing--swept the faces of the assembly with a
magnetic glance which compelled their entire attention. The hush was
_felt_ among them, and in the silence his voice--clear, passionless,
low, and far-reaching--seemed not so much a voice as a suggestion within
the inner consciousness of his hearers of the thoughts he uttered. The
strange sense of impersonality which was one of his distinguishing
attributes prevented the usual desire for contest with which most
thinking men meet other strong minds, and was, perhaps, a secret of his
triumphs.

"Most Serene Prince, Counsellors, and Nobles of the Council, if you ask
me of the law as it hath declared itself to my understanding, the matter
is simple and quickly to be uttered.

"The dominion of the Church marches in the paths of heaven; it cannot
therefore clash with the dominion of princes, which marches on the paths
of earth. But the Roman court--calling itself the Church--is no longer
satisfied with that spiritual dominion to which it hath right, having
become aggressive and seeking to impose doctrines far removed from the
primitive law of the Church."

There was a slight pause, while the quiet eyes held his audience with a
challenge of assent; the faces of those who were unqualifiedly with him
in doctrine grew eager; here and there a dignified head bowed, unaware,
as if surrendering some belief.

"Christ himself hath said, 'My kingdom is not of this world,' and the
power of the Sovereign Pontiff over Christians is not limitless, but is
restricted to spiritual matters and hath for rule the Divine Law.

"If the Pope, to enforce his commands--unlawful when they exceed the
authority given him by Christ--fulminates his interdict, it is unjust
and null; in spite of the reverence owed to the Holy See, it should not
be obeyed.

"Seven times before hath Venice been so banned--and _never_ for anything
that had to do with religion!"

Again that strange, slight, emphatic pause, as if he need wait but a
moment for his reasoning to dissipate any conscious unwillingness.

The Contarini quoted low to his neighbor a recent _bon mot_ of the
Senate, "Everybody hath a window in his breast to Fra Paolo;" for
several senators of families closely allied to Rome started at the
boldness of the thought, and exchanged furtive glances of disapproval,
and the fearless eye of the friar immediately fixed upon them, holding
and quieting them as they moved restlessly to evade his glance. It was
as if he assured them silently, "I speak that I do know; cease to oppose
truth; let yourselves believe." And resistance lessened before the
impersonality of the pleader.

"One of the fathers tells us that an excommunication is null when it
would usurp over citizens the right of their prince. '_By me kings reign
and princes decree justice_'--it is the word of God."

There was no need of further pauses in the quiet flow of words, for
there was no longer any resistance; the Senate and Council hung
breathless upon his speech, which answered every misgiving; they knew
that his reading of canon law had never been questioned in Rome itself;
the man spoke with immense authority. But there was no triumph in his
bearing as he tuned the atmosphere of that august assembly into absolute
harmony, conquering every discordant note--only a further lowering of
the quiet voice, which seemed to utter, unchallenged, the conclusions of
each listener.

"The Sacred Canons agree that a Pope is liable to error and fallible in
cases of special judgment.

"Isaiah denounces such legislation, 'Woe unto them that decree
unrighteous decrees.'

"Wherefore I declare the justice of the cause of the Republic, and the
nullity of any judgment that may be pronounced against her in this
matter.

"Nor shall evil befall one for a sin not committed, nor can there be
disobedience to a mandate which hath been issued, without lawful
authority, by him who proclaims it; and authority, transcended, is no
longer lawful."



XX

When Marcantonio, finally released from his long day of service in the
Senate Chamber, sought the private apartments of the Doge, where Marina
with her maidens was waiting for him, he found her lying back, wan and
spiritless, in one of the great gold and crimson arm-chairs of the state
salon; her eyes were closed, her lips were moving in prayer, but her
rosary had dropped from her weak clasp. Some of her maidens, as thus
doing their lady truest service, were still kneeling with hopeless
petitions to the Holy Mother to avert the doom from Venice; but one, the
Lady Beata, who was tenderly devoted to her, had not ceased from efforts
to rouse her with nameless little gracious cares. She was watching for
Marcantonio, to whom she signed eagerly to hasten, as the guard of the
Doge permitted him to pass the doorway.

"Thus hath our lady been, and naught hath moved her," she said low, and
in distress, "since the Secretary of the Serenissimo, who with much
futile reasoning hath sought to change her, hath taken his leave, save
that ever and anon she hath opened her eyes to watch the door and bid us
pray for Venice."

Her husband had reached her side and taken her listless hand before
Marina had noticed his approach; but there was no smile in her eyes as
she raised them to his--only a look of unutterable misery.

"Is there no hope?" she questioned. Her fingers, weakly folded about
his, were burning.

He controlled himself with a great effort.

"Yes, carina, every hope. All is well; and the Serenissimo hath been
most gracious. To-morrow, when thou hast had thy rest, he will send to
thee the Reverend Counsellor Padre Maestro Paolo, that he may quiet all
thy fears. For all is well."

She tried to draw him nearer, but her hand dropped powerless. "The
vote?" she questioned, with her eager eyes; and, more falteringly, with
that hoarse, broken whisper which pierced his heart.

"It is well," he answered her tenderly. "Carinissima, all is well."

She fixed him with terror-stricken eyes, in which her soul seemed
burning and her lips moved with a question he could not hear. He bent
closer, touching her cheek caressingly.

"The vote?" she had asked again.

"Tell her the count," said the Lady Beata, with an imperious touch on
his wrist; "it is killing her."

The Senate had adjourned in triumph; without a dissenting voice Venice
had rallied to the support of her prince. Marcantonio had thought he
should be proud to tell her of this unanimous action of their august
body, which could not fail to restore her confidence and quiet her
fears. But now he could not find the words he sought, for never had he
looked into eyes so full of a comprehending woe.

"Marina," he began. "Carinissima--" helplessly repeating his powerless
assurance: "It is well."

Still her deep eyes seemed to question him relentlessly, though she did
not speak; her gaze fascinated him, and he could not withdraw his eyes
until he had read in hers the great agony he had so lightly
estimated--the agony of a soul deeply religious, of unquestioning faith
in the strictest doctrine and dogma of the Church of Rome; the grief of
such a soul, tenderly compassionate for the suffering brought upon an
innocent people by no rebellion of its own; the terror of this
soul--passionately loving--measuring the horrors of an unblessed life
and death for all its dearest ones.

"All?" she had seemed to question him, leaning nearer, and Marcantonio
could not answer; but he saw, from the deepening horror in her eyes,
that she understood. She knew that _he_ had helped to bring the doom.
Oh, if he could but have told her that he had not voted--that he had
withheld his one little vote from Venice to comfort her! If, for this
once, he had failed to give what Venice expected of him, only for
Marina's sake!

He bent over her passionately, a thousand reasons rushing to his rescue,
clamoring to be told her. "Marina, beloved, there is nothing to fear!"
he cried desperately, eager for his own defense, resolute to make her
comprehend the perfect safety of Venice, to calm the beseeching horror
in her eyes; "Fra Paolo will come!"

Her gaze relaxed, her eyelids quivered and closed; she had fainted.

--Or was it death?

He folded her to his heart with a cry of desolation.

The Lady Beata hastily thrust him aside and opened the white robe at the
throat, and Marcantonio started back; there were stripes of half-healed
laceration on the tender flesh--some fresh, as if but just raised by the
lash.

"Ay, my lord," Beata answered very low, to his quick, grieved question;
"all that a daughter of the Church may do hath our lady added to her
prayers for Venice. She hath been rigorous in fasting and in penance
until her strength is gone; but the pain of it she feeleth not, because
of the greater pain of her soul, which is lost in supplication that
availeth naught."

Leonardo Donato would be very gracious to the Lady of the Giustiniani,
though she had come so near to costing the city a divided vote, because
he had seen the misery in her eyes with her great love for Venice, and
because the Council had so declared its vote for the State that he could
afford to be magnanimous. Nay, since even the Senator Marcantonio had
not flinched before that wonderful agonized white face, he need not
confine her, as he had intended, in a convent for decorous keeping; he
was glad of the change in her favor which would prevent the harshness
that might have increased her influence to the degree of danger. He
sent, instead, a gracious message by his secretary--"Might the father
pay a visit to his daughter of the Republic to inquire of her welfare
and assure her of his favor, before she returned to her palace?"

But the message of courtesy, sent by the Doge himself, had been stayed
on the threshold of his own state salon.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Republic had, indeed, quitted herself nobly in her vote; so valiant
a blow had she struck for the rights of princes that this consciousness
rang out in the bold tones of her announcement to the courts of
Europe--"Which things we have thought best to tell you for your sole
information, so that if mention be made of them to you, and not else,
you may be able to answer to the purpose and to justify this our most
righteous cause."

And from the moment that the Senate had been unofficially apprised by
Nani that the terrible Interdict was already printed and would presently
be fulminated, every possible precaution of self-defense had been put in
operation throughout the dominions of Venice, with an ingenuity, a
foresight, and a celerity which the watching courts of Europe not only
viewed with amazement, but accepted as an evidence of the conscious
power and justice of the Republic. Overtures came fast from England,
from Spain, from France--every monarch wished some share in the
pacification between these courts of Rome and Venice.

Meanwhile, in Venice life went on superbly. There was no question of any
spiritual disfranchisement; these sons of the Church were not under
interdict, having committed no sin which laid them open to that charge.
Moreover, no ban had been _published_ throughout the wide extent of
their domain. Hence, for the Venetians, there was no interdict, whatever
awful anathema might be affixed to those distant doors of Saint Peter's
in Rome; with whatever voice of anger its terrors might be thundered at
the Holy See, against rulers, people, priests, and sacraments within the
doomed city--the wide waters of the lagoon laved its shores in
benediction, like a baptismal charm upon the fair front of Venice,
against which the Curse threatened impotently.

At the centre of this superb and daring court sat a friar, trained from
his childhood up in the customs, traditions, and beliefs of his Church
and of his order--a reverent practitioner in her fasts and sacraments,
simple in his habits as a hermit-monk, faithful in his religious duties
as the most punctilious priest in Rome, sure in his faith that God would
uphold the right, and asserting, without compromise, that right was on
the side of Venice.

What a stay for rulers who fortified their every position by some appeal
to precedent--who would punctiliously know the source and interpretation
of every law upon which they rested!

Above all, what a stay for the simple people who, in these days of
bewildering conflict, knew not what to believe!

Would Masses go on, and the church doors be open and the sacraments
continue? Might they still take their brides and baptize their little
ones, and follow their dead to burial, and sign the sign of the cross,
in token of the favor of heaven--as loyal sons of the Church?

And would the Madre Beata--blessed guardian of this Virgin City--still
smile upon them from all the separate shrines of Venice?

Should the labor and the imprecation of this simple people go on until
the evening in their wonted flow, and should nothing fail them of the
benedictions they had known?

It was a mystery; but threatening Rome was far and unfamiliar, and
Venice they knew--present, protecting, peremptory--impossible to
disobey.

Before the commands of the angry Pontiff could reach the heads of the
orders in Venice, people, priests, and prelates throughout the dominions
were forewarned; they must continue in every accustomed practice of
their religion; they might neither receive nor publish any minatory
papers--these must be instantly brought to the government, under
severest penalties.

Offending prelates were brought from distant sees to meet the
displeasure of the Republic; hesitating priests were silently hastened
to decision by scaffolds, looming suddenly within their precincts. While
leaflets--expressly prepared to disaffect the Venetians--proclaiming
that no obedience was due from a people to its prince under censure;
that all vows, contracts, and duties between man and man, husband and
wife, children and parents were nullified for those who remained
faithful to the Church in acknowledging the censure, as against those
who disclaimed it--these leaflets, introduced by secret agents of the
Pontiff and interdicted by the Republic, flowed in vast numbers, but
silently, into the hands of the Ten, and were seen no more.

Meanwhile that terrible thing which the people had vaguely feared had
_not_ come upon them; though at first they paused, half-hearted, when
they passed the house of the Tintoret, where the quaint figure of
"Ser-Robia," the Pasquino of Venice, had often a bit of news that the
people cared to hear, grotesquely placarded over his broad mouth. He was
a good friend to the people, Ser-Robia, and gave them many a pleasant
bit of gossip to cheer their evening stroll; but it was wise not to
laugh until one had heard the words, and there was often a priest or a
scholar near to tell the meaning to those who could not spell it out for
themselves. Always, in these days, there was some one who could read to
the people, for this was that solemn "protest" of "Leonardo Donato, by
the Grace of God Doge of Venice," etc., wherewith the most Christian
Republic defied the interdict. Here, along the Rialto, in all the public
squares of Venice, on the doors of the churches,--wherever proclamation
was wont to be made,--the people might pause and read this consoling
word of Venice, instead, perchance, of some copy of the interdict which
had been smuggled into the city and pasted, surreptitiously, over the
Doge's "protest," but which those faithful _Signori di Notte_--the
night-watch of Venice--were sure to destroy before the morning dawned.

"To the Most Reverend the Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops of our
Venetian Dominions," said this "Protest," "and to the Vicars, Abbots,
Priors, Rectors of Parochial Churches, and other Ecclesiastical
Prelates, greeting:" forthwith proceeding to declare that "the Interdict
which his Holiness was 'said' to have published was null and void, and
forbidden to be observed--not having been incurred by any fault of
Venice."

But even those who could not read soon recognized the features of that
message, which met them everywhere, hiding the scars of other messages
which they must not see.

"No, no," they said, with laughing thanks to some friendly interpreter
who stood near; "it is enough; _va bene_--we know it like our Ave
Maria!"

But sometimes a family group came back for a word, when the others had
scattered.

"Thou, Gigio, tell the good padre!" says the bright-eyed young
contadina, pulling the gray sleeve of her fisherman who stands stolidly
beside her.

"_Si, si_," he answers indifferently, shrugging his shoulders and
relapsing into silence, as he pushes his wife and mother before him for
a refuge; for the men of the islands were less at home in argument with
the priests than were the women of their households.

"It is thus, your Reverence," the young woman explains cheerily. "It is
the grandmother who is afraid. Santa Maria! _how_ she is afraid!" She
touches her forehead significantly.

The simple old woman, comprehending only that they speak of her, drops a
courtesy, looking furtively about her with troubled eyes, and fumbling
over her beads; the "protest" has no meaning for her, although it is
written in good Venetian.

But a few words suffice for such as these who have caught only some
vague hint of the Holy Father's displeasure, and are reassured by the
open church and the promise of Mass and benediction.

It is those others who make trouble; they come, from time to time,--by
twos and threes, never alone,--and read for themselves, with lowering
brows, but ask no questions. And sometimes, if they watch too silently,
the courteous friar who has graciously interpreted the message which is
above the heads of the crowd, exchanges a glance of intelligence with
some gay young signor who belongs to the great army of secret
service--as revealed to the friar on guard by the password of the day;
and the sullen-browed group is courteously accosted by the young
noble--"Excuse me, signori, you are strangers in Venice; a gondola is
waiting to conduct you to the palace."

They will be tried as secret agents of the enemy. But resistance is
rare, for an escort of guards pours out from the doorways and calles, if
a stiletto but gleam in the sunlight; and no secret agent may cope with
Venice in promptness of self-defense and ingenuity of prevention.

It is interesting in the campo in these early days, before the effect of
the government's measures for coercing the opinions of the populace is
fully declared.

"I am a good Catholic, most reverend father; I keep the mariegole; every
year I go to confession," protests some sturdy gondolier, who has been
made anxious by his womenfolk. "And many a fare I pay to light the
traghetto of San Nicolo; with an ave for the favor of the Blessed Mother
to confound the scoundrel Castellani, who threw a good Nicolotto over
the Ponte Senza Parapetti, in the last fight; and it cost us oil enough
to light Venice for a year--faith of San Nicolo!--to keep them from
winning at our regatta--_maledetti_!"

For even those gondoliers who kept the mariegole were not precisely
angels, and the part of their creed which they religiously upheld was a
deathless antagonism to the rival faction which won more lamps and
pretty gifts for the patron madonnas of the various traghetti than any
other article of their faith.

To a few, chiefly women with devout, sad faces--watchers, perchance,
beside beds over which the shadow of death is creeping--the padre tells
compassionately of consoling, helpful words that are preached daily in
the great deserted church of _I Gesuiti_; for in this parish, more than
others, there are difficulties, since it had been the centre of the
disaffection. But now its doors are ceaselessly open for a refuge; no
service is omitted, no sacrament denied; and daily, before vespers, the
people may listen to a few simple words from Fra Paolo. Thither, in
these early days of the struggle, the crowd flocks, drawn partly by
curiosity to hear a man of whom it is whispered that he has just been
individually put under the greater excommunication by the Holy
Inquisition, because of his attitude in this quarrel.

There is much talk of Fra Paolo sifting about the church and square,
where the gathering of the people shows a sprinkling of red-robed
senators; for the Padre Maestro Paolo, which is his title since he has
been Consultore to the Republic, is a great man now, with a greatness
that means something to the populace, to whom letters and sciences are
nothings. But the Consultore is the friend of Venice; he is _their_
friend--coming each day to talk to the people. "It is not true that
great trouble has come upon Venice, for Fra Paolo makes it all quite
plain, and he knows everything," they say; "our padre in San Marcuolo is
like a bimbo to him! The Jesuit Fathers went too soon, and might have
spared themselves the burning of their papers and their treasure. Santa
Maria!--what is it they are saying about Fra Paolo finding the die for
making money that the _padri_ left behind? What is a 'die,' Luigi? If
thou hadst had the sense to bring thy boat to clear away the rubbish,
instead of thinking there are only fish in the world, thou mightest have
had the luck to find it; it must be better than working lace bobbins all
the week for a handful of _soldi_ that wouldn't buy one macaroni!"

"Peace, then, with thy babble!"

"See, then, the holy water is quite safe; I saw our padre cross himself
by that first basin. Thou hast done well,--_hein_ Luigi,--to bring me
from Burano, if there are _no_ fish to-morrow at the Ave Maria; for now
we can sleep in peace! They told such tales of I Gesuiti, one thought
the devils were having a holiday--Santa Maria!"

"The women are worse for chattering," Luigi retorts, with a forcible
imprecation. "Here cometh the Consultore--hold thy tongue."

"No, no, Luigi; it is only a frate from the Servi; Fra Paolo is a great
man, with a robe like the Serenissimo; he might wear a crown if he
liked! Ah, to be great like that!"

But Fra Paolo and his secretary wore the grave garb of their order, to
the great disappointment of the younger women, who had been attracted by
the expectation of some pomp.

"Word hath reached the Contarini secretly from Rome," said one senator
to another, as the Consultore passed them, "that they have found
themselves a new diversion before the palace of the Vatican, and that
some of our great ones here are burned in effigy to instruct the
populace. A pile of Fra Paolo's writings doth light the funeral pyre;
and all that he hath written or _may hereafter write_ is placed upon the
Index."

"_Davvero_! his words would make me wrathful if I held the views of his
Holiness, who may well fear the incontrovertibility of his wit. But our
Consultore looketh a simple man to have been shown such honor!"

"He beareth honors bravely," the other answered, with due appreciation
of the humor; "but lately, when the master Galileo was before the Senate
with his telescope, he had a pretty tale of Gian Penelli and Ghetaldo,
wherewith in Padua Fra Paolo hath won the title of 'the miracle of the
century.'"

"I heard it not; some commission held me at the arsenal; San Marco be
thanked that it is over!"

"Ebbene, old Penelli--gouty so that he can scarce move--hath a visit
from our great mathematician Ghetaldo, who findeth with our magnificent
patron of letters a friar to whom Penelli showeth such honor--limping to
the door with him, as if he were a prince--that Ghetaldo, wrathful at
this foolish waste over a friar, asketh his name with scorn. And is not
better pleased when Penelli telleth that Fra Paolo is the 'miracle of
the age in every science.' 'So, I will prove it,' saith Penelli, 'for
verily the world knoweth the great Ghetaldo for a mathematician! Come,
then, with problems the most difficult thou canst prepare, on a day it
may please thee to name, and meet Fra Paolo at my table, without warning
to him.' _Ecco_! Penelli is subtle; great satisfaction and much labor on
the part of our mathematician. Enter Fra Paolo,--simple,
unadvised,--solves the propositions at a hearing. 'Miraculous!' cries
the superb Ghetaldo, gentle as a lamb! A friendship for life, and Fra
Paolo is the teacher! But it is more wonderful to hear the tales of how
he preacheth to the people here, in the Gesuiti. Let us follow, for he
giveth them not many minutes, for fear of wearying them. We need lift
our mantles high, for the pavement is like a market garden of Mazzorbo,
with broken bits from the women's baskets--Faugh!"

The splendid senators seldom mingled in such a crowd, except at guarded
distances, to make a pageant for it; it was picturesque, shabby,
malodorous, composed chiefly of young women with bright-eyed babies and
baskets emitting unctuous savors of _frittola_ and garlic; now and then
an old peasant who could not be tranquil until she had heard Fra Paolo
speak was escorted by a rebellious grandson, bribed to quiet by the
promise of a _soldo_ for his little game of chance; occasionally a man,
impatient to have done with it all and get out on the canal again, moved
restlessly from place to place; only here and there the dim light showed
a face pathetic in its questioning, to whom the answer meant life or
death.

"What hath a man of such rare powers and learning to do with these
simple ones--a man whose time is precious to the State?"

The noble senators withdrew a little from the crowd to watch the scene,
as they put the question to each other; their servants brought them
chairs within the shadow of a column.

They did not know that few are great enough in an age of superstition to
hold a conscience uncontrolled by traditions, and a primitive faith
simple as a child's, with the tenacity of a strong man; there had been
nothing in his labors at the Senate to call forth this most sacred side
of his reserved nature, and they did not understand that it was to this
he owed much of the marvelous poise of will and judgment which kept him
unspoiled in spite of intellectual gifts that would have ruined him
without his absolute dependence on the One Supreme. But on this sacred
side alone was there any entrance to his emotions.

Fra Paolo was not speaking from the pulpit; he stood beside a table that
had been placed in the nave, and the people gathered close about him, as
children near a father, while he opened a great vellum-bound volume with
massive golden clasps, which his secretary had brought from the library
of the Servi.

"Come nearer," he called to them simply, beckoning with his hand, "so
that all may hear; put the old people and the little ones nearest."

He looked around him, not smiling, but very quiet and patient, as if he
were waiting for the slight confusion to subside; for at first they
pushed each other rudely to get closer.

"There is room for all," he said, "in God's house;" and as he looked
into their faces each felt that it was a word to him, and held his
breath to listen--which suddenly seemed quite easy! The smaller children
nestled contentedly on their mothers' arms, munching some dainty brought
to keep them quiet, and fascinated by the low, clear voice, watched with
round, solemn eyes to see if he would smile; while two or three who were
tall enough to reach just over the edge of the table steadied themselves
by clutching it with their chubby hands, dropping their hold of their
mothers' mantles--for the pages were full of pretty colors, and the
voice of the padre was like a lullaby to keep them still, and they were
not afraid--at all.

Fra Paolo never gave the people many words, but sometimes they were
strong and beautiful, like an old poem, and in their own Venetian--not
in the Latin which had been made for the great ones.

"It was a wonderful book, written long ago," he told them; "before the
Bishop of Altinum fled with his people to Torcello and built the old
Duomo; before Venice began to be."

Many of them did not know there was _anything_ so old as that! They
looked at each other and began to think.

"And it was written for the comfort of every one who loveth God, our
Father, whatever his troubles may be. See what is written here for any
who fear that the consolations of our holy religion shall be taken away.
For that is what you fear?"

They looked at each other, hesitating. "Si, si--yes--" timidly. "No,
no," more bravely.

Fra Paolo smiled.

"No!" they said, distinctly.

"If any of you are afraid," Fra Paolo said, looking full into their
faces as they pressed nearer, "because the fathers of this church have
gone away and left you, there are words in this old book--written long
ago, before there was any Venice--to condemn those who would close the
churches. 'Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of
my pasture,' saith the Lord. 'Behold, I will visit upon them the evil of
their doings, saith the Lord.' 'Where is the flock that was given thee,
thy beautiful flock?'"

"And here are some words that are written for you--whom they have
deserted. 'Thus saith the Lord: again there shall be heard in this
place, _which ye say shall be desolate_, the voice of joy and the voice
of gladness; the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride; and
of them that shall bring the sacrifice of praise into the house of the
Lord.' It is all very simple. Love God and pray to him, and be faithful
in your duty. And he will keep you happy and safe from harm."

The ringing treble of children's voices sounded through the open door of
the sacristy and distracted the attention of the congregation, who
turned to watch the choristers as they came in sight, by twos and twos,
chanting the canticle, "Praise the Lord of Hosts; for the Lord is good;
for His mercy endureth forever!"

While Fra Paolo slipped away unnoticed.



XXI

So life went on, and those who looked to see the people fail and falter
under this burden which the rebellion of their rulers had brought upon
them saw them, with unshaken confidence, still loyally upholding the
banner of Saint Mark. Preparations for war--marshaling of soldiers,
building of galleys, increased activities at the arsenal--enlarged the
industries and added a judicious vivacity to the life of the people.

There was no war declared; but it was a time when border-lands should be
looked to and bravery encouraged and the martial spirit developed; and
the ever politic Senate tickled the fancy of its pleasure-loving people
with the pomp of a fete, on the day when the newly created
general-in-chief of the armies of the Republic assembled, with fanfare
of trumpets and roaring of cannon, his splendidly appointed corps in the
Piazza, the people thronging the arcades, crowding the windows and
balconies, waving and shouting, as the stately escort of three hundred
nobles, in crimson robes, led the way to San Marco for solemn
dedication. And here, like a knight vowed to holiest service, the
general knelt before the altar, while the Patriarch blessed his sword.
"In defense of Venice and the right," with a memory of the old
battle-cry of the Republic.

  "Non nobis, Domine--sed tibi gloria!"

And the people, accepting as a favor the pageant which had been
cunningly devised to impress them, followed, thronging, up the giant
stairway, into the halls of the Council Chamber, into the stately
presence of the Serenissimo and the Signoria, to hear their latest
magnate profess his gratitude for the honor of his investiture and the
magnificence of his outfit, with solemn oaths of loyalty.

There was no war, though talk of it had little truce in those days; but
the cardinal nephews were busy in Ferrara and Ancona with the marshaling
of troops, and four of the princes of the Church had been appointed by
the Holy Father--vice-regent of the Prince of Peace--to superintend his
military operations and prepare his army of forty thousand infantry and
four thousand cavalry! Thus, in Venice, the spectacle of a
general-in-chief, with his splendid accoutrements, was timely and
inspiriting.

Meanwhile, in the palazzo Giustiniani the days dragged wearily, and knew
no sunshine; the Senator Marcantonio had been by special favor excused
from attendance in the Council Chamber; in his mind Venice was no longer
regnant; one thought absorbed him wholly through all that miserable
time--he had but one hope--everything centred in Marina.

When they had undressed her to apply restoratives a small, rough
crucifix had been taken from the folds of her robe near her heart; it
had belonged to Santa Beata Tagliapietra,--that devoted daughter of the
Church,--and the Lady Beata herself had given the precious heirloom out
of the treasures of the chapel of their house to her beloved Lady
Marina. Possibly she reflected, with a shudder, as she laid the relic on
the altar of the oratory of the palazzo Giustiniani, that the
remembrance of the constant dangers of Santa Beata had incited the Lady
Marina thus to peril her life. Of the long nights of vigil on the floor
of the oratory and of many other austerities which had filled those last
sad days since the quarrel with Rome had begun, the Lady Beata was
forced to give faithful account to the physicians who were summoned in
immediate consultation to the bedchamber of the Lady Marina. These
practices and the horror upon which she had dwelt ceaselessly would
sufficiently account for her condition, said the learned Professor
Santorio; and if she could but forget it there might be hope; meanwhile,
let her memory lie dormant--at present nothing must be done to rouse
her.

Perhaps already she had forgotten it; for the shock had been great and
life was at a very low ebb; had all memory gone from her of her life and
love? They thought she knew them, but she expressed no wish; she
scarcely spoke; lying listless and white under the heavy canopy of the
great carved bedstead, which had become the centre of every hope in
those two palaces on the Canal Grande, while the absorbing life of the
Ducal Palace, so little distant, was for Marcantonio as though it did
not exist. In that time of waiting--he knew not how long it was nor
what was passing--life was a great void to him, echoing with one
agonized hope; time had no existence, except as an indefinite point when
Marina should come back to him with her soul and heart in her eyes once
more.

He had gathered the few books from her oratory and boudoir, and at
intervals when he could control his thought he pored over them,
treasuring every faint pencil-line, every sentence blotted by tears, as
an indication of having specially occupied her. Now that he could no
longer discuss these moods, how eagerly he sought for the light she
would so gladly have given him in those past, happier days!

In vain he asked of the Lady Beata whether they had discussed these
thoughts together--whether Fra Francesco had brought her the little worn
volumes.

"My lord, I know not," she answered coldly, resolved in her own heart to
tell him nothing that he did not already know, since only now it had
pleased him to concern himself with that religious attitude which was
costing Marina so dearly. For the whole strength of the love she would
once have yielded him for the asking, the Lady Beata now lavished upon
Marina, in jealous devotion.

But he could not be angry with Fra Francesco, who had only been faithful
in sharing his belief with her, while he, her husband, had refused to
help her. "My God!" he groaned; "why are we blind until the anguish
comes!"

As he drearily paced the stately chambers--so empty without Marina--what
would he not have given to hear her voice again repeat those eager
questions he had been so willing to repress! How could it ever have
vexed him that she should wish to understand the question that was
occupying Venice! But now he remembered having grown less and less
patient with her as she had returned to this theme, until, in
self-defense, she had said with gentle dignity, yet half-surprised at
his irritation:

"Marco, have a little patience with me. Remember that our young nobles
are trained in knowledge of these laws of Venice from quite early
boyhood."

"It is part training, if thou wilt," he had answered lightly; "or in
these questions women are stupid--I know not. But these matters concern
them not." And after that, he remembered now with shame, she had
troubled him no more, and he had felt it a relief; for during the few
discussions they had had together he had been aware that they approached
the question from a radically different point of view. He had never
taken the trouble to comprehend her ground nor to give her reasons for
his own; he had simply made assertions, with a sense of irritation that
any repetition should be called for in a matter quite out of a woman's
province; for the women of Venice had no part in that salon influence on
politics which was ascribed to their sisters of France, and her attempts
to gain understanding for a personal judgment had chafed him like an
interference in his own special field. He, with his subtly trained
intellect and legal knowledge, could so easily have convinced her, he
told himself remorsefully; but he had not taken the trouble even to look
through her lens, while she had been so eager to understand his point of
view--and only that she might reach the truth!

Now he had much time to understand it all! He recalled a strange, hurt
look when her questions had ceased, but it had not troubled him then;
she would forget it,--would understand that he preferred to talk about
other things,--he had said to himself, and he had been careful in
gracious little ways to show her that he was not displeased. And she had
been wise and had vexed him no more; there had been no arguments on this
or any other theme. And then the days of strain had come and the labors
of the Council had absorbed him. Now he saw that she had been too proud
and strong to subject herself to repeated insinuations of inferiority of
understanding, as she had been too loving and dutiful to prolong the
contest. And so--he groaned aloud as his mistake revealed itself to him
in those long, unhappy hours--he had lost the dear opportunity of
leading her aright; for he contemplated but one possible issue of such
an attempt on his part; he had scorned her entreaty when she came to him
for understanding of a mystery that was killing her, and he had driven
her to take up the study alone, with the help of her father confessor,
who knew but one side of the vexed question, and that _not_ the side of
Venice!

He was sure that it was a matter of conscience and not of contest with
Marina, therefore she _must_ know; he should have realized that! How had
Fra Francesco met her questions? Had he told her it was a matter beyond
the comprehension of women? Or had he been patient with her difficulties
and solved them with terrible positiveness? Was it he who had brought
her these manuals on "Fasts and Penances," "The Use and Nature of the
Interdict," "The Duty of the Believer," which completed for her the
pictures of horror her faith had already outlined? Marcantonio had taken
in all their dread meaning in rapid glances. How could she believe those
terrible things he had seen in her eyes--those terrible, terrible
things!

Nay, how should she not believe them? And how implicitly she must have
believed them to have endured so much in hope of averting this doom!

"Marina! Carina!" his heart went out to her in a great wail of pity; a
woman--so tender, so young--kneeling at night in her chapel, alone with
the vision of the horror she was praying to avert; bearing the fasting
and the penance and the weakness, all alone, in the hope that God would
be merciful; gathering up her failing strength so bravely for that
thankless scene in the Senate. And he, her husband, who had never meant
that his love should fail her, could have spared her all this pain by a
little comprehension! Could she ever forgive him? And would she
understand some day? Might he reason it all out lovingly with her when
her strength came back to her--"For baby's sake!" that sweet, womanly,
natural plea which he had disregarded?

"Signor Santorio," he moaned, "if I might but reason with her, I might
cure her!"

"Nay," said Santorio, "not yet; the shadow hath not left her eyes. Let
her forget."

She had been growing stronger, they said, doing quite passively the
things they asked of her toward her restoration; she recognized them
all, but she expressed neither wish nor emotion, lying chiefly with
closed eyes in the cavernous depths of the great invalid chair where
they laid her each day, yet responding by some movement if they called
her name--rarely with any words; nothing roused her from that mood of
unbroken brooding.

"She will not forget," the great Santorio said in despair. "We must try
to rouse her. Let her child be brought."

The ghost of a smile flitted for an instant about her pale lips and over
the shadowy horror in her eyes, as Marcantonio leaned over her with
their boy in his arms. "Carina," he cried imploringly, "our little one
needeth thee!"

She half-opened her arms, but this wraith of the mother, he remembered,
frightened the child, who clung sobbing to his father.

Marina fell back with a cry of grief, struggling for the words which
came slowly--her first connected speech since her illness. "It is the
curse! It parts even mothers and children!"

A strange strength seemed to have come to her; a sudden light gleamed in
her eyes; she turned from one to the other, as if seeking some one in
authority to answer her question, and fixed upon Santorio's as the
strongest face.

"The official acts of a Pope are infallible?" she questioned, with
feverish insistence, after the first futile attempt to speak. "The Holy
Father who succeeds him may not undo his acts of mercy?"

"Yes, yes, it is true," Santorio assented, waiting eagerly for the
sequence.

A little color had crept into her cheeks; her hands were burning; they
grasped the physician's arm like a vise; the change was alarming.

"The edict cannot hurt my baby! Santissima Maria, thou hast saved him!"
she cried. "For he hath the special blessing of his Holiness Pope
Clement, and our Holy Father cannot reach him with this curse of
Venice!"

"We cannot keep her mind from it," said Santorio, aside to Marcantonio;
"it is essential to calm it with the right view--no argument, it might
induce the most dangerous excitement. Send for some bishop or theologian
who takes the right view; let him present it as a fact, and with
authority; her life depends upon it."

He leaned down to his patient in deep commiseration to tell her that all
was well--that Venice was under no ban, that God's blessing still
shielded her churches and her children; but she raised her eyes steadily
to his, and the strength of the belief, which he saw clearly written
within them, filled him with awe and hushed his speech. How was it
possible to make her understand!

"Nay," said Marina faintly, still holding him with her sad, solemn eyes,
"do not speak. Since Fra Francesco comes no more there is but one who
speaketh truth to me. It is the vision of my beautiful Mater Dolorosa of
San Donato, which leaveth me not."

There was a stir in the depths of the streets below--a noise of the
populace coming nearer, following along the banks of the Canal Grande,
as if the cause of their excitement were in some hurried movement on
its placid waters; the shouts and jeers of the strident voices were
broken by authoritative commands of the Signori della Notte--the
officers of police--and the tramp of their guards failing to create
order; and above the hubbub rose the cry, distinctly repeated again and
again--the cry of an angry populace, "Ande in malora! Ande in malora!"
("Curses go with you!")



XXII

Even Giustinian Giustiniani came and went heavily, asking for the latest
change before he returned to the Senate Chamber, and carrying with him
always a vision of that white, pleading face which had so wrought upon
his anger when he had seen it luminous with her hope for Venice. But now
his anger was transferred to her confessor who had bewitched her, to all
those Roman prelates who had paid her court--a mere child, not able to
defend herself nor to understand, killing herself for a question beyond
her! And Marcantonio, for love of her, useless and unmanned! It was more
than his senatorial pride could endure to find himself powerless under
such complications. To appease his wrath he denounced Fra Francesco
through the Bocca di Leone, but when the friar was sought for, by order
of the Ten, he was not found. Fra Paolo was appealed to, for he was the
friend of the gentle confessor; but he had not known his plans. "If his
conscience held him not, it was well for him to flee," he said, "and
best for Venice."

But when Fra Paolo was alone in his cell, which, in those days of
greatness, he would not exchange for quarters at the Ducal Palace though
the Senate pleaded, the memory of a confidential talk held since this
quarrel with Rome began brought a hint of the reason for this sudden
flight.

He was tender of conscience and strong of faith, this good Fra
Francesco; always sad, but never stern toward Fra Paolo's failure to
hold a belief implicit as his own in some doctrines of his beloved
Church which he held to be vital. Yet his reverence for Fra Paolo's
great knowledge and holy life made him unwilling to criticize where he
unconsciously questioned. It was the severest test of friendship to keep
his faith and affectionate devotion in one who was taking so prominent a
part in a movement opposing papal authority; but sometimes, when Fra
Paolo had uttered many things he would not have tolerated in any other
priest, Fra Francesco said only to himself, in great sadness, "It is God
who maketh men different; we do not know the why!"

The gentle friar sometimes wondered in himself that he could not openly
say to Fra Paolo when they met, after matins, the many things which had
lain hot in his heart through the night--for how _could_ it be right to
oppose the supreme authority? But when the placid face of his friend met
his, bathed in the fresh benediction of his altar service--new each
morning and never omitted--he forgot the horror with which he had been
reasoning that Fra Paolo was hastening the curse upon Venice.

But if Fra Paolo derived no added _finesse_ for his masterful thought
from the confidences he so often unconsciously invited from this
lifelong friend, his faith in the sincerity and spiritual depth of this
brother friar who, out of love for him, listened to much that pained
him, taught him to value at its highest this opportunity of the closest
scrutiny of his own motives, as he noted the impression of their talk on
a nature as sincere and spiritual as it was transparent.

But that night, when they had passed from the cloister into Fra Paolo's
study-cell, continuing as they walked the train of thought they had been
discussing, his listener soon became so distrait that Fra Paolo, who was
singularly conscious of unspoken moods, dropped the problem he was
unfolding and laid his hand upon his shoulder with the rare tenderness
expressed only where he hoped that he might serve.

"We were speaking of weighty matter and thy thoughts are not with me.
Tell me thy trouble."

"It is a question of responsibility--the burden of the confessional,"
Fra Francesco answered simply.

Fra Paolo drew back his hand, and his tone was a shade less tender.

"Of all that hath been reposed in thee under that sacred seal thou must
bear the burden alone."

"My brother, dost thou think I can forget my vow?" Fra Francesco
exclaimed, reproachfully. "I spake not of that which hath been reposed
in me, but of my duty growing out of that sacred office. It was for this
I wanted counsel, and I had sought thee before to pray thee to confess
me; but I know thy views and I ask thee not."

"Yet as brothers of one holy order thou mayest confide in me, if
perchance it may bring thee comfort. For us of the Servi it is our duty
of service."

Fra Francesco sat for a moment in silence. "Life is heavy," he said
slowly, "and hard to interpret. Yet I seem to feel that thou wilt
understand, though it be in the very matter of our difference. There is
one--highly placed and noble in spirit, and to the Church a most devoted
daughter--who cometh to me for teaching in this matter of the interdict.
She asketh of me all its meaning--what it shall bring to Venice?"

"Thou tell her, then, it shall bring naught. For if it be pronounced it
will be unjustly, and without due cause."

"Nay, Paolo, my brother; it is written in the nineteenth maxim of the
'Dictatus Papae' 'That none may judge the Pope.'"

"My brother, who gave thee thy conscience and thine intellect?" Fra
Paolo questioned sternly. "And hath He who gave them thee so taught thee
to yield them that it should be as if thou had'st not these gifts which,
verily, distinguish man from the animals--to whom instinct sufficeth?
Yet, if thou would'st have answer from one of our own casuists in whom
thou dost place thy trust, the Cardinal Bellarmino, in his second book
on the Roman Pontiffs, will teach thee that without prejudice to this
maxim of Gregory thou mayest refuse obedience to a command extending
beyond the jurisdiction of him who commands; as Gaetano in his first
treatise on the 'Power of the Pope,' will also tell thee. For the peace
of thine own mind, my brother, I would I might make thee understand!"

"Nay," answered Fra Francesco, not less earnestly. "Peace for him who
hath faith cometh not with one intellectual solution, nor another; but
with calm purpose to do the right, however it may be revealed."

"Which, as thou knowest, Francesco, Venice seeketh--and naught else. It
is a matter of law in which thou hast made no studies, and therefore
hard for thee. Now must I to the Council Chamber, but later I would
willingly show thee all the argument. But of this be sure. The Republic
will not offend against the liberty of the Holy Church; but she will
protect her own."

"Fearest thou not, dear friend," Fra Francesco questioned, greatly
troubled, "that thou mayest lead Venice o'erlightly to esteem this vow
of obedience which every loyal son of the Church oweth to the Holy
Father? My heart is sore for thee. I see not the matter as thou would'st
have me."

"Nay," said Fra Paolo quietly, "to each one his burden! If thy
conscience bears not out my teaching, thou art free from it. I interpret
the law by the grace which God hath given me; I, also, being free from
sin therein, if my understanding be not equal to the tasks wherein I
seem to feel God's guidance."

"Yet tell me, I pray thee, Paolo mio, and be not displeased by mine
insistence,--perchance it may help me to comprehend this mystery,--how
knowest thou the limit beyond which one may without sin, judge that the
Holy Father shall not command obedience of the sons of the Church?"

"I do not say, when it conflicts with that which is in itself against
the law of God," Fra Paolo answered him, "this limitation thou also
would'st admit; yet it may well-nigh seem to thee a blasphemy to suppose
so strange a case, though many of the early fathers do provide against
it. But, to take another case, when a command of the Sovereign Pontiff
doth conflict with the rule of the Prince in his realm, see'st thou not
what confusion should come if the Pope may revoke the laws of princes
and replace them by his own in the temporal affairs of their dominions?
And if it belong to his Holiness to judge which laws shall be revoked
and what may be legislated to replace the old laws, ultimately but one
power should everywhere reign--and that an ecclesiastical power. The
matter is simple."

Fra Paolo's searching gaze noted the flush of feeling in the face of his
friend, which was his only response.

"And thus will the Senate vote when the question shall come before
them?" Fra Francesco had asked, after a pause; for this conversation had
taken place in the earlier days of the struggle, while in many quarters
opinions were forming.

"There can be no accurate recital of the manner of a happening before it
hath taken place," the Teologo Consultore replied so placidly that his
tone conveyed as little reproach as information; yet Fra Francesco could
not again have put his question in any form.

Still he lingered, as if something more must be spoken, although Fra
Paolo had already sent to summon his secretary. "I also," he said,
asserting himself, with an effort which was always painful to his gentle
soul, "I also would be faithful to my conscience and my vow; that which
I believe--I can teach no other."

"More can one not ask of thee," Fra Paolo answered, suddenly unbending
from the stilted mood of his last words. "By the light that is given him
must each man choose his path."

"If," said Fra Francesco, speaking sorrowfully, "the blessed law of
silence were added to our vow, how would it save a man perplexity and
trouble! For that which one believeth must color his speech, though he
would fain speak little. Thy light is larger than mine own--I know it to
be so--and yet to me it bringeth no vision. I would it had been given us
to see and teach alike!"

"In this matter of the confessional," said Fra Paolo, returning and
speaking low, "if but thou didst believe with me that, _as a sacrament_,
it is oftenest unwise and best left unpractised, thy difficulties might
be fewer."

"Nay, Paolo mio, tempt me not. I would I might believe it, but my
conscience agreeth to my vow."

"As thou believest, so do; 'for whatsoever is not of faith is sin,'"
said Fra Paolo solemnly. "That was a strong word spoken of doctrine to
guard the conscience. I would I might scatter all the noble words of
that noble Apostle Paul among the people and the priests, in our own
tongue!"

"Sometimes thou seemest so like a rebel I know not why I come to thee in
trouble"--Fra Francesco looked at him with grieving eyes--"except that
in thine heart thou art indeed true."

"So help me God--it is my prayer!" Fra Paolo answered. "And for thee and
me alike, however we may differ, there is this other helpful word in
that same blessed book which they will not let the starving people
share--'God is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above that
ye are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape,
that ye may be able to bear it.' May God be with thee!"

"And Christ and the Holy Mother have thee in their keeping!" Fra
Francesco answered, with a yearning look in his loving face, in a tone
that lingered on the sweet word "mother" and almost seemed to hint of an
omission, as they clasped hands and parted.

This was the last time they had had speech together; but on the evening
of the day when Venice had declared her loyalty to her Prince by
unanimous vote, there was much animated talk of the matter in the
refectory. Fra Francesco had joined the group and listened silently. But
as the call to _compline_ rang through the cloisters and the friars
scattered, he had turned his face to Fra Paolo, who read thereon a very
passion of love, reproach, and pain which he could not forget. "When the
duties of the Council press me less," he thought, "I will seek him out
and reason with him."

But after that night the gentle friar was seen no more in Venice, and
inquiry failed to develop a reason for his flight. They missed him in
the Servi, where already they were beginning to gather up the pale
happenings of his convent life with the kindly recollection which tinged
them with a thread of romance, as his brothers of the order rehearsed
them in the cloistered ways where he would come no more; for to him some
ministry of beauty had always been assigned. The vines drooped for his
tending, they said; and the pet stork who wandered in the close
languished for his hand to feed the dainty morsel, and for his voice in
that indulgent teasing which had provoked its proudest preening.

But this, perhaps, was only fancy, or their way of recognizing a certain
grace they missed. But of the reason of his going, which most of them
connected in some way with this movement in Venice over which he had
often grieved, there was no open recognition among them--partly because
they feared that ubiquitous ear of the Senate, which penetrated unseen
through many closed doorways, partly because they realized how strange
it was that their own sympathies had not confessed his view of right.

Furtively, too, the friars watched Fra Paolo; for the adoration of the
gentle Fra Francesco for this idol of their order, from the day when
they had entered the convent as boys together, had formed a cloister
idyl--none the less that the response of the graver friar was not
equally demonstrative, though it was felt to be true; for it was a
marvel that two such opposite natures should hold so closely together
and that Fra Francesco, for all his gentleness, should apparently retain
opinions uninfluenced by the power and learning which all others
recognized.

Yet, from those early days, Fra Francesco had abated nothing of his
scrupulous and loving conservatism; never had he questioned a rule, nor
chosen the least, instead of the most, permitted in an act of humility;
and after his Church, the Madonna, and his patron saint, he expended the
devotion of his nature upon his friend with a just estimate of his power
and daring which filled his soul with anxious happiness. Often, in
those earlier days, when the echoes of Fra Paolo's triumphs had
penetrated to the refectory of the Servi, Fra Francesco had felt a
strange premonition which had kept him long on his knees before the
altar in the chapel. "Shield him, O Holy Mother, from danger," he had
prayed, "nor let him wander from the lowly path of obedience for pride
of that which thou permittest him to know!" And his day-dream of earthly
happiness was the spending of his friend's great gifts in the service of
the Holy Church, wherein he should ascend from honor to honor, enlarging
her borders and strengthening her rule, attaining at last to the supreme
position.

Weeks after Fra Francesco had disappeared from the convent a letter was
brought by the gastaldo of Nicolotti, Piero Salin, who, in spite of
opposition among the brothers, persisted in delivering it with his own
hand, though it was rare that any one outside his usual circle was
permitted to hold an interview with Fra Paolo; but Piero's masterful
ways had not left him, and when he willed to do a thing the wills of
others counted little. It was a pity--because the missive was
mysterious, crumpled with long carrying--and if a trusty member of their
own community had delivered it to Fra Paolo in his cell, there might
have been some revelation!

But there was none. Fra Paolo was only a little more grave and silent
than of wont; but often now he was so absorbed in government matters
that he took less part in the social life of the Servi.

So Piero, laughing at the ease with which he had carried his point for
nothing but the asking,--and it had to be done, since he had promised
Marina,--had his interview alone with Fra Paolo, and passed easily
through the group of disappointed friars, under those exquisitely
wrought arcades to his gondola, thanking them with nonchalance and
pressing them to avail themselves more often of the eager service of his
barcarioli, that the blessing of the Madonna might be upon their
traghetti, to the discomfiture of their rivals the Castellani. For Piero
was a faithful gastaldo and lost no opportunity of seeking favor for the
faction he represented, and there was a certain grace in his proffer,
since priests and friars paid no fares.

Fra Paolo left alone read the message which held the tragedy of a life.

"I could not stay in Venice, dear friend of my whole life, to see thee
guide our country into such sad error; for so to my heart it
seemeth--may God help us both!

"And when there was no longer hope that my little word might prevail to
hold any in that way which alone seemeth to me right--and thou, with thy
great gifts, art using them for State and not for Church, Paolo mio, not
for our Holy Church--I could not stay, because I love thee! I must have
been ever chiding thee had I remained, as if God had made me for no use
but to be a thorn in thy flesh--which I could not believe.

"But because He hath made thee great, He hath given thee thy conscience
for thy guide, as mine to me; which holdeth me from grief over-much, for
I know thee to be true and great.

"Therefore for peace, and not for gladness, have I left thee; for
reverence to the Holy Father, and for the better keeping of all my vows.

"If perchance, at the feet of the Holy Father, my prayers and penances
might, by miracle, avail to turn his wrath from Venice--it could not
hurt thee!

"Yet because of this wish, which only holdeth life in me,--so sore is my
heart at leaving Venice and thee and our dear home of the Servi,--well I
know that never more mine eyes shall see these places of my love--and
thee, my friend!

"If we learn by the way of pain, after this life God will forgive our
errors!

"FRANCESCO, thy brother of the Servi."



XXIII

As the cry of the populace rang down the Canal Grande, following the
retreating ranks of the Jesuits, who, bound by their greater vows to
Rome, had remained steadfast and refused obedience to the Senate's
mandate, the Lady Marina, roused by the excitement which they dreaded,
had started to her feet with a marvelous return of her former mental
power and a fullness of comprehension which sought for no explanations.
She stood for a moment panting with hot, unspoken speech, turning from
one to another, and then, with a sudden, great effort, repressed the
words she would have spoken, asking quietly, after a pause in which no
reference had been made to the expulsion of the confraternities:

"Which of the orders have gone? What more hath happened that I know
not?"

"Nay, the orders of the monks and of the friars have chiefly been
faithful to Venice," they told her, "and all is well. This society,
which for long hath been cause of much disorder in our Republic, it is
well that it leave Venice in peace."

She answered nothing, weighing their words silently. "Is it because they
are faithful to their vows, and to their Church?" she asked at length,
in quiet irony.

"Nay, but because they teach disobedience to princes and would thus
undermine the law of the land," Marcantonio hastened to explain,
grateful that she could at length discuss the question.
"Carina,--blessed be San Marco,--thou art like thyself! We will talk
together; we will make all clear to thee; thou shalt grieve no more,
carinissima!"

She put up her hand and touched his cheek with an answering caress--the
first through all these weary days. "I shall get well, Marco mio," she
said, with a sudden conviction that surprised them; but still there was
no smile in her eyes, and their hearts were sad, though the change that
had come over her was so extraordinary that they hoped much from the
explanation which the great Santorio had authorized.

But for whom should they send in this moment, when life and death hung
in the balance, to speak that authoritative word.

The Bishop of Aquileia, first and greatest of the Venetian bishops, had
incurred the displeasure of the Senate for refusing to perform the
duties of his office while the Republic remained under that fulminated
but unacknowledged censure, and a new prelate, of opinions approved by
the Most Serene Republic, sat in the vacated see. The Bishop of Vicenza
had likewise signified his sympathy with the Holy See; and in Brescia
their wandering prelate had scarcely yet received that strengthening
monition of the watching Senate which was to recall him from his
hiding-place and hold him steadfast in his cathedral service.

And for the Patriarch Vendramin, who had been summoned to Rome to
receive the benediction of the Supreme Pontiff, but had been forbidden
by the Senate to leave the Venetian domains, this episode, which was a
feature of the struggle known to the whole of Venice, placed him so
openly on the side of the Republic that it forbade his ministry with the
Lady Marina.

But there was one so jealously guarded from all interruption and fatigue
that strangers who came from far to see him were refused audience, by
order of the Senate, or were received for a few moments only in some
protected chamber of the Ducal Palace; for the springs of government
moved at his touch, the matters which occupied him were weighty, and for
these they would spare his strength. Yet again the Senate signified a
rare consideration for the Ca' Giustiniani by permitting the attendance
of their Teologo Consultore in the palazzo of the Lady Marina; for who
so well could minister to her diseased mind as he who had unanswerably
placed the question in its true light before all the Councils of the
Republic?

She stood with bowed head and clasped hands as he approached her, her
hair falling unbound, as in her maiden days, over the simply white robe
which she had preferred in her illness, discarding all her jewels and
all emblems of her state--pale as a vision, like a sad dream of the
beautiful Madonna del Sorriso which the Veronese had painted for that
altar of the Servi at which, each morning, Fra Paolo still dutifully
ministered.

"Peace be with thee and to thine house, my daughter," said the Padre
Maestro Paolo, spreading out his hands in priestly salutation as he
entered the oratory of the palazzo Giustiniani, where the Lady Marina
awaited him.

She had desired that the interview should take place in this chapel,
which she had not visited since her illness. A faint odor of desolation
stole through the dimness of the place to meet him--a breath from the
withered rose-petals which had dropped from the golden vases upon the
splendid embroidered altar-cloth and mingled with the dust of those many
days which had remained guiltless of Mass or service; the altar candles
were unlighted; the censer had lost its halo of mystic smoke.

"It were fitter to my mood, most Reverend Father, wert thou to scatter
penitential ashes before a desecrated altar which may send no incense of
praise to heaven."

"Nay, my daughter; love and faith may still minister, and God, the
Unchangeable, accept that service from every altar in Venice! 'The
sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit,' it is written in the Holy Book
which God hath granted for the comfort of His people. May peace indeed
bring thee its benediction--the more that thy need is great."

Was there some strange power of resistance in that fragile, drooping
figure which made it difficult to rehearse the argument for Venice with
his accustomed mastery?

She listened silently while the learned Counsellor patiently explained
that the sentence of Rome was unjust, therefore not incurred and not to
be observed by priests nor people; wherefore it was the duty of the
Prince to prevent its execution--of the Prince who, more than any
private citizen, is bound to fear God, to be zealous in the faith and
reverent toward the priests who are permitted to stand in the place of
Christ for the enforcement of his teaching only; but it is also the more
the duty of the Prince to eschew hypocrisy and superstition, to preserve
his own dignity, and maintain his state in the exercise of the true
religion.

But there was no acquiescence in her eyes.

"I thank thee, most Reverend Father, for thy patient teaching," she
said; "but I lack the learning to make it helpful. Fra Francesco was
more simple, and he hath taught me by no arguments; but he, for the
exercise of the true religion, hath found it needful to quit Venice, and
doth make his pilgrimage to Rome, barefooted, that he may pray the Holy
Father, of his grace, to lift this curse from our people."

"There is that in her face which maketh argument useless," Fra Paolo
said low to his friend Santorio, for he was himself no mean physician,
having contributed discoveries of utmost importance to the medical
science, "and there is a physical weakness combined with this mental
assertiveness which doth make it a danger to oppose her beliefs. Yet I
would I might comfort her, for her soul is tortured."

"It must be that thou shalt convince her!" Santorio pleaded with him.

Thus urged, Fra Paolo spoke again, in a tone that pity rendered
strangely near to tenderness. "I would not weary thee, my daughter,
having spoken the truth which I would fain have thee embrace for thine
own healing. Only this would I remind thee--that none may be excluded
from the Holy Catholic Church if he be not first excluded by his own
demerits from Divine Grace."

She answered nothing, but there was an unspoken argument in her face.

"See'st thou not that those terrors which thou dost fear shall not come
upon Venice, since she hath not sinned? It is this which, for thy peace,
we would have thee comprehend."

"My Father, there is but one whose teaching fitteth my reasoning," she
answered resolutely, "and he hath fled from Venice that he may be free
to believe and to practise his religion as our Holy Church doth require,
and to plead against our doom, where prayer may be heard, unhindered by
the cloud which keepeth us in Venice from God's favor. He, being a holy
man, hath taught me that the law of obedience to the Supreme Head of the
Church may not be transgressed--that our doom cometh not undeserved--and
my whole heart is sick with fear!"

"There is but One to whom is owed this supreme and inalterable
obedience, my daughter; we do not differ in our beliefs; yield it always
to him, most reverently and unreservedly," Fra Paolo answered solemnly.
"But upon this earth, it hath been taught us by our Lord himself, 'there
is none good--nay, not one.' The Head of the Church of God is God
himself, the only infallible and just. Thinkest thou that He would have
us obey a command conceived in error, with intention to exclude from
every benefit of our Holy Church, in the hour when they most need divine
comfort and protection, those who would faithfully do him service? Thus
read we not the love and mercy of our Heavenly Father!"

"Most Reverend Father," she cried, clasping her hands in extremity.
"How shall a weak, untaught woman reason with the Counsellor of Venice!
I know not where the words are written--but, somewhere, Fra Francesco
hath taught me, yet his soul is loving--there is a thought of the
vengeance of God, and it is terrible! Day and night there is no other
vision in my soul but this--of the _vengeance of God_, poured out upon
the disobedient. For this the blessed Mater Dolorosa of San Donato
weepeth ceaselessly. Love is for those who serve him; but
vengeance--here and hereafter--for those who disobey. Oh, my Father! for
every human soul in Venice--the helpless women, who have no power but
prayer, which is but insult while God's face is hidden--the little
children who have done no harm--Madre Beatissima, how can we bear it!"

"Nay, nay, my daughter, for our Father is righteous and merciful.
'Vengeance is mine,' he saith; '_I_ will repay.' He giveth no man charge
to bring his wrath upon us. He hath invested no human power with a
supremacy beyond that which abideth in every loving and faithful soul,
as to the things of the conscience. Thou, with thy love and faith and
pain, art at this moment very near to Him; be comforted, and cease not
to believe that He counteth all thy tears, and that thy prayers are dear
to Him."

"My Father," she confessed sadly, "it is a part of the shadow that it
hides my faith; night and day, with fast and penance, have I not ceased
to pray for Venice--and the answer hath been denied me. I could seek for
death, but for the horror that cometh after, at the Madonna dell'
Orto--the Tintoret--and that which the Michelangelo hath seen in
vision--Oh, my God!"

"My child, it is not God who faileth thee in answer to thy prayer; and
love and faith are yet strong and beautiful within thy soul; only a
human weakness is upon thee which cloudeth thy human reason, and for
this thy soul is dark. For reason, also, is of God's gift--lower than
faith and love, yet a very needful part of man while God leaveth him in
his human habitation. There hath come an answer to the prayer, though
thou see'st it not."

"Is it written, my father, in the cruel words of the interdict?" she
gasped.

"She is tortured out of reverence," Santorio exclaimed apart, and would
have hushed her.

But Fra Paolo, overhearing, said gently:

"For this I came, to hearken all thy trouble, if perchance I might give
thee rest. The answer to thy prayer is not written in those unjust
words. For they--mark well, it is here that thy reason faileth thee--for
they were uttered by a human will, striving to coerce obedience in a
matter beyond its province. The power which God hath given to priests
and princes is not arbitrary, but to be regulated by the law of God;
neither is obedience toward those in authority to be stolid and blind,
but yielded only when the command is within this divine law. The Holy
Father hath no power to command disobedience to the Prince in his
rightful realm,--which thus he seeketh to do."

She spread out her hands before her and half-turned away her head, as if
in deprecation of some sacrilege, growing very white.

"Is _this_ the answer, my Father?"

"It is the reason for the answer which hath come by unanimous conviction
into the soul of every man of the ruling body of Venice, and hath been
voiced by each, in his vote, with a fullness of consent which is of
God's sending. Thus are they nerved to declare the censure void--and
Venice is unharmed."

"Madre Beatissima! _thus_ hast thou answered me?"

"My daughter, may it not comfort thee to know that that which thou, in
faith and love, hast prayed for Venice--that in this struggle she should
hold God's favor unharmed--hath come to her, though the manner of the
benefit accord not with the manner of the grace which thou hast asked?"

"If my reason is clouded with terror," she said very slowly, as if her
strength were spent, "God hath vouchsafed me no other reason--but only
that which trembles at this broken law of obedience. My Father--I pray
thee--I am very weary----"



XXIV

The nuncio had declared that Venice no longer required his services and
had withdrawn, with every ceremony of punctilious and honorable
dismissal, to Rome, from whence the Venetian ambassador presently went
forth _without_ the customary compliments.

But if diplomatic relations were severed between Rome and Venice, there
were still chances for private communication which sometimes cast a
curious light upon the subject under discussion, but which made no
change in that irreproachable suavity of exterior or that invincibility
of purpose with which the Venetians held in check any attempt at
disaffection through Roman agency, or averted any schismatic movement
within their own dependencies.

To Sarpi, the Chief Counsellor, had been committed the censorship of the
press; and the supervision of those very papers which had been written
by friends of the Republic to scatter broadcast in defense of its
rights, formed not the least delicate part of his task. For the
government demanded that they should maintain a fine reserve in method,
and in spite of examples to the contrary freely given by their
opponents, would tolerate neither heresy nor coarseness. Every detail of
this world-renowned quarrel was conducted on the part of Venice with an
irreproachable dignity and diplomacy that raised it to the height of a
negotiation of State, and it formed no part of the policy of the
Republic to tolerate any disbelief in her own loyalty; the Venetians
should stand before the world as faithful sons of the Church, bearing
unmerited sentence of excommunication.

Then Rome, to make an end of the brilliant flow of pamphlets from
Sarpi's pen, would have lured him from Venice with flattering promises
of churchly preferment. "Nay," said he, "here lieth my duty; and my work
hath not deserved honest favor from a Pope who interpreteth the law with
other eyes than mine."

Meanwhile the schemes of the enemy were tireless for obtaining secret
influence within Venetian borders. Now it was a barefooted friar to be
watched for at Mantua, coming with powers plenipotentiary from his
Holiness over all the prelates of the rebellious realm; or it might be
this same friar, in lay disguise, still armed with those ghostly and
secret powers, for whom the trusted servants of Venice were to be on
guard. Or there were disaffected brothers, who had left their convents
and were roaming through the land inciting to rebellion, to whom it was
needful to teach the value of quiet, however summary the process. But
Venice, by a broad training in intrigue and cunning, joined to her
mastery of the finer principles of statesmanship, still remained
mistress of the springs of action and wore her outward dignity, and the
disappointments were for her adversaries. But this training was a costly
one, for it put a prize on daring, confused the colors of right, and
invariably laureled success--if it did no more specific harm to the
State.

Piero Salin had been secretly summoned by the Ten and given an
indefinite leave of absence from Venice, together with a large
discretionary power in the direction of his wanderings, with certain
other passes and perquisites which bespoke a curious confidence in one
who had been known for a successful and much dreaded bandit gondolier.
But if the government in its complicated labors had need of tools of
various tempers, it had also the wisdom to discern legitimate uses for
certain wild and lawless spirits when they were, like Piero, full of
daring and resource.

In the days when they had been dwellers under the same roof Piero had
never been able to disregard Marina's will, often as he had chafed under
the necessity of yielding to it; and now, since she was Lady of the
Giustiniani, it had not been otherwise in the rare instances when it had
pleased her to require anything of him. Yet it would have been
incongruous to charge Piero with over-sensitiveness on the side of
chivalry, though Marina's power over him was still as great as in those
old days when, being unable to shake himself free from her influence, he
had wished to marry her to make it less.

Piero was not introspective, but he doubtless knew that his ruling
passion was to achieve whatever purpose he might choose to set himself.
The Nicolotti knew it well when, a few months before, they had
unanimously elected him to rule over them--as their chief officers had
realized it when they had nominated him, without a dissenting voice, to
this position of gastaldo grande--a position of great honor fully
recognized by the government. So the rival faction of the Castellani
bore marvelous testimony to his mastery when they went over in
surprising numbers from along the _Giudecca_, and underwent the strange
ceremonial of baptism into the opposition party.

Yet when the rival factions of the people had thus conspired to make him
their chief it was Marina who had alone induced him to accept the honor.
To all his objections her answer had been ready:

"Nay, Piero, it is meet for thee; they need one strong and brave, of
whom they stand in dread, who knoweth their ways--"

"As much bad as good," Piero had interposed frankly, and not without
asseverations well known to gondoliers.

"It is well said," she had answered, with the comprehension born of her
intimate knowledge of the class; "and to keep them in order--verily,
none but thou canst do it."

Piero gave an expressive shrug, having had enough of compliment. "_En
avanti--c'e altro_!" he said, laughing. "The taxes are heavy, and their
Excellencies the tax-gatherers have less patience than the poor
gondoliers bring of _zecchini_ to the purse of the Nicolotti. But the
gastaldo hath as little liberty of delay, as their Excellencies leave
him to decline the burden--I might better make shipwreck in the Canale
Orfano."

It was in this canal that the victims of the Inquisition mysteriously
disappeared, and Marina had repressed a shudder while she answered,
"Thou wilt come to me, Piero, if the purse of the Nicolotti weighs
little; thou shalt not fail, for this, of wearing the honor of gastaldo
grande.

"Nay," she had added, quickly disposing of his awkward attempts at
thanks, "think not of it again; it is for my pleasure to see thee great
among the people, for I also and my father are of them. It is this that
I have always wished for thee."

So, chiefly because it had been Marina's will, Piero had waived his
unwillingness and become the central figure in the imposing ceremony of
the election of the gastaldo grande of the Nicolotti, who were, indeed,
almost nobles by antiquity and prestige, not only claiming among
themselves the coveted title of _nobili_, but, under the sanction of the
government, electing their gastaldo with a degree of ceremonial granted
only to high officials, and prescribed in very ancient books of the laws
of the traghetti. One of the ducal secretaries, having received official
notice of the vacancy of the office carried in person before the Senate
by the oldest man of the Nicolotti, came, in purple state, to preside
over the election when the bell of San Nicolo had tolled forth the
call--taking his seat among the twelve electoral presidents who, already
chosen by the people, awaited him, having sworn the inevitable oath of
impartiality and fealty to the Republic; they sat behind locked doors
until the election was brought to a close--in that solemn semblance of a
ducal election which could not fail to impress the people--with
complicated, time-using ballotings, and comings and goings of candidates
from adjoining chambers to express their views of the responsibilities
of the office, or to defend themselves against the freely invited
attacks of opponents or malcontents.

And for once Piero had uttered opinions, however clumsily, upon
"government" and "reform" from the pulpit of San Nicolo, in the
dignified and interested presence of a ducal secretary, the bancali, and
the disconcerting throng of gondoliers who were intolerant of speeches
and impatient for their vote; and he had retired shamefacedly, like an
awkward boy, while his jejune remarks were elaborately discussed by the
judges. And because his views--if he had any--had not been
over-luminously set forth in this his maiden oration, a party of zealous
advocates had nearly caused an uproar by their irrepressible shout of
"Non c'e da parlar', ma da fare!" which was, in truth, too sure an
indication of the temper of the people to be ignored. "We do not want
talking--but doing!"

And for once he had experienced a curious sensation which cowardly men
call "fear," but for which Piero had neither name nor tolerance, when
all the people who had been worrying him led him in triumph to the altar
and forced him down on his stubborn knees to take a solemn oath of
allegiance, his great bronzed hand, all unaccustomed to restraint,
resting meanwhile in the slippery silken clasp of the ducal secretary.

Here also had the gastaldo received, from those same patrician hands,
the unfurled banner of the Nicolotti, with the sacramental words:

"We consign to you the standard of San Nicolo, in the name of the Most
Serene Prince and as proof that you are the chief gastaldo and head of
the people of San Nicolo and San Raffaele."

And after that had come freedom of breath, with the Te Deum, without
which no ceremonial was ever complete in Venice, chanted by all those
full-throated gondoliers--a jubilant chorus of men's voices, ringing the
more heartily through the church for those unwonted hours of repression.

But when the doors had at last been thrown wide to the sunshine and the
babel of life which rose from the eager, thronging populace who had no
right of entrance on this solemn occasion--men who had no vote, women
and children who had all their lives been Nicolotti of the Nicolotti--a
Venetian must indeed have been stolid to feel no thrill of pride as the
procession, with great pomp, passed out of the church to a chorus of
bells and cannon and shouts of the people, proclaiming him their chosen
chief.

Piero Salin was a splendid specimen of the people--tall,
broad-shouldered, gifted by nature and trained by wind and wave to the
very perfection of his craft; positive, nonchalant, and masterful;
affable when not thwarted; of fewer words than most Venetians; an adept
at all the intricacies of gondolier intrigue, and fitted by intimate
knowledge to circumvent the _tosi_. Moreover, he was in favor with the
government, a crowning grace to other qualities not valueless in one of
this commanding position.

No wonder that the enthusiasm of the populace was wild enough to bring
the frankest delight to his handsome sun-bronzed face as they rushed
upon him in a frenzy of appreciation and bore him aloft on their
shoulders around the Piazza San Nicolo, almost dizzied with their haste
and the smallness of the circle opened to them in the little square by
the throng who pressed eagerly around him to grasp his hand--to wave
their banners, to shout themselves hoarse for the Nicolotti, for San
Nicolo and San Raffaele, for _Piero, gastaldo grande_, for Venezia, for
San Marco, with "Bravi," "Felicitazioni," and every possible childish
demonstration of delight.

Should not the Nicolotti--blessed be the Madonna!--always overcome the
Castellani with Piero at their head, in those party battles on the
bridges which had now grown to be as serious a factor in the lives of
the gondoliers of Venice as they were disturbing to the citizens at
large, and therefore the more to the glory of the combatants?

Was he not their own representative--elected by the very voice of the
people, as in those lost days of their freedom the doges had been? And
did not the rival faction so stand in awe of the new gastaldo that from
the moment of his nomination there had been disaffection in their ranks?

And now, as they shouted around him, many a sturdy red cap tossed his
badge disdainfully into the throng and snatched a black bonnet from the
nearest head to wave it aloft with cries of "the black cap! The
Nicolotti! Viva San Nicolo!"

And again, when Piero essayed to prove himself equal to his honors, his
few words dropped without sound upon the storm of vivas--"We do not want
talking for our gastaldo--but doing!"

Since this happening Piero had been indeed a great man among the
people--a popular idol, with a degree of power difficult to estimate by
one unfamiliar with the customs and traditions of Venice; holding the
key, practically, to all the traghetti of Venice, since even before this
sweeping disaffection of the Castellani the Nicolotti were invariably
acknowledged to be the more powerful faction, so that now it was a
trifling matter to coerce a rival offending traghetto; and gondoliers,
private and public, were, to say the least, courteous toward these
nobles of the Nicolotti, who were dealing with tosi as never before in
the history of Venice.

In truth, but for those unknown _observors_ in secret service to the
terrible Inquisition,--an army sixty thousand strong, one third of the
entire population of Venice,--impressed from nobles, gondoliers,
ecclesiastics, and people of every grade and profession, from every
quarter of the city, and charged to lose nothing of any detail that
might aid the dreaded chiefs of the Inquisition in their silent and
fearful work--the power of Piero would have been virtually limitless.
These three terrible unknown chiefs of the Inquisition were never named
among the people except with bated breath, as "i tre di sopra," _the
three above_, lest some echo should condemn the speakers. But the
unsought favor of the government was as much a check as an assistance to
Piero's schemes, bringing him so frequently into requisition for
official intrigues that he had less opportunity for counterplotting,
while his knowledge of State secrets which he might not compromise, of
the far-reaching vision of Inquisitorial eyes, and of the swift and
relentless execution of those unknown _osservatori_ who had been
unfaithful to their primal duty as spies, made him dare less where
others were concerned than he would have foretold before he had been
admitted to these unexpected official confidences; while for himself he
had absolutely no fears--having but one life to order or to lose, and
caring less for its length than for the freedom of its ruling while it
remained to him.

And still Marina was, as she had always been, the gentlest influence in
his reckless life,--to some slight extent an inspiring one,--steadying
his daring yet generous instincts into a course that was occasionally
nearer to nobility than he could ever have chanced upon without her, yet
never able to instil a higher motive power than came from pleasing her.

It was Piero who had escorted Fra Francesco to the borders of the Roman
dominions, guarding him from pitfalls and discovery until he was free to
undertake his barefooted penitential pilgrimage upon Roman soil; and
from no faith nor sympathy in the gentle friar's views, but only because
he was dear to Marina.

And through Piero's agents, established under threats as terrible as
those of the Ten themselves, had come the news which, from time to time,
he unfolded to her; while the same secret agent brought perhaps a rumor
which the gastaldo grande confided to the Ten, wherewith some convent
plotting was unmasked, or other news so greatly to the keeping of the
peace of the Serene Republic, that Piero might have bought therewith
propitiation for all those sins against it, of which the government was
happily in ignorance. Now it was a hint of a plot in embryo to seize
the arsenal, involving some members of distinction in the households of
resident ambassadors; or word of the whereabouts of that wandering,
barefooted emissary with plenary powers, who had hitherto eluded
Venetian vigilance.

It was Piero also--although he never confessed to it--who, out of
compassion for Marina's priestly proclivities when she lay critically
ill, had made it possible for the Jesuits to remove those coffers of
treasure which, in spite of strictest orders to the contrary,
accompanied them on their flight from Venice; it was not that he took
part against Venice in the quarrel, but that the penalty of exile seemed
to him sufficient, especially as Marina had a weakness for priests; and
he could be generous in his use of power, though a man less daring would
not have risked the freak. But there was a masterful pleasure in
outwitting the Signoria and the Ten, lessened only by the consciousness
that he must keep this triumph to himself, and Piero also knew how to
hold his tongue--for discretion was a needful grace in that strange time
of barbaric lawlessness shrouded in a more than Eastern splendor.

But even Piero sometimes quickened his step as he passed the beautiful
sea facade of the Ducal Palace, whose rose-tinted walls seemed made only
to reflect sunshine; for perchance he guessed the name of that victim
who hung with covered face between the columns, bearing in bold letters
on his breast, by way of warning, the nature of the crime for which he
paid such awful penalty--some crime against the State. "To-day," said
Piero to himself, "it is this poor devil who cried to me to shield him
when I was forced to denounce him to the Signoria; to-morrow, for some
caprice of their Excellencies--it may be Piero Salin!"

But the gastaldo relapsed easily into such philosophy as he knew. "By
the blessed San Marco and San Teodoro themselves!" he was ready to cry,
as he reached his gondola, "there must always be a last 'to-morrow'!"



XXV

Life had begun to move again, with slow, clogged wheels, in the Ca'
Giustiniani since that sudden favorable change had come to the Lady
Marina. Her husband was no longer excused from attendance in the Council
Halls of the Republic, and whether to quicken his interest in the
affairs of the government or because, in due course, the time had come
when a young noble so full of promise should take a prominent place in
her councils, he was now constantly called upon to fill important
offices in transient committees. Certainly there was some strange,
ubiquitous power in that watchful governmental eye; and in the Broglio
it had been whispered that if the young Senator were not held constant
by multiplied honors and responsibilities the home influence might be
fateful to the house of Giustiniani--a house too princely and too
important to Venice to be suffered to tolerate any sympathy with Rome.
Giustinian the elder, being pronounced in his patriotic partizanship,
had replaced the ambassador to his Most Catholic Majesty of Spain, whose
attempts at conciliation were so ludicrously inadequate that a court of
less astute diplomacy than Venice might have been tempted to withdraw
its embassy. Spain and Venice had been stepping through a stately dance,
as it were, decorous and princely,--though scarcely misleading,--an
interminable round of bows and dignified advances leading no whither,
since for a forward step there was a corresponding backward motion to
complete the _chasse_, and all in that gracious circle which flatters
the actor and the onlooker with a pleasurable sense of progress; but the
suspense as to the issue of this minuet was all on the side of Spain,
and Venice had patience to spare for these pretty time-filling paces
which presented such semblance of careless ease to the watching
embassies. England, with an understanding quickened by her own
experience, took a serious interest in the quarrel. But his Most
Christian Majesty of France was foremost among the princes in efforts to
hasten the conciliation of the disputants, and when Henry of France
offered to mediate between the powers, Venice said him not nay. For if
she would take no personal step toward conciliation, she yet held no
code by which the intercession of a monarch might seem to lessen her
dignity; and the coming of so princely an envoy as the Cardinal di
Gioiosa was celebrated with fetes meet to grace the reception of so high
a dignitary of the Church of Rome.

Hence Venice, under the ban, suggested rather a lively tourney in some
field of cloth of gold, than an excommunicated nation in its time of
mourning; there were frequent interchanges of diplomatic
courtesies--receptions to special embassies which had lost nothing of
their punctilious splendor. There had always been time in Venice for
absolute decorum, and now there was not less than usual, since her
conduct had been denounced--though Venice and her prestige were
untarnished and the world was looking on!

Marcantonio, in spite of his deep home anxiety, was becoming more and
more absorbed in the affairs of a government which made such claims upon
him, and for the honor of his house, by all Venetian tradition, he must
give to the full that which was exacted of him. But he worked without
the brilliancy and enthusiasm of a few months past--as a man steadied by
some great sorrow, striving more strenuously to give of his best where
honor is concerned, because he is conscious that the heaviness of his
heart makes all duty irksome.

For Marina, with returning health,--the physicians spoke of her thus
since they had pronounced her out of danger,--had not fully returned to
him; it was less her whiteness and wanness that oppressed him than that
nameless change in the face and eyes which suggested a ceaseless,
passionate suppression of the deep, impassioned self, under the listless
exterior; there was an immeasurable loss in the sweetness of life to
them both, though never since the early days of their love had he been
so tender and patient, so eager to gladden her in little ways. But she
answered his love more often with a mute caress of her hand upon his
cheek than with smiles or words--yet with a touch that lingered, as if
to assure him that her love was not less, though she herself was
changed.

Something terribly real lay between them, of which it seemed better not
to speak, since all his efforts to change her point of view had failed.
It was utterly sad to have her so nearly herself again, and yet so far
from him. Life was hard for this young senator with his multiplied
honors, his wealth, and prestige. Marina had always given impetus to his
life; now it was he who watched and cared for her, while she seemed to
have no will for anything, yet had lost that old charming ingenuousness
which had underlain her power. He had promised himself, out of his new
pathetic yearning when she had begun to improve, that never again should
she know an ungratified wish, yet now he feared that she would give him
no opportunity of granting a request, so apathetic had she grown. But
one day, when he was trying to rouse her to express a desire, she laid
her hand eagerly on his, asking a thing so strange that unconsciously he
started away from her.

"Marco, mio, take me to Rome!"

For a moment, in spite of all that had gone before, the young Senator
was betrayed into a forgetfulness of his tender mood--it was so strange,
this request of a Lady of the Giustiniani, to choose Rome rather than
Venice at a time of contest; but her face and manner and speech were
luminous with hope; she was radiant again, as she had not been for many
months; yet the words escaped from him unintentionally and sternly:

"_To Rome_!"

"Yes, Marco, thou and I and the little one! We should be so happy again
in the palazzo Donatello, where baby came to us."

"Marina, a Giustinian abides by Venice. From the days when every man of
the Ca' Giustiniani--save only the priest, who might not take up
arms--laid down his life before Lepanto, none hath ever forsaken
Venice."

"It is not to forsake our Venice, Marco mio!" she cried, with growing
eagerness, "but to serve her--to plead with the Holy Father that he will
remove the curse and let all the prayers of Venice ascend again to the
Madre Beatissima, who listens no more! It is a service for a Giustinian
to render!"

Her whole soul pleaded in face and gesture, beautiful and compelling; he
felt her old power reasserting itself; he almost groaned aloud as he put
up his hand to shut out this beseeching vision of the wife whom he loved
before all things but honor--lest he, being among the trusted rulers of
his country, should fail to Venice out of the great joy of granting to
Marina the happiness she craved.

Not for an instant did the young Venetian noble question his duty, while
with head averted, lest Marina should guess his struggle, he invoked
that ever-present image of Venetia regnant, which all her children
recognize, to stay him from forgetting it until this temptation were
past and he could be strong again; but now he knew that he was weak from
an irrepressible yearning to clasp Marina in his arms and grant her
heart's desire--at whatever cost; he dared not touch her lest he should
yield.

The moment's silence intensified her eagerness and hope; he felt them
burning in her eyes, and would not meet their prayer again. But she
could not wait, and her hand, fluttering restlessly upon his shoulder,
crept up to touch his cheek, thrilling him unbearably, as if each
sensitive finger-tip repeated her urgency. He must yield if she kept it
there. He snatched her hand to his lips and dropped it quickly, nerving
himself to speak steadily, lest he should betray irresolution--so
covering the tenderness which would have atoned for the positive
refusal.

"Marina, a Venetian may not demean himself to ask forgiveness of the
Holy Father in a matter wherein Venice hath not sinned--but Rome."

"Marco, my beloved, if Venice were mistaken! If thou and I might save
her!"

Her voice broke in a sob of agony, and her husband gathered her in his
arms, struggling not to weep with her. "Carina--carinissima!" he
repeated soothingly; yet, as she grew calmer, brought despair again.

"Nay, Marina, no loyal senator may question the decision of his
government; thou presumest too far; but thine illness and thy suffering
have made thee irresponsible."

Then, grieving so to cross her in her weakness and pain, with all his
tenderness in his voice, he hastened to atone for the firmness of the
declaration which had sufficiently proved his staunchness.

"Marina, thou and I--were we not Giustiniani--more than all other
Venetians owe our loyalty in time of stress; and for love of thee,
beloved, shall Venice find me faithful in her need--I and all my
household true, and all my fortune hers in service, if need should
be--as thus I vowed, before them all, on that day when the Senate gave
thee to me and made thee the sweetest patrician lady in all the land. We
will not fail them, beloved!"

He clasped her close, holding her firmly, as if to infuse her with his
faith. "All blessings are for those who do the right, Marina; we need
not fear."

Never had she seen his face so inspired, so masterful, so tender; it was
a revelation. The whole of their beautiful love story was written on it,
mastering all the traditions of Venice, yet binding him more closely to
the service of his country.

For a moment she looked at him awestruck, longing to give the submission
which would bring her rest; it was not strange that she loved him so;
oh, if she might but acquiesce in his view of right! Madre Beatissima,
life was hard, and the way of right was the way of the cross--how many
holy women had found it so! One hand stole to the little crucifix
beneath her robe and pressed its roughened surfaces into her breast, for
she must not place the sweetness of this earthly love before the duty of
the heavenly one. "Santa Maria, save me!" she prayed, while, only for
one moment, she drooped her head to his shoulder and nestled close, that
he should know her heart was his, whatever came--_whatever came_.

Was it strange that her agony threatened her reason? In that one little
moment of comfort, which she yearned to hold free from suffering that
its remembrance might uphold her, the powerful vision of the
Tintoretto's awful _Judgment_ rose beckoningly before her. It was the
doom of Venice, and she alone--so impotent--recognized the danger.

The vision pursued her night and day. The River of the Wrath of God,
leaping up to meet those frowning skies of His most just anger, and
Venice--superb, disdainful--overwhelmed between; the cloud of
innumerable souls, tortured and writhing, fleeing from before the face
of the Holy One, no more than a mere film of whirling atoms,
falling--falling into an abyss of horrors--the dim, doomed shapes
wearing faces that had smiled into hers--With an inarticulate moan she
hid her face on her husband's shoulder.

"Marco," she whispered with an effort, for her strength was spent, "not
though it were a vision, revealed by the Madonna San Donato, thou
wouldest take me to Rome? Not though I could make thee comprehend what
it means for me--and thee?"

She waited breathlessly for his answer, with pulses that seemed to pause
for the momentous decision, not daring to look at him lest she should
falter and retract; for never again would she ask this question, which,
even now, she had put in the form of an assertion.

"Nay, Marina, the Madonna asketh naught of thee but that which gracious
women must give--submission to their princes--in which, beloved, thou
seemest to fail; and duty to thy Church, in which thou, having ever been
before all others, art now neglectful. For from the altar of your home
no Masses ascend, no fragrance of flowers nor praise. Venice is more
faithful in that which she commands, and we, carina, may not longer
disregard her will without suspicion of disloyalty. Since Fra Francesco
is no longer here, I will apply for some new ministrant. Hast thou a
wish in this choice of a priest for the service of our oratory?"

She had started away from him almost resentfully, that he could charge
her--whose fealty to her Church was killing her--with neglect of any
duty it imposed; but, out of her larger love, she understood him better
than he knew her, and she forgave him and nestled back again. He had not
been brought up to place the requirements of the Church before the
commands of Venice,--few patricians were in those days,--she could not
make him realize the awful restrictions of that ban which, by her strict
teaching, made it impossible for the faithful to worship in Venice while
it remained unwithdrawn; yet he could count it as non-existent!

She was glad that she had felt the tumult of his heart while he answered
her so calmly; it made her realize what it cost him to deny her prayer;
it assured her that a staunch sense of duty underlay his strength;
pitilessly it assured her also that he would not change, and the very
firmness which came between them made her love and admire him the more.
In the midst of her pain she was proud that he also had conscience on
his side, however misguided it seemed to her. Why did the good Madonna
permit these differences? How was it possible for Marco, with his quick,
intellectual grasp, not to comprehend the truth--not to see the terrors
that Venice had brought upon herself! He was suffering also, but only
because she suffered; never would he understand her agony; the rudest,
crudest weight of the cross she must lift alone, weary and spent with
the bitter struggle.

She summoned all her strength to answer him as though the words were
easily spoken. "Since it is not Fra Francesco, whom we love," she said,
"I know no other; choose thou, my Marco."

His face flushed with pleasure that her resistance seemed conquered.
"And when we have found our confessor, shall we go together--thou and
the little one and I," he asked brightly, "to the Island of Sant' Elena,
which thou lovest, and we ourselves bring flowers to deck our chapel?
For it hath been long since Mass was said therein."

"Yes, Marco mio," she answered to the love in his voice, struggling to
repress every accent of dissent; for in her heart she told herself that
the chapel of the palazzo Giustiniani was his, not hers, since their
faith was divided; "and for me only, not for him, to worship there is
sin. And the beautiful day together, alone on the island with the
flowers--it is the gift of the Holy Mother to help me endure!"

And her husband, as he left her, carried with him a smile that satisfied
him.

But, turning in the doorway for another glance--so sweet it was to have
her all his own again--a pang shot through him, for the glory was gone
from her face--or was it the shadow that made it so wan and gray?--and
no smile hid the questioning anguish of her eyes. Nay, he himself was
fanciful, for it was too far to see, and he could not shake off the
sadness of the days that were past. But he must teach himself to forget
them. For Marina had smiled at him, radiantly, as in the sweet, old
days; and together they would deck the chapel for a benediction!



XXVI

Fra Paolo was fast becoming a centre of romance, so many were the
attempts from suspicious quarters to manage private interviews which the
Senate had thought necessary to frustrate; and the fact that he was
known to have declined the escort of guards which the Senate urged upon
him as means of safety endowed him with a sort of heroic halo in the
eyes of the lesser multitude. "Fate largo a Fra Paolo," they called in
the Merceria if the people pressed him too closely--"Make way for Fra
Paolo!"--and a strange youthfulness, as of satisfied affections, was
beginning to grow upon his calm face. He had had no cravings, feeling
that duty sufficed; yet, through this absolute yielding of himself to
express the message with which his life was charged, his heart had
warmed within him, and now, unsought, the people loved him, magnifying
the interest of every minor happening of his life and zealously
gathering anecdotes of the days before he was great.

A group of his brother friars were strolling back and forth under the
fretted colonnades of the greater court of the Servi one evening before
vespers, a glow of relish on their genial, cowled faces, rehearsing the
tale of Fra Paolo's unconventional slippers; for it was the hour of
small gossip, and the day had been warm.

"They were scarlet, like an eminence's," explained Fra Giulio, who had
secured this choice bit for the entertainment of his special cronies;
"for all colors are one to Fra Paolo, who hath no distinction for
trifles."

"Because he spendeth himself in scheming for honors that belong
elsewhere," interposed a disaffected brother who had strolled up and
joined the group uninvited; he belonged to another chapter of the Servi,
and had but recently come among them; honors had passed him by and
duties attracted him less, and he had made no friends within the
convent, though he professed great interest in all that concerned Fra
Paolo, and had even offered to wait upon him in chapel or in his cell.

"Thou, Fra Antonio, seek thine own friends!" Fra Giulio retorted, with
unusual asperity; "for this tale is too good for thine hearing, being
another triumph for Fra Paolo in the days when he was only a frate of
the Servi."

"_Ebbene_, and then?" urged the eager auditors, crowding around the
speaker, for the incongruity of the grave padre, in his frayed and rusty
gown attempting to usurp a decoration, lent interest to the petty
happening.

"_Ebbene_, and then his Eminence of Borromeo--for it seemeth that only
the illustrious play parts in this farce"--Fra Giulio continued with
keen enjoyment, "his Eminence of Borromeo hath explained at Rome that
Fra Paolo was innocent of contempt of rule."

"Verily, the fault might have been counted to one who hath no sins of
the body to atone for!" sneered Fra Antonio, who could not be converted
to the prevailing tone of admiration for this abnormal being who walked
among them not as other men, and toward whom his own attitude was a
singular compound of obsequiousness and cynicism. "Even the slippers of
your saint can do no wrong," he added venomously.

"But thou, in canonized shoes, couldst walk but wearily, Fra Antonio,
lest they should lead thee in unwonted ways!" one of the party retorted
maliciously.

"Fra Paolo hath fear of no man, and that which he declareth he knoweth,"
said another of the frati, lowering his voice and glancing about him
furtively. "And it hath chanced to him, more than once, to be wiser than
the Serenissimo and the Ten themselves--may San Marco have other uses
for his ears! But the day that our famous Signor Bragadin was summoned
from his palace on the Giudecca to make his promised gold for the
Signoria, I stood with the crowd in the Merceria to see him pass, with
his two black dogs and their golden collars looking for all the world
like powers of evil! And our gold-maker himself going to the Senate like
a noble, with his friends the Cornaro and the Dandolo in crimson
robes--the people thronging to see him pass!"

"Ay, Bragadin was a saintly man!" one of them retorted mockingly. "Dost
remember the tale how that he fooled the worshipful Signoria to leave
him a week in peace, that he might take the blessed sacrament quietly,
finding therein 'a holy joy' that should fit him to proceed to the
service of Venice--looking, meanwhile, for means of escape?"

"_Davvero_! but this was the hour of his highest favor, and I followed
with the rest of the crowd till there was scarce breathing space under
the clock tower, where the _Magi_ were just coming forth to salute the
Madonna and the Bambino at the stroke of the day; and the people were
shouting so one could not hear the bell for cries of 'Gold! gold!
Bragadin!'

"We surged back against the doorway of the 'Nave d'Oro,' the people
struggling with each other lest they should lose the sight as he passed
through the Piazza, and suddenly there came a voice,--cold, and
scornful, and low, but no man lost the words,--'Thou art wearied in the
multitude of thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the star-gazers, the
monthly prognosticators stand up and save thee from these things that
shall come upon thee!' The people stopped their pushing and looked
aghast to see who spake, but I could have sworn it was Fra Paolo's
voice. I caught a glimpse of him standing quietly just inside the 'Nave
d'Oro,' while the other signori who go there to ridotto were out in the
Merceria to see the show; and I made haste away lest the crowd should
object to my habit for being like Fra Paolo's--they were so crazy for
Bragadin, following in the footsteps of the Signoria, like good
Venetians!"

"Who told the saying to the Signoria, when it might have crushed Fra
Paolo?" Fra Giulio questioned jealously.

"It may well have been his Excellency the Signor Donato, who was of the
Council in those days, but a man too strong to have a mind to the folly
of the others, and who walked about the chamber giving sign of much
displeasure while Bragadin made his gold. And the next day Fra Paolo is
commanded before the Signoria to meet the Provveditor of the Mint--being
the only man who hath dared speak his mind before the Signoria had
proved the worthlessness of Bragadin's promise. And our fine gold-maker
exchangeth his palace for a prison; for the test of the crucible is all
too easy for Fra Paolo, who speaketh naught that he knoweth not."

"Santa Maria! here cometh the 'bride,'" some one exclaimed warningly;
for none of Fra Paolo's friends had the courage for frivolity in his
grave presence, harmless as it might appear in his absence, and this
watchword was often heard in the cloister as he approached.

He was conversing earnestly with his secretary, Fra Fulgenzio, evidently
on business of the Senate, having remained in the convent all day,
contrary to his usual custom; Fra Fulgenzio had been to and fro with
messages, and once had returned from the Ducal Palace escorting several
grave personages who had gone to Fra Paolo's cell for some conference,
which gave rise to pleasant comment in the convent--since the
Serenissimo could not dispense with the personal service of its
Consultore for a single day, and every honor shown to Fra Paolo was dear
to the hearts of the Servi.

Fra Paolo paused only for a moment as he passed the group to exchange a
greeting, but his keen, quiet glance took in every expression, from the
affectionate smile of old Fra Giulio to the jealous discontent of Fra
Antonio, whose gaze drooped before him while he hastened to give the
accustomed sign of reverence due to one so high in authority.

Fra Paolo considered him seriously for a moment before resuming his
stroll. "Fra Antonio," he said, in his passionless voice, "the head of
the Roman Chapter hath made inquiry for thee, and knew naught of thy
presence here. Thou wilt soon be recalled. That thou doest--do quickly."

A sudden pallor overspread the features of Fra Antonio, who staggered
and would have fallen, as he made an effort to steal away unobserved,
had not the others come to his assistance.

"What is thy sudden ailment?" one of them asked him roughly, for he was
no favorite.

But before the trembling friar could steady his voice or choose his
words he was forgotten, for the evening bells began to chime for
vespers, and as the brothers came flocking through the cloisters the
great bell at the entrance gate on the Fondamenta dei Servi sent back
the special deep-toned call, which took precedence of every order within
the convent. Those who had already reached the chapel streamed back in
wild confusion to answer the summons which filled the court with
clanging echoes, while the silvery notes of the chapel chimes sounded
faintly in the pauses of the deeper reverberations--like the voice of a
timid child crying to be comforted when it does not understand.

In the excitement that followed Fra Antonio was forgotten by all but Fra
Giulio, who had been watching him closely as he made his way with
difficulty toward the low, arched passage which led in the direction of
the dormitory.

"Lean on me," said Fra Giulio, who stood barring the way.

"Nay," replied the other, who seemed scarcely able to stand, "I must
needs reach my cell; a sudden illness hath overtaken me."

But Fra Giulio, usually so compassionate that he was called "woman
hearted," did not move.

"Later a remedy shall be brought thee," he answered coldly. "Thou
hearest the great summons which none of our order may disobey; it is
rare and solemn to hear that call. Something of moment hath chanced.
_Ecco_, now we shall know!" he added in a tone of relief, as Fra
Gianmaria appeared from under the convent entrance, whither he had gone
to receive the Chief of the Ten, who now entered the great court with
him in formal state, with a secretary and attendants and an officer of
the guards.

The tumultuous crowd began to range itself in orderly groups at the
command of the superior, and Fra Antonio controlled himself with a
supreme effort as a body of palace guards, in brilliant uniforms,
scattered themselves among the black-robed friars. The heavy gates
closed behind them, and the dismal tolling of the bell ended in a
silence through which the heart-beats of Fra Antonio sounded in his ears
louder and more ominous than the harsh tones of the summons had done a
moment before.

Who were those two terrible gondoliers all in black, who stood by the
water-entrance on the Fondamenta? Was it the shadow of their great black
hats that darkened their features like masks? Why were they there?

He glanced stealthily at the faces of the friars; they were more full of
interest than dread, while the eyes of the little choristers who stood
robed for chapel service shone with delight. Evidently to all that
community the interruption was an event filled with possibilities of
excitement that was welcomed as breaking the monotony of the daily
round. Perhaps no one had noticed those gondoliers! Only Father
Gianmaria, the Superior, and the Senator Giustinian Giustiniani, the
Chief of the Ten, were stern and angry; and Fra Paolo stood between
them--calm and inscrutable as ever.

Now, thought Fra Antonio, before the curiosity of the friars had been
satisfied,--while no one was thinking of him,--he must escape! But at
every passage leading out of the court a scarlet coat stood guard, save
only before the low doorway of the dormitory stair. Fra Giulio's eyes
were fixed earnestly, adoringly, upon his beloved Fra Paolo, and he had
moved a little way from the wall.

Fra Antonio stole softly in behind him, breathlessly anxious. He was
already under the archway when his unsteady foot stumbled in a hollow of
the worn brick pavement just within the opening--in another moment he
should be safe! But a voice, meant for him alone, leaped through all
that crowd and petrified him with horror; it was filled with a sarcastic
grace as it offered the courtesy.

"Whoever hath need to leave this cloister before the Inquiry of Venice
is satisfied, shall be served by the gondola of the _Piombi_--which
waits."

I Piombi! Those prisons under the leads where the heat was slow
torture--this was the meaning of the masked gondoliers!

Surely it was the Chief of the Ten who had spoken! Fra Antonio trembled
from head to foot; but was he not already far enough within the narrow,
winding passage to be hidden from the cruel gaze of that man of power?
Half an inch might make the difference between life and death; he folded
his black gown closer about him--stealthily--so that it might not
rustle, watching the faint shadow on the pavement in agony--what if his
hand had been seen as he passed it behind him to gather up the folds!

Those words could not be meant for him; they were merely a general
order; there were twenty men--forty men in that company more wicked than
he! He could not turn back and face them to glide into his place again;
it would be certain death; but when the Chief of the Ten or Father
Gianmaria should begin to speak, he must go on.

He lifted one foot to be ready; a great sweat broke out on his
forehead--would this silence never end? He dared not stir until there
should be words to hold the crowd; for if he should be caught----

Were they speaking?--His heart thumped so that he could not hear. Santa
Maria!--death could not be worse!

"Thou art summoned; they are calling thee," said Fra Giulio, close
beside him, in a low, hard voice that changed to one more compassionate
as the friar turned his livid face toward him. "I know not thy fault,
but Fra Paolo will plead for thee; for thou art ill, verily."

"Fra Paolo is no man of mercy."

"Nay, but of justice. He will not remember thy discourtesies."

"_Discourtesies_!" ay, it was true; Fra Giulio did not know--nobody
knew; he would take courage and plead to be forgiven his manifold
"discourtesies" toward this idol of the Servi; it was for this that he
was summoned! The palace guards were approaching the low passage, and
the extremity of his need steadied him; he rallied all his powers for a
last effort, and, shaking off their touch, advanced into the court--his
face, withered and pain-stricken, might have plead for him but for the
strange hardness of the lines.

"It was a sudden malady that bade me seek my cell," he gasped. "I knew
not that your Excellency had need of me."

He was a ghastly thing in his fear.

The inexorable Chief of the Ten surveyed him in silence for a brief
moment that seemed unending.

"Ay, Fra Antonio, we _have_ need of thee--more than another. For word
hath reached Venice, privately, from special friendly sources in Rome,
that thou art come hither charged with a message of vital import to a
trusted servant of the Republic. Thou hast leave of the Signoria to
declare it in this presence."

Fra Antonio opened his dry lips and framed some words of which he heard
no echo.

"The Inquiry of Venice is satisfied," said the Chief. "Thou art the man
whom we seek. Conduct him to the gondola of the Piombi."

Fra Antonio fell upon his knees in wild supplication as the guards
gathered around him, but the Father Superior detained them with a
prohibitory motion.

"I crave your Excellency's pardon. For the better ruling of this
community and the clearing of all the innocent among our brotherhood, I
have summoned hither every soul under my rule. That no scandal may
arise, your Excellency will permit that the charge under which this
arrest is made be declared."

Assent was given by an impatient gesture.

"Fra Antonio, while he hath been a recipient of our hospitality," said
the Superior, "is described by trustworthy advices from our Chapter in
Rome, but just received, as a person who hath designs upon the life of a
member of this community."

"It is a false scandal," cried Fra Antonio, who had found his voice at
last. "I shall not be condemned without proof!"

"The truth is known," said Fra Paolo, leaning toward him and speaking
low. "It were better for thee to confess--or depart in silence."

But the man was beside himself with fear; he caught at his last,
desperate chance of favor, dragging himself to the feet of Fra Paolo and
pouring out an abject tale of petty jealousies and offenses for which he
obsequiously craved pardon of this "idol of the convent," protesting,
with horrible oaths, that he was guilty of nothing more.

The rare shade of compassion that had softened Fra Paolo's face when he
gave his warning, deepened to a glory and his eyes shone with a grace
that was like love, as he raised the wretched man and strove to arrest
his torrent of words. "_God_ heareth thee, my brother," he said
pleadingly; "have pity on thine own soul. Kneel to Him alone in thy
great need. But spend not thy strength with trifles that demean us both.
If thine heart hath aught against me, I forgive it."

Then turning to the Chief he besought that the trial should be
short--"For the man is ill, and I would have quiet speech with him."

"For the honor of the Servi, let the matter be dispatched, and let proof
be brought," the Superior demanded, surprised and displeased at any
softness in Fra Paolo, whose dominant note was justice, rather than
mercy.

"We will grant him the favor of a farewell collation ere he taketh leave
of his entertainers," said the Giustinian. "Let the refection be
brought."

The friars exchanged glances of astonishment and dismay as a dish of
fruit and of white bread were brought forward by two of the ducal
guards, on a costly salver wrought with the arms of Venice. It was like
the simple refreshment they had often carried to Fra Paolo's cell when
he had been absorbed by some train of thought, which, according to his
wont, he would not suspend for any hour of sleep or meals until the
problem had been conquered. Fra Giulio trembled; he would have said
those were the very grapes he had chosen to tempt Fra Paolo's slender
appetite,--white, with the veins of purple,--all as he had left them on
his desk that day, with the plate of fine white bread, when the midday
meal was served--but in no lordly dish.

A faint cry escaped Fra Antonio, and he put his hands before his face.

There was a moment of breathless silence; but no compassion anywhere
upon all those strained and eager faces, except in the eyes of Fra
Paolo, which seemed divine in pity, as he drew nearer the guilty man and
put his arm about him to steady him.

"These," said the Chief of the Ten, "fine grapes and wheaten bread,
exquisitely flavored with a most precious powder, thou shalt presently
enjoy in this presence,--with the compliments of the Signoria, who have
most carefully considered this repast,--unless thou dost instantly make
frank and full confession of thy deed and thine accomplices.

"And if more be to thy taste," the cruel voice went on, for no answer
came, "since in these matters thou hast a consummate knowledge--thou art
permitted, by grace of the Signoria, to use the contents of this packet,
which hath been found within the lining of thy cassock. This powder hath
a marvelous power to still the blood which floweth over-swiftly----"

"We have proof more than sufficient for the arrest, your Excellency,"
interposed the officer of the guards, as he gave the signal. "And no
deposition can be taken here, for the man hath fainted from his fright."

But almost unnoticed the guards bore their burden from the cloister to
the gondola of the prisons of the Piombi; for it had taken but a moment
to complete the unfinished tale in the minds of the listeners, and with
one accord they were gathering about Fra Paolo, eager to express their
loyalty, their indignation, their gratitude for his escape.

The court was in a tumult. "Fra Paolo!" "_Our_ Fra Paolo!" mingled with
bursts of vehement condemnation and rapid questions. "Our Consultore!"
"And because he is necessary to Venice!"

The chimes of the chapel sounding joyously broke in upon these
demonstrations, and two little choristers came running back to tell them
that, by order of Fra Gianmaria, a Te Deum for the safety of Fra Paolo
would be sung, in lieu of the interrupted vesper service.

"The Signoria hath had warnings without end," the Chief of the Ten was
explaining hastily to Father Gianmaria, as they strolled toward the
chapel. "The Holy Father wanteth him out of Venice, since he hath been
Consultore--for the man is a marvel! But he would rather have him alive
than dead--as the learned Scioppius hath explained, not long since, to
Fra Paolo himself! And this whole plot hath been unveiled to us by one
who watcheth secretly in Rome for the interest of Venice, since there
hath been no open communication. It was hatched in the Orsini palace, in
that holy city, not unknown to some of their Eminences; the chief
accomplices are friars--we have the names of the other two; and Piero
Salin is on the watch. The stakes are high for the friars' game--five
thousand _scudi_ apiece and a promise of Church preferment; but Piero
Salin hath ways of doing his duty! The Senate will send orders for the
better protection of its Consultore; meanwhile let him not venture forth
without two ducal guards."

"Your Excellency knoweth that Fra Paolo will have no state."

"A cowl over their saintly faces, if it please his fancy! It is the
order of the Senate, waiting better plans of safety--a suite in the
Ducal Palace or a house connected therewith by some guarded passage.
Warning hath been sent us most urgently, by friends of the Republic, of
a great price and absolution for him who may bring Fra Paolo to
Rome--alive or dead!"



XXVII

These days had been important in the Senate. In the deliberations prior
to the departure of di Gioiosa the concessions which Rome had
persistently asked had been so persistently and diplomatically declined
that even the wily cardinal dared no longer press them; and it seemed at
last that there was to be truce to the cautious and subtle word-weighing
of months past, as di Gioiosa, suddenly realizing that he held the
ultimatum of the Republic, had taken his departure for Rome in the
night--conceiving it easier, perhaps, to confess his partial defeat to
the dignified Signoria by proxy. So he made the announcement through a
gentleman of his household the next morning, while he was already
journeying toward the expectant Pope, to whom he carried bitter
disappointment; and the heart of the cardinal himself had been scarcely
less set upon those points of amelioration which he had not obtained. It
was a blow to his diplomacy and to his churchman's pride; for the terms
which the cardinal was empowered to offer were scarcely less haughty
than was the attitude which Venice had assumed throughout the quarrel.

His Holiness had wished that Venice, as a first step, should cancel the
"Protest" which she had widely published, declaring the interdict
invalid.

But Venice, with cool logic, had declined to accede to this; since the
protest, being based upon the censures, was practically annulled by
their withdrawal--which must therefore first take place. And, although
by this same logic she was led to declare that no act on the part of the
Republic would then be necessary to void her protest, she consented to
give a writing to that effect, so soon as the censures should have been
withdrawn.

The Pope requested that all who had left Venice on account of the
interdict should, upon its withdrawal, return and be reinstated in their
former privileges--making a special point of including the Jesuits.

But here, also, Venice made and kept to her amendment; all should
return, with full privilege and favor--save only the Jesuits, who had in
various ways rendered themselves obnoxious to the government.

The revocation of those laws which the Pope demanded was not to be
thought of, since this would be questioning the right of Venice to make
laws; neither was their suspension possible, for the laws were just. But
his Holiness might rest assured that they would be used in moderation
and Christian piety only--as they had ever been.

The real concession--the only one--was in the case of the ecclesiastical
prisoners--the Abbot of Nervessa and the Canon of Vicenza--whom his
Holiness persisted in claiming. But Monsieur du Fresne, the French
Ambassador, suggested that the Republic should, "without prejudice to
her right of jurisdiction over criminal ecclesiastics," _give_ these
prisoners to the ambassador as a mark of special favor to his king, the
mediator, who might then consign them to the Pope if he chose--they
being his to deal with.

Venice, with her powers of subtle reasoning, gladly embraced this way
out of the difficulty which had first appeared insuperable. "So to
_give_ them," she said, appeased, "confirms rather than questions our
authority, since no one may 'give' to another that over which he
exercises no dominion."

It was not Venice, but France, who was to request that the interdict be
withdrawn, that she might not seem to other nations to be under the ban;
for the Republic did not acknowledge that this condition of disfavor had
gone into effect; she could not therefore personally request the Pope to
change an attitude which put only himself in the wrong. But when there
was a hint of "absolution," which the cardinal in his zeal would also
ask the Holy Father to pronounce, Venice was silent from displeasure.
She had done no wrong; she would neither ask nor accept absolution.

The Senate might indeed be weary of these interminable discussions and
unending compliments, and glad of a respite in which to turn to other
matters. But there were no idle hours in that august assembly, though it
might chance that some whimsical phase of statesmanship lightened, by
way of entr'acte, the severity of their deliberations. They were,
possibly, not unpleasantly aware of the irony of the situation when a
letter from their governor in Constantinople announced "the extreme
solicitude of the Turkish Government for the life and welfare of the
Holy Father," who had so furthered their interests by widely inciting
discord among the nations of Christianity that, seeing therein a mark of
the special favor of Allah, the sultan had ordered prayers and
processions for the continued welfare of his Holiness!

The singular jealousy of the Venetians for the solidarity of their
government, with their no less singular jealousy of individual
aggrandizement, together with the rare perception of mental
characteristics that was fostered by the daily culture of the councils
in which every noble took his part, led them constantly to ignore their
selfish hopes in order to choose the right man for the place. These
sentiments, acting and reacting upon each other, had secured their
political prosperity; but a disaffection was beginning to make itself
felt in the Senate which led ultimately to over-limitations of power and
such multiplied checks and suspicions that noble living and wise ruling
became impossible.

It was a time of suppressed excitement, and there had been a grave
discussion as to the growing power of the Ten, against which some of the
senators had dared to express themselves openly; for many of these
strong men were beginning to feel that their government weighed upon
them like a Fate, crushing all liberty and individuality; and of secret
trials without defense there were tragic memories haunting the annals of
that grave tribunal.

But so great were the complications of the involved Venetian machine--so
many were the mysteries and fears environing the daily life of these
patricians--that each felt the actual to be safer than the untried
unknown, and surrendered the hope of change, tightening the cords that
upheld the government as their only means of safety.

For there was an under side to all this gold-tissued splendor that was
sometimes laid bare to the people, in spite of the deftness with which
the Signoria stood tirelessly ready to cover up the flaws; and a recent
sad travesty of justice was one of the weird happenings of this time.

Not long since a formal _decree of pardon_ had been solemnly declared
and published throughout Venetia, at which the people stood aghast. For
the man to whom this clemency was graciously extended had been condemned
and executed between the columns of San Marco and San Teodoro, ten years
before--standing accused of conspiracy against the State. There had been
many murmurings when the name of this old patrician, holding honorable
office in service of the Republic, had been erased from the Golden Book;
and he had suffered his ignominious death protesting that the charge was
false, and that all who had aided in his condemnation should die before
the year was out. His dying words had proved a grim prophecy, which,
encouraged by the pressure of the senators, induced the Signoria to
order a re-investigation of his case, whereby the _manes_ of this
dishonored servant of the State were re-instated in that serene favor
now so worthless.

And to-day the people gathered in gloomy silence while the great bell of
the campanile tolled the call to the solemn funeral pageant by which the
Republic offered reparation over the exhumed body of the victim. The
senators, wrapped in mourning cloaks, surrounded the bust of the man
they desired to honor as it was carried in triumph to the church where
the tomb was prepared; and the three _avvogadori_, who had the keeping
of the Golden Book, bore it on a great cushion behind the marble effigy,
the leaf bound open where the name was re-inscribed. Here also walked
the domestics of the re-habilitated noble of Venice--the hatchments that
had been doomed to oblivion freshly embroidered upon their sleeves above
their tokens of crepe. The Doge and the Signoria all took part in this
tragic confession of wrong, doing penance unflinchingly for the sins of
their predecessors; for Venice could be munificent in reparation, not
shrinking from her own humiliation to appease outraged justice and
confirm her power, and there was nothing lacking that might add
impressiveness to the pageant.

But the people looked on gloomy and unappeased, filled with a horror
which the funeral pomp did little to quiet; they did not follow as the
_cortege_ descended the steps of the Piazzetta to embark in the waiting
gondolas that had been lavishly provided by the Republic. Santissima
Maria! they wanted to get back to their own quarters on the Giudecca and
breathe a little sunshine! What did one noble matter, less or more? "But
it's a gloomy barcarolle that a dead man sings!"

"And one that hath not died his own death!" a woman answered under her
breath, as she crossed herself with a shudder.

The wind inflated the empty folds of the crimson robe that draped the
bier, carrying it almost into the water, as the gondolas glided away
from the Piazzetta.

"San Marco save us! he wanted none of their pomp," said an onlooker
scornfully. "The ten good years of his life and a quiet grave in San
Michele--the Signoria would buy them dear, to give them to _him_
to-day!"

Yet if some had died unjustly, there was not less need of ceaseless
vigilance against unceasing intrigue, within and without that body which
held the power; and one morning the Senate was thrown into a state of
great agitation by disclosures from one of the brothers of the Frari,
indubitably confirmed by the papers which he delivered into the hands of
the Doge.

"It is beyond belief!" Giustinian Giustiniani exclaimed to the Lady
Laura, "how Spain findeth method to make traitors in Venice itself! It
is a nation treacherous to the core, and it were beyond the diplomacy of
any government,--save only ours,--to maintain relations on such a basis
of fraud."

"What is there of new to chide them for?" she asked with keen interest.

"Is not the old enough to make one wrathful! Boastful threats of arms
against the Republic if she yield not obedience to the Holy Father, with
secret promises of armed assistance to his Holiness to keep him firm in
his course, at the very moment of her cringing attempts at mediation
lest France should carry off the glory!--and because Spain hath neither
men to spare for Rome, nor courage to declare against the Republic, nor
diplomacy to bring anything to an issue!"

"Nay, now them art returned to Venice forget the disturbing ways of
Spain," the Lady Laura answered, with an attempt at conciliation. "I am
glad that thy mission in that strange land hath come to an end."

"Ay, but the ways of Spain do make traitors of us all!" Giustinian
exclaimed hotly. "When a senator of the Republic hath such amity for the
ambassador of his Most Catholic Majesty, forsooth, that at vespers and
at matins, in the Frari, they must use the self-same kneeling stool--a
tenderness and devotion beautiful to see in men so great; for it is aye
one, and aye the other, and never both who tell their beads at
once--that, verily, some brother of the Frari doth take cognizance of a
thing so rare and saintly and bringeth word thereof to the Serenissimo,
_with matter of much interest found within the prie-dieu_."

"Giustinian!"

"Ay, these minutes of the noble Senator, who acteth so well the spy for
favor of Spain, would do honor to a ducal secretary, for accuracy of
information concerning weighty private matters before the Council! And
due acknowledgment of so rare a courtesy doth not fail us in the very
hand of the ambassador himself, for this letter also was intercepted!
This frate who hath brought the information verily deserveth honor for
so great a service!"

"And the others?"

"Is there more than one treatment for a traitor?" Giustinian exclaimed,
with increasing temper. "And for the ambassador--it hath already been
courteously signified to him that the air of Venice agreeth not well
with one of his devotional tendencies."

"Tell me the name of the traitor," the Lady Laura urged, coming close
and laying her hand upon his shoulder.

"Nay," said her husband, shaking off her touch impatiently, "my anger
doth unlock my speech to a point I had not dreamed, for the matter may
be held before the Inquisition! But it is a name unknown to thee, and
new to this dignity, which he weareth like a clown! The freedom is still
too great for this entry to the Senate; the serrata hath done its work
too lightly if it leave space for one parvenu! To-morrow, when thou
takest the air in thy gondola, my Lady Laura, thou shalt look between
the columns of the Ducal Palace and know whatever the State will declare
to thee of that which concerneth the government alone! The times are
perilous."

"They will be better when the interdict is removed----"

"Ay--no--one knows not; it is a matter too grave for women and too
little for the Republic to grieve about. His Holiness would have us on
our knees, weeping like naughty infants, and abjectly craving his pardon
for daring to make our own laws and uphold our prince!"

"Giustinian, there is more to it than that."

"Ay, there _is_ more, if it setteth the women up to preach to us and to
expound the laws of the Republic--a knowledge in which I knew not that
they held the mastery! Take not the tone of Marina, who hath come near
to killing herself and making half a fool of Marcantonio."

"Nay, Marco is true to Venice and swerveth not. And for our
daughter--she hath suffered till it breaks my heart to look into her
face, poor child! And thou, Giustinian, wert little like thyself, when
she lay almost dying! The Signor Nani hath confessed to me that in Rome
there was much intriguing for her favor--of which she suspected naught.
It was a harm to them that they went to Rome; I would not have had it
so."

"Ay, thou would'st not have had it so; thou would'st have had it all
thine own way!" retorted Giustinian, who was becoming impossible to
please, now that the paths of government were growing more thorny and
exacting, and the Lion showed no sign of climbing to his portal. "That
father confessor of hers hath much to answer for. Keep the little one
well out of the way of their craft--dost thou hear? He is to be trained
for Venice, after the ways of the Ca' Giustiniani. And Marcantonio--who
knows?"

He had drifted into his favorite reverie, and wandered abstractedly out
upon the balcony looking longingly toward the rose-colored palace where
his every ambition centred; but he felt the glittering, jeweled eyes of
the patron saint of Venice glare upon him mockingly from his vantage
point upon the column, while the very twist of the out-thrust tongue
insinuated a personal message of malice and defeat.



XXVIII

Venice was flooded with moonlight. The long line of palaces down the
Canal Grande shone back from the breast of the water, starred with
lights, repeated again and again in the rippling surface.

A ceaseless melody filled the air, braided of sounds familiar only to
this magic city--echoes of laughter from balconies high in air, silvery
tintinnabulations falling like drippings of water from speeding oars,
franker bursts of merriment from the open windows of the palaces, low
murmured tones of lovers in content from gliding gondolas, hoarse shouts
of quick imperious orders from gondoliers to offending gondoliers, as
they passed--apostrophes to liquid names of guardian saints, too
melodious for denunciations, hurled back with triple expletives and
forgotten the next moment in friendly parsiflage; here and there a
strain of ordered music, in serenade, from a group of friendly gondolas
swaying only with the tranquil movement of the water; or the mysterious
tone of a violin, uttering a soul prayer meant for some single listener,
which yet steals tremblingly forth upon the night air--more passionate,
more beautiful and true than that other human voice which breaks the
quiet of a neighboring calle with some monotonous love song of the
people.

And far away, perhaps, in the quainter squares of the more primitive
island villages--in Burano or Chioggia--before the Duomo, some reader
lies at full length in the brilliant moonlight under the banner of San
Marco, his "Boccaccio" open before him, repeating in a half-chant,
monotonous and droning, some favorite tale from the well-worn pages to
listeners who pause in groups in their evening stroll and linger until
another story is begun; this time it is some strophe from the
"Gerusalemme," to which a passing gondolier may chant the answering
strain--for this is the very poem of the people, echoing familiarly from
lip to lip, and tales from the Tasso are not seldom wrought into the
ebony carvings of their barks. Meanwhile the younger men and maidens, on
a neighboring fondamenta, keep step to the music of some strolling
player who lives, content, on the trifling harvest of these moonlight
festivities.

In the great Piazza of San Marco, with its hundreds of lights and its
hurrying throng, life is gayer than in the day. Crowds come and go under
the arcades, loiter at the tables closely set before the brilliant
cafes, or stroll with laughter and snatches of song and free Venetian
banter where there is less restraint, up and down the broad space of the
Piazza, between the colonnade and the burnished Eastern magnificence of
San Marco, beyond the reach of the yellow lamp flames--their laughing
faces grotesque and weird in the white glare of the moon. But under the
shadow of the Broglio and those great columns of the Ducal Palace there
are only slow-moving figures here and there, wrapped in cloaks, and dark
under the low, unlighted arches, talking in undertones which even the
watchful Lion--so near, so cunning--does not always overhear.

But in the calles, half in moonlight and half in shadow, night wears a
more poetic air of mystery and quiet; and if a fear but come in passing
some dread spot of tragic memory, a gentle Virgin at every turning, with
a dingy, flickering flame beneath her image, is waiting to grant her
grace--for is not Venice the Virgin City? And on the splendid palaces in
the broad canals the watching Madonna stands glorified in exquisite
sculpture and cunningest blendings of color,--ofttimes a crown of light
above her, or rays of stars, symbolic, beneath her feet,--casting her
benediction far out on the water, which, ever in motion, repeats it in
shimmering, widening circles--all-embracing--in which the stars of
heaven shine, tangled and confused with these stars of a paradise in
which earth has so large a part.

Yet in the glory and charm of this Venetian night how should there be
space for sorrow or thought of care, or cause for the tears which
brimmed the eyes of the Lady Marina, as she sat in her sculptured
balcony at the bend of the Canal Grande, watching for the coming of
Marcantonio, who lingered late at the Senate when every moment was
precious to her!

Ever since her husband had left her she had sat with her little one
gathered convulsively in her arms, showering upon him a tenderness so
passionate and so unlike herself in its uncontrolled expression, that
the child, wondering and afraid, was but half-beguiled by the rare treat
of the music and the lights of the Canal Grande, and clamored for his
nurse.

And now he was gone, with a kiss upon his sweet, round baby-mouth that
was like a benediction and a dirge in which a whole heart of wild mother
love sobbed itself out in renunciation--but to him it was only strange.
And she herself had hushed the grieving quiver of his lip, and quickly
filled his dimpled hands with flowers to win the farewell caress of that
dancing smile which irradiated his face like an April sunbeam, parting
the pink lips over a vision of pearly infant teeth.

Below, in the chapel, her maidens were decking it as for a festa with
vines and blossoms which she and Marco had brought that day--that
heavenly day--from the beautiful island of Sant' Elena, wandering alone,
like rustic lovers, over the luxuriant flower-starred meadows and
through the cloistered gardens of its ancient convent, lingering awhile
in the chapel of the Giustiniani, while he rehearsed the deeds of those
of his own name who slept there so tranquilly under their marble
effigies--primate, ambassadors, statesmen, and generals; ay, and more
than these--lovers, mothers, and little ones!

And now, while she sat alone in this holy moonlight, the voices of her
maidens came in sounds of merriment through the fretted stonework of the
great window, and a sweet odor of altar candles and incense mingled with
the breath of the blossoms that was wafted up to her; for to-morrow, for
the first time since her illness, there would be matins in the chapel
of the palazzo, and Marcantonio had assured her that the new father
confessor was much like Fra Francesco--coming, also, from the convent of
the Servi, that he might seem nearer to her who had so loved the gentle
confessor.

Ay, she had loved him, with a holy reverence, for his goodness and
gentleness and faith; for his inflexible grasp of duty, according to his
views of right; for his teachings, which she could understand and which
she believed the Holy Mother had taught him--for his self-denial and
suffering.

And now, for a few moments, she forgot herself--forgot to watch for
Marco, her thoughts busied with the sad tale of Fra Francesco, which
Piero, always _in viaggio_ for business of the Senate, had told her but
a few days before--news that had reached him from the frontier. The
gentle confessor had indeed completed his pilgrimage, barefooted, to
Rome, but had gained no favor with the Holy Father; having at first been
welcomed as a deserter from the enemy's camp, flattered, and plied with
questions, to which Fra Francesco gave no answers--wishing no harm to
Venice nor to any who sat in the councils of the Republic. Whereupon his
lodgings had been changed and all communications with the brothers of
the Servite chapel in Rome had been forbidden. And again, and more than
once, he had been brought forth to be questioned; and again there had
been nothing told of that which they sought, for they asked him of his
friends, and his heart was true. But it was told that he had used
strange words. "Each man is answerable to his own soul and to God for
that which he believeth. He answereth not for the faith of another
man--nor shall he bring danger upon his friend--who hath also his
conscience and God for judge of his faith and actions."

"But what of Fra Paolo?" he had been asked; "How doth he defend himself
for leading thus the cause of Venice against Rome?"

"Am I my brother's keeper?" the gentle Fra Francesco had answered; and
had said no more.

"Thou shalt at least show us how one may obtain speech with him, for the
furtherance of his soul's salvation--apart from the vigilance of the
Senate, and without suspicion in the convent that the message cometh
from Rome, else were it not received in that unholy city."

And in this also Fra Francesco was obdurate. And then, for disobedience
to authority, acknowledged lawful by his own submission, came
prison--wherein he languished, always obdurate,--and death,--perhaps
from discontent or homesickness, one knows not; or from failure of his
plans; or--there was a question of torture, but one knows not if it were
true.

"No, no, it was not true!" Marina had exclaimed, quivering, when Piero
had told her the story. "It is wicked to say these things--and they are
not true!"

But now, alone--apart from all the brightness about her, from every hope
of happiness except those few brief hours with Marco--she did not know
if it might not be true; her heart was too sad to deny any pain that had
been or that might be; but Fra Francesco's sad and gentle eyes seemed to
smile upon her through whatever distance might be between them--of
this, or of any other world--without reproach for those who had bidden
him suffer, and charging her to keep her faith.

"If it be true," she said, "the end of pain is reached, and he hath won
his happiness.--Why cometh not my Marco?"

A gondola of the Nicolotti detached itself from a group of serenaders
just above the palace, was caught for a few moments among the _pali_
before the Ca' Giustiniani, and then floated leisurely down toward the
Piazzetta. She noted it idly while she sat waiting for Marco, for in the
gondola there was a graceful figure, closely wrapped, clasping her
mantle yet more closely with a hand that was white and slender enough
for one of the nobility; yet the gondolier wore the black sash of the
Nicolotti with the great hat of a bravo shading his face. "It is some
intrigue," she said, almost unconsciously, in the midst of her sad
dreaming.

"Oh, Marco, thou art come! It hath been long without thee."

"The Senate is but just dismissed," he answered, smiling fondly at the
eagerness which gave to her pale face a passing flush of health. "But
why is the Lady Beata not with thee?" he questioned abruptly.

"She is in the chapel, making it fair with flowers."

"Thou knowest it, Marina?"

"She came to me with a question but a little while ago, when Marconino
was with me--and I wished to be alone. Marco, he was so beautiful! And
the day has been a dream; I wished for no one but for thee alone."

He held her hand in a mute caress, but with preoccupation, while his
eyes wandered back to the Piazzetta searchingly.

"It is strange," he muttered to himself, still watching from the end of
the balcony. "It was an echo of the Lady Beata's voice that startled me,
crossing the Piazzetta saying two words only--'In Padua.'"

Then rousing himself, he turned brightly to his wife. "Carina, I have
news for thee, for the time hath been momentous for us in Venice. Di
Gioiosa hath gone forward, these many days, with terms from Venice; and
soon, it is thought, there will be peace."

_Terms_ from Venice to Rome!--but the words did not move her from her
resolve to let no shadow of their difference mar the beauty of this
night.

She looked at him wearily. "It is ever the same," she said, "through
this long, dreary year--ever the same! Let us forget it all for this one
night. Let us talk together of our Marconino!"

And as if there had been no questions--no interdict--no pain--while the
night sounds died into silence and the moon withdrew her glamor and left
them alone to the solemn mystery of the starlight, they sat and talked
together of love and their little one and their hopes for him, and of
things that lie too deep for utterance--save by one to one--far into
that beautiful Venetian night, with the odor of flowers and incense
blown up to them on the breath of the sea.



XXIX

The yellow lamp flames were burning late in the cabinet of Girolamo
Magagnati, who took less note of the difference between evening hours
and those of early dawn since there was no longer in his household a
beloved one to guard from weariness. Nay, the night was rather the time
in which he might forget himself and plunge more whole-heartedly into
his schemes of work--financial or creative. For the world was surely on
the eve of discoveries important to his art, and it would be well if he
might secure them, before his working days should pass, for the
Stabilimento Magagnati.

Piero Salin stood in the doorway as he glanced up from the drawings that
littered his table--the dark oak table which had seemed a centre of
cheer to Girolamo, when, in this very chamber, his child had made a
radiance for him in which the lines of his life shone large and
satisfying.

Girolamo never seemed to remember that this son-in-law was a great man
among the people; to him he was only Piero Salin, barcariol; the single
token of the old man's favor was that in his thought he no longer added
the despicable word _toso_; and it was a proof that he was mellowing
with the years, for Girolamo never forgot this unwelcome and
dishonorable past, and Piero was always ill at ease in his presence.

"Messer Magagnati," he began awkwardly, twirling his black cap in his
hand rather after the fashion of a gondolier than of the Chief of the
Nicolotti, "I must crave, by dawn of the morrow, the blessing of San
Nicolo--of holy memory."

"Enter," said Girolamo, with a reluctance not wholly concealed by his
attempt at courtesy, for he felt the moments to be the more precious
that the dawn was near; but the invocation of the sailor's patron saint
portended a journey. "Verily, Piero, thy comings and goings have been,
of late, so frequent that one learns the wisdom of not mourning
over-much when thou dost crave an ave at the shrine of San Nicolo. May
he grant thee favoring breezes! Thou art in favor with the Ten, they
tell me."

Piero shrugged his shoulders. "Favor or disfavor," he said, "it is but
the turning of the head--and both may lead to that place of unsought
distinction between San Marco and San Teodoro, if the orders of their
Excellencies bring not the end they sought. But it matters little--a
candle flame is better blown out than dying spent."

"And whither art thou bent on the morrow?"

"Nay, Messer Girolamo, that is not mine own secret. But this word would
I leave with thee; if, perchance, I return not before many days, seek me
on the border-land--at the point nearest Roman dominions." He had come
close to the old merchant, and uttered the last words in a tone very low
and full of meaning.

Girolamo started. "On the border-land of Rome!" he echoed. "This mission
of thine is then weighty; and thou fearest----"

"Nay, I fear naught," said Piero haughtily. "But the times are perilous;
and later, if thou would'st seek me, thou hast the clew. But of the
mission, to which I am sworn in secrecy, let it not be known that I have
so much as named it--it would argue ill for me and thee. And the clew is
for thy using only. Meanwhile, forget that I have spoken. The Ave Maria
will soon waken the fishers of Murano. _Addio_!"

But he still waited as if he had not uttered all his mind. Girolamo
studied his face closely.

"There is more," he said. "Speak!"

"By the Holy Madonna of San Donato!" said Piero, casting off his
restraint with a sudden impulse, "if I come not back, I would have thee
know that if ever there came a chance to me to serve Marina--the Lady
Marina of the Giustiniani--I, Piero, barcariol or gastaldo, would serve
her as a soldier may serve a saint. For she hath been good to the
Zuanino. Ay, though it cost me my life, I would serve her like a saint
in heaven!" he repeated. Then, flushed with the shame of such unwonted
speech and confession, he hastened to the door, and his steps were
already resounding on the stone floor of the passage when Girolamo
recovered from his astonishment sufficiently to follow him into the
shadow and command him to stop.

"Thou hast seen my daughter--thou hast news of her?"

"Ay, yestere'en, at the Ave Maria, I spoke with her, in Santa Maria
dell' Orto, coming upon her kneeling before the great picture of Jacopo
Robusti--she, saint enough already to wear a gloria and looking as if
the heart of her were worn away from grief! She hath need of thee daily,
for her love for thee is great, and death not far."

"Tell it plainly!" commanded Girolamo, hastening after the retreating
figure and violently grasping his arm to detain him. "Have I failed to
her in aught? She is soul of my soul! Maledetto! why dost thou break my
heart?"

"Look to thine other son-in-law!" Piero retorted wrathfully; "him of the
crimson robe who sits in the Councils of Venice, and findeth no cure for
thy daughter--dying of terror beside him."

"It is a base slander!" cried old Girolamo, trembling with anger and
fear. "Never was wife more beloved and petted! Marcantonio hath no
thought, save for Marina and Venice!"

"Ay, 'for Marina and Venice,'" was the scornful answer, "_but Venice
first_. Splendor and gifts and the pleasing of every whim, if he could
but guess it--gold for her asking, and her palace no better than a cross
for her dwelling; for the one thing she needeth for her peace and life
he giveth not!"

"What meanest thou?" cried Girolamo, furiously. "Hath he not spent a
fortune on physicians--sparing nothing, save to torment her no more,
since their skill is but weariness to her! She is eating her heart out
for this quarrel with Rome--which no man may help, and it is but
foolishness for women to meddle with; and she hath ever been too much
under priestly sway. Why earnest thou hither this night?"

"For this cause and for no other," said Piero solemnly, "that thou
mightest find me, if need should be for any service to her. And to swear
to thee, by the Madonna and every saint of Venice, that I would give my
life for her!"

But old Girolamo grew the angrier for Piero's professions of loyalty.
"Shall her father do less than thou?" he questioned, wrathfully. "On the
morrow will I go to her, and leave her no more until she forgets."

"By all the saints in heaven, and every Madonna in Venice, and our Lady
of every traghetto!" Piero exclaimed, as he wrenched himself away from
Girolamo's angry grasp, while the old man staggered against the wall,
still holding a bit of cloth from the gondolier's cloak in his closed
hand, "I am vowed to my mission before this dawn! What I have spoken is
for duty to thine house, and not in anger--though I could color my
stiletto in good patrician blood and die for it gaily, if that would
help her!"

But Girolamo could not yet find his voice, and Piero, with his hand on
the latch of the great iron gates of the water-story, turned and called
back: "Women are not like men, and Marina is like no other woman that
ever was born in Venice. Whether it be the priests that have bewitched
her--may the Holy Madonna have mercy, and curse them for it!--or whether
she be truly the Blessed Virgin of San Donato come to earth again, one
knows not. But, Messer Magagnati,"--and the voice came solemnly from the
dark figure dimly outlined against the gray darkness beyond the iron
bars,--"thy daughter is dying for this curse of the Most Holy
Father--'il mal anno che Dio le dia!' (may heaven make him suffer for
it!)--and she hath no peace in Venice. _She will never forget nor
change_. If thy love be great, as thou hast said, thou wilt find some
way to help her. _For in Venice she hath no peace_."

The old merchant, dazed by Piero's hot words, was a pitiful figure,
standing, desolate, behind the closed bars of his gate, the night wind
lifting his long beard and parting the thin gray locks that flowed from
under his cap, while he called and beckoned impotently to Piero to
return, repeating meanwhile mechanically, with no perception of their
meaning, those strange words of Piero's--"_In Venice she hath no
peace_." He stood, peering out into the gray gloom and listening to the
lessening plash of the oar, until the gondola of the gastaldo was
already far on the way to San Marco, where sat the Ten.

But it was not of Piero's mission he was thinking, but of his
child--saying over and over again those fateful words, "In Venice she
hath no peace." Had Piero said that?

Suddenly the entire speech recurred to him--insistent, tense with
meaning. She could not live in Venice. Marina had no peace in Venice.
She would never forget nor change. She had need of him--of her father's
love; and if he loved enough, _he would find a way_!

Chilled and heart-sick he turned, and with no torch and missing the
voice which had guided him through the long, dark passage, he groped his
way to his cabinet and sat down to confront a graver problem than any he
had ever conquered with Marina's aid. He _would_ find a way--but "it
must not be in Venice!" How could they leave Venice? Were they not
Venetians born, and was not Venice in trouble? To leave her now were to
deny her. _It could not be_!

He put the argument many times, feverishly at first, then more
calmly--coming always to the same conclusion, "it could not be." It was
a comfort to reach so sensible and positive a decision. To-morrow he
would go to his daughter, and meanwhile he must continue his work; he
needed to reassert his power, for he had been strangely shaken.

He drew the scattered papers together, but the lines, blurred and
confused, carried no meaning; the fragments of broken glass in the
little trays beside him were a dull, untranslucent gray, and written all
over papers and fragments, in vivid letters that burned into his brain,
were those other terrible words of Piero's which he had tried in vain to
forget--"Thy daughter is dying for this curse." _Marina--dying_!

How should Piero know more about Marina than her own father knew? Did he
profess to be a physician that one should credit his every word? What
did he mean by his impudent boast of "dying for her, if need should be!"
Had she not her husband and father to care for her? Her husband "who was
denying her the only thing that could give her life and peace," Piero
had said.--What was the matter with his insulting words, that he could
not forget them?--Had she not her father, who was going to her on the
morrow, when he had matured his plans, and would do whatever she
wished--"in Venice"? Her father "who loved her, as his own soul"--that
was what he had said to Piero, with the memory of all those dear years
when they had been all in all to each other, in this home.

Was it for hours or moments only that he sat in torture--enduring,
reasoning, placing love against pride, Marina against Venice, Venice
against a father's weakness, duty to the Republic before the need of
this only child who was "soul of his soul"?

The last of his race--inheriting the traditions and passionate
attachments of that long line of loyal men who had founded and built up
the stabilimento which was the pride of Murano; of the people, yet
ennobled by the proffer of the Senate, and grandsire to the son of one
of the highest nobles of the Republic--what was there left in life for
him away from Venice? How should he bear to die dishonored and
disinherited by the country which he had deserted in her hour of
struggle? For never any more might one return who should desert Venice
for Rome!

And those panes of brilliant, crystal clarity which he had dreamed of
adding to the honors of the Stabilimento Magagnati--so strong that a
single sheet might be framed in the great spaces of the windows of the
palaces and show neither curve nor flaw--so pure that their only trace
of color should come from a chance reflection which would but lend added
charm--these might not be the discovery of his later days, though the
time was near in which this gift _must_ come to Venice. He had not
dreamed that he could ever say, while strength yet remained to think and
plan, "The house of Magagnati has touched its height, and others may
come forward to do the rest for Venice."

And the secret lay so near--scarcely eluding him!

It was no mere empty jealousy, nor trivial wish for fame, nor greed of
recompense--of which he had enough--that forced the veins out on the
strong forehead of this master-worker, as he struggled with this
question of surrendering all for his daughter's peace. It was the art in
which his ancestors had taken the lead from the earliest industrial
triumphs of the Republic--an art in which Venice stood first--and in his
simple belief it was not less to their glory than the work of a Titian
or a Sansovino. In this field he wrought whole-hearted, with the passion
of an artist who has achieved, and his place and part in the Republic,
as in life, was bounded for him by his art. "To stand with folded
hands--always, hereafter, to be unnecessary to Venice!"

How should one who had not been born in Venice ever guess the strange
fascination of that magic city for her sons, or dream with what a
passion the blood of generations of Venetian ancestry surged in one's
veins, compelling patriotism, so that it was not possible to do aught
with one's gifts and life that did not enhance the greatness of so fair
a kingdom! It was the wonderful secret of the empire of Venice that here
the pride of self was counted only as a factor in the superior pride of
her dominion.

Marina had been proud of his cabinet, and he took the little antique
lamp she used to hold for him and unlocked the door with a tremulous
hand, standing unsteadily before it and trying to hearten himself, as he
ruthlessly flashed the light so that each fantastic bit came out in
perfect beauty, glowing with the wonderful coloring of transparent gems.

But suddenly those fearful words of Piero's played riot among them,
obliterating every trace of beauty, every claim of Venice, every
question as to his own judgment or Marina's reasoning--even the ignominy
of the secret flight. "_Thy daughter dying_!"

The letters blazed like stars, gleaming among his papers--glittering
around the chair where Marina used to sit, climbing up into the air,
closing nearer to him--wavering, writhing lines of living fire, tracing
those awful words he could not forget----

"My God!" he cried, "is not Marina more than all!" There was no longer
anything in life that he willed to do but to win peace for her,
according to her whim.

"Stino!" he shrieked, with a voice louder than the clang of the rude
iron bell whose rope had broken in his impetuous hand.

"Light me a fire in the brazier, and burn me this rubbish!" he commanded
of the foreman who entered, aghast at the imperious summons, and yet
more amazed at the destruction of those precious pages over which his
master had spent days of brooding; but he ventured no protest.

"And here," said Girolamo, with a look of relief, as the last paper
shrivelled and curled into smoke, "are the keys of these cabinets--thou
knowest their contents, and that they are precious. And here shalt thou
remain, as master, until my return--keeping all in order, as thou
knowest how, and loyally serving the interest of the stabilimento. All
moneys which I may send for thou shalt instantly remit by trusty
messenger."

"How long doth the Master remain away?"

"So long as it may please the Lady Marina, who hath need of change. And
if I return not," Girolamo resumed, after a moment's pause which gave
solemnity to his words, "my will shall be found filed with the
Avvogadori del Commun; and thou, Stino, shalt answer to the summons they
will send thee--if I come no more."

"Master!" cried the faithful Stino, greatly troubled, for these
preparations filled him with dread, and were strange indeed for so old a
man who had never yet left Venice for a night. "Life is other than we
know it away from Venice; and the heart of us goes mourning for the
sight and sound of the sea and the color of our skies!"

"Nay, Stino, I have said it," his master answered, unmoved by his
imploring eyes.

"When goest thou--that all may be ready?"

"Now; ere the dawn!" Girolamo cried with sudden resolution. "I would say
my Ave Maria in the chapel of the Lady Marina. Rouse the gondolier, and
lift the curtain that I may see how soon the day cometh."

"Master, dear Master," said Stino tenderly, as he drew the heavy
draperies aside. "Already the sun is high, and the household hath been,
these many hours, awake."

"So!" Girolamo answered with deep gravity, for the battle had been
longer than he had dreamed, yet with his habitual control. "I knew not
the time--my thoughts held me. Stino, if I return not, may the saints
bless thee for all thou hast been to me since the Lady Marina hath dwelt
in the palazzo Giustiniani. And in my will thou art not forgotten."

As Girolamo issued from his own portal, closely followed by Stino and
the other superintendents of the great stabilimento who were filled with
foreboding at this sudden and surprising decision of their good master,
several gondolas wearing the colors of the Giustiniani floated into the
waterway from the broad lagoon; and with them, like a flock of sea-birds
in their habits of gray and their cowls of white, came the sisters of
San Donato, returning from that early chanted Mass at the palazzo
Giustiniani which had been a dream of the Lady Marina's happier days.

The young Senator had urged his boatmen to feverish speed, and his own
gondola was far in advance of the train. He bounded from his bark the
moment it neared the steps, and, rushing blindly toward the dwelling,
encountered his father-in-law on the threshold.

"She is here--Marina?" he questioned, half crazed with grief; and,
forgetful of the usual courtesies, would have pushed him aside to enter.
"I have come with her maidens and her child to take her home. Let me go
to her!"

And, as Girolamo stood, dumb and dazed, "I beseech thee--conceal her
not!"

Looking into each other's faces for one anguished moment, they knew,
without need of further speech, that she had gone from them both.

Girolamo gave a great and bitter cry, "My son!" folding his arms about
the younger man in measureless grief and compassion.

And when they could trust their footsteps they went desolately into the
house together.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Nay," Girolamo had answered to every argument. "It is for thee to
remain in Venice with her child, that the Signoria be not wroth with the
Ca' Giustiniani, and for me to seek and care for her--mayhap, if heaven
be merciful, to bring her to thee again! She cannot be far to seek."

"In Padua!" cried Marcantonio, with sudden conviction. "They will sleep
in Padua to-night. It _was_ the voice of the Lady Beata!"



XXX

"Art thou sure, Marina?"

"Ay, Piero, though it were death to me; and death were sweeter----"

Her hair lay like a wreath of snow across her forehead, from stress of
the night's vigil, her lip trembled like a grieved child's, but in her
exquisite face there was the grace of a spirit strong and tender.

He helped her silently into the gondola and steered it carefully between
the pali which rose like a scattered sheaf, glowing with the colors of
the Giustiniani, in the water before her palace. And thus, in the early
dawn--unattended, with the sadness of death in her pallid face--the lady
of the Giustiniani floated away from her beautiful home--away from
happiness and love--into a future cheerless and dim as the dawn lights
that were faintly tinging the sea. For the day was breaking, full of
gloom, under a sky of clouds, and the wind blew chill from across the
Lido.

She sat with her gray mantle shrouding her face, and neither of them
spoke, while the gondola, under Piero's deft guidance, quickly gained
the steps of the Piazzetta and passed on to San Giorgio. Then she
touched his arm entreatingly.

"Oh, let us wait one moment before we lose sight of the palazzo! Madre
Beatissima, have them in thy keeping!"

She stretched out her hands unconsciously, with a gesture of petition,
and her mantle slipped back, exposing her pallid, pain-stricken face and
her whitened tresses.

Piero was startled at the havoc the night had made, for he had seen her
only the day before, in answer to her summons, when she had been far
more like herself.

"Santa Maria!" he exclaimed, crossing himself, and awkward under the
unaccustomed sense of an overwhelming compassion. "The Holy Mother must
shrive me for breaking my vow, for if San Marco and San Teodoro would
give me a place between them before the matins ring again--mistaking me
for a traitor--I cannot take thee from Venice. We will return," and
already the gondola was yielding to his stroke. "Let Marcantonio bring
thee himself to Rome."

"Piero, thou hast sworn to me! Thou shalt abide by thy promise!" she
cried, seizing the oar in her trembling hand.

"Ay, Marina, I have sworn to thee," he answered, with slow pauses, "and
by our Holy Mother of San Giorgio, I will serve thee like a saint in
heaven. Yet I would thou wert in thy home again--already thou hast
broken thy heart for love of it."

The gondolas of the people were gathering about the steps of the
palaces, bringing their burdens for the day's ongoings in those
luxurious homes; the bells were calling to early Mass; the stir of life
was beginning in the city; soon, in her own palace, her little one would
wake, and Marco--She stood with straining eyes, yearning for the chance
of a face in her palace window--the bare last chance of another sight of
his dear face. She did not know that Piero was watching
her--compassionate and comprehending--while she was struggling to
outlive the agony for the very love's sake which made it so keen.

It was the only sweetness left in life for her, that this cruel parting
was yet for Marco's sake; that she might still plead with the Holy
Father for this desperate need of which Marco seemed unconscious--since,
in a vision never to be forgotten, the blessed Madre of San Donato had
confided this mission to her. She could bear everything to win such a
blessing for her beloved ones, only she must reach Rome--surely the
Madre Beatissima would let her live to reach the Holy City!

The tide was brimming the canals, rising over the water steps; the
growing light gleamed coldly on the polished marbles of her palace,
burnishing the rich gold fretwork of frieze and tracery--but not any
face of any dear one responded to her hungry longing, watching for her
in the deep spaces of the windows, in token of the love from which she
was fleeing.

This also--this last longing--she must surrender!

Her white face grew brave again; she sat down and drew her veil--the
ample _fazzuolo_ of the Muranese--more closely about her. "I am ready,"
she said, and turned her face resolutely forward.

As they rounded San Giorgio, turning into the broad Giudecca, a shoal of
little boats came over the water from Murano.

"They are the nuns of San Donato!" she said in amazement, and drawing
her veil closer. "Piero, canst thou not ask their whither?"

It was so strange, on this morning of all others, to see them turn in
the direction of Ca' Giustiniani; there came a vision of her chapel,
which her maidens were decking--of the dear altar, at which she should
kneel no more--and she held her breath to hear the answer.

"Will the most Reverend Mother bless the boat of a gondolier of the
people; and his sister, who hath been ill and craveth the morning air?"
Piero, who had discarded every emblem of his office, and wore only the
simple dress of the Nicolotti, put the question easily, without fear of
recognition. "And there is no great trouble in the city which calleth
these illustrious ladies so early from Murano?"

"Nay; but the Senator Giustiniani hath prayed us for a grace to his
sweet lady, for the chapel hath been closed while she hath been too ill
for service; and to-day it will be opened, dressed with flowers, and
we--because she loveth greatly our Madonna of San Donato and hath shown
bounty, with munificent gifts, to all the parish--will chant the matins
in her oratory."

They gave the benediction and passed.

While Marcantonio, with his tender thought for Marina fresh in his
heart, was waking to find only her note of farewell.

"Only because I love thee, Marco mio, I have the strength to leave thee.
And it is the Madonna who hath called me. Forgive, and forget not thy
sad Marina."

"Marina--" Piero began awkwardly, for argument was not his forte, and
Marina had always conquered him. "'Chi troppo abbraccia nulla stringe,'
one gains nothing who grasps too much. Thou wast ever one for duty, and
if the Senator Marcantonio will not take thee to Rome----"

"No, Piero, he cannot; he is one of the rulers of Venice."

"Thou, then--his wife----"

How could he venture to counsel her, of whose will and wisdom he had
always stood in awe? It seemed to Piero that he had already delivered an
oration; yet he felt that there was more to say, but his thoughts grew
confused in seeking for expression, and it was a relief to him to
communicate his uncertainty to the motion of his gondola.

The unsteady movement said more to her than words, for Piero was an
unfailing stroke.

"It is the men only of whom the Republic hath need," she explained,
unflinchingly; "but for the women there is no conflict of duty--the Holy
Church is first. 'Prayers for the women and deeds for the men'--thou
hast seen it written."

"And thy father?" Piero questioned, unconvinced, recalling the interview
of a few hours before.

A quick, tender light flashed and passed in her eyes; a ray of color
trembled on her cheek. "I shall grieve him," she said, "but he will
forgive, for ever hath he bidden me choose the right." Her voice broke
and she was silent, while she sought for some token in the folds of her
robe. "Thou wilt take him this when thou returnest, that he may know I
hold him dear."

"Marina!" he pleaded, growing eloquent, with a last desperate effort,
"thou wast ever an angel to the Zuanino--thou canst not leave thine own
bimbo!"

She did not answer immediately, but she clasped and unclasped her hands
passionately. "He is safe," she said at last, very low and struggling
for control. "He hath the blessing of the Holy Father, given when it
might avail; and the little ones are ever in the care of the Blessed
Mother. It is not for my baby that I needs must go--but for Marco and my
father, and for Venice. Santissima Maria, because thou sendest me, shalt
thou not grant the strength!"

There was a silence between them while they floated on, for Piero had
many things to think of. He was accustomed to accomplish whatever he
undertook, for he was not a man to fail from lack of resource, nor to be
overcome by fears and scruples. By means of his passes and his favor
with the government he could reach the borders of the Venetian dominions
without suspicion, from whence he would escort Marina to the nearest
convent and place her in safety with the Mother Superior, to whom he
would confide the story of her distinguished guest and secure for her
the treatment due to a Venetian princess; which, under the
circumstances, would be an easy matter, as no member of a noble Venetian
house espousing the side of Rome would be met with any but the most
flattering reception. To provide Marina with companionship, Piero had
confided her intended flight to the Lady Beata Tagliapietra, being sure
of her devotion; and she would be waiting for them at Padua with two
trusted gondoliers and whatever might be needful from the wardrobe of
the Lady of the Giustiniani. The fact that he had broken his promise of
secrecy did not trouble him, since it was in Marina's service, which
made the action honorable; and were it not so, the little perjury was
well atoned for by a keg of oil anonymously sent to the traghetto of San
Nicolo e San Raffaele, "pel luminar al Madonna";[8] and Piero had much
faith in anonymous gifts, for confessions were not always convenient for
an officer of his dignity. But it was perhaps too much to expect that
these poor little traghetto lamps should be more than dimly luminous,
since the oil was so largely provided by fines for delinquencies!

  [8] To light the Madonna.

With an easy conscience, also, he had helped himself to the requisite
funds for their journey, amply estimated, from the treasury of the
Nicolotti, which was in his keeping; and his reasoning savored of
Venetian subtlety, with a hint of his toso training. Had not the Lady of
the Giustiniani offered to guarantee the funds necessary for the
assessments of the state, when Piero, doubtful of their resources, would
have declined the position of gastaldo grande, cumbered as it was with
the uncomfortable requirement that the chief should be personally
responsible for all dues and taxes levied upon the traghetti? Piero was
not the first gastaldo who had wished to escape an honor that weighed so
heavily, and a very serious penalty was already decreed for such
contempt of office by that tribunal tireless in vigilance.

So, without compunction, Piero had taken the needful, sure that when he
returned Marina's husband or her father would repay it.

_Could_ he return--after helping a patrician to escape from Venice into
the heart of the country with which the Republic was at war? It looked
doubtful even to Piero, with his indomitable temperament, but he wasted
no sentiment upon this question; for if he might not return there were
other countries in which a man could live. Or, should he be pursued and
lighted upon by the far-seeing eye of the Ten, he could die but once and
get into trouble no more! He crossed himself decorously as he dismissed
the matter; but it was not an event that he could change by pondering.

There was another question that interested him more keenly at this
moment; when Messer Girolamo should know that his daughter was not in
Venice, could he fail to comprehend the hint he had given a few hours
before, and would he not follow them to Rome, as Piero devoutly hoped,
for he wished to leave Marina in her father's care. It was not easy to
predict what Messer Girolamo might do--the case had been too doubtful
for a more explicit confession, and Piero had been wise in his
generation.

He turned now to Marina with the question: "If thou hadst told thy
father of thy wish mayhap he might have come with thee?"

She shook her head sadly and made no answer, but after awhile she said,
"He is like the others. They cannot understand the need, for to them the
Madonna hath not revealed the desperate state of Venice."

"Yet thou knowest, Marina, that already the great cardinal--but lately
come from France--hath started for Rome to make up this quarrel?"

"That is what the Senate will not understand!" she cried, with flashing
eyes. "The Holy Father will have submission and penance, in place of
embassies and pomp. One must go to him quite simply, from the people,
saying, 'We have sinned; have mercy upon Venice!' Piero, thou knowest
that awful vision of the Tintoret? It is Venice that he hath painted in
her doom--the great floods bursting in upon her--all the agony and the
anguish and the desolation of God's wrath! Santa Maria! I cannot bear
it!" She closed her eyes, shuddering and sick with terror.

"It was the way with Jacopo," said Pietro irreverently. "He was full of
freaks, and some demon hath tormented him. He was a man like others--not
one for a revelation."

"Hush, Piero!" she implored; "it breaks my heart! This also may be
counted against Venice, for it is the Holy Madonna who hath granted me
the vision."

If Piero was silent he was only restrained by deference to Marina from
invoking the aid of every saint in the calendar, in copious malediction,
on this miserable Jacopo who had so increased the trouble in Marina's
eyes--since women had such foolish faith in pictures.

"Jacopo Robusti, posing for a seer, and foretelling the end of the
world, like a prophet or a saint! _Goffone_!"[9] Piero was paddling
furiously. "Jacopo, of the Fondamenta del Mori--not better than
others--with that boastful sentence blazoned on his door!--'The coloring
of Titian, with the drawing of Angelo!'"

  [9] Great fool!

But he forgot even his resentment against Jacopo in his anxiety as he
watched Marina, asking himself if it would be possible for her to pray
herself back into healthful life again, even in the dominions of the
Holy Father; for he realized that nothing could help her but this one
thing on which her heart was set--while he was yet, if possible, more
utterly without sympathy for the fear that moved her than her father or
Marcantonio had been. But if the one woman in Venice had but one desire,
however desperate and incomprehensible,--"_Basta_! It is enough," said
Piero to himself,--she should not die with it unfulfilled, if he could
compass it.

Yet, at the thought of death his heart sank. "It was the Madonna which
thou beheldest in thy vision--not the cross?" he asked her quickly,
making the fateful sign as he spoke, to avert this dread presage of
death, and afraid of her answer; for Marina was failing before his eyes,
and doubtless, in her vision, there had been some apparition of a cross;
and even the less devout among the gondoliers were still dominated by
some of the superstitions which gave a picturesque color to the habits
of the people.

But she, too earnest in her faith to take any note of a less serious
mood, answered simply:

"It was the very Madonna herself, as thou knowest her in San Donato, who
came to me in the palazzo one night when I slept not, and gave me the
mission to save Venice,--scarce able to speak for her great sadness,
and the tears dropping, as thou knowest her in San Donato,--commanding
me to go before the Holy Father and pray for mercy to Venice. She it was
who told me that our prayers pass not up beyond the clouds which hang
above a city under doom of interdict. Oh, Piero, hasten; for my strength
is little, and Rome is far!"

When the Lady of the Giustiniani had sent for Piero to meet her in Santa
Maria dell' Orto, to ask him to manage her escape to Rome, it had not
been possible to refuse her; all his attempts at reasoning were in vain.
"I must go," she said, with that invincible persistence which he never
could combat. "If thou wilt not help me, I go alone." She was kneeling
before the terrible "Judgment" of the Tintoret, and the face she had
lifted to him in appeal was white with agonized comprehension.

The journey had been long and wearisome; all day they had been slowly
toiling against the tide; and long since Piero had summoned to his aid a
trusted gondolier who had been ordered to follow them at a little
distance, and who, at a sign from the gastaldo, had silently left his
bark to drift and taken his place at the other end of the gondola in
which the fugitives were making their way to Padua.

They had passed the domain of the Laguna Morta, weird and
half-forbidding, with tangles of sea-plants and upspringing wild fowl
calling to each other with hoarse cries across the marshes--with armies
of water beetles zigzagging in the shallows, and crabs and lizards
crawling upon the scattered sand heaps among the coarse sea-grasses,
while small fish brought unexpected dimples to the deeper pools that lay
between. And the mingled odor of waters fresh and salt was broken into a
breath now pungent and pleasant, now almost noisome, as the light breeze
stirred the shallows of this strange domain which was neither land nor
sea. Yet even here the pale sea-holly and the evening primrose made
redeeming spots of beauty, with their faint hues of violet and yellow;
and a distant water-meadow shimmered like the sea, with the tender blue
of the spreading lavender.

They had passed Fusina, and the lagoon lay silvery, like a trail of
moonlight behind them--Venice in the distance, opalesque, radiant, a
city of dreams. The clouds above them, beautiful with changing sunset
lights, were no longer mirrored on a still lagoon, but mottled the
broken surfaces of the river with hues of bronze and purple, between the
leaves of the creeping water-plants which clogged the movement of the
oars; for they had exchanged the liquid azure pavement of their "Citta
Nobilissima" for the brown tide of the Brenta. On the river's brink the
rushes were starred with lilies and iris and ranunculus, and the
fragrance of sheeted flowers from the water-meadows came to them fresh
and delicious, mingled with the salt breath of the sea, while
swallows--dusky, violet-winged--circled about their bows, teasing their
progress with mystic eliptical flight--like persistent problems
perpetually recurring, yet to be solved by fate alone.

It was the hour of the Ave Maria, and Marina roused herself from her sad
reverie. The clouds piled themselves in luminous masses and drifted
into the hollows of the wonderful Euganean hills, and a crimson sunset
tinged peaks and clouds with glory, as Padua with its low arcaded
streets, and San Antonio--cousin to San Marco in minarets and Eastern
splendor--and the Lion of Saint Mark upon his lofty column, closed the
vista of their weary day. The chimes of Venice were too far for sound,
but from every campanile of this quaint city the vesper bells, solemn
and sweet, pealed forth their call to prayer--as if no threat of Rome's
displeasure made a discord in their harmony.



XXXI

Piero had watched all night before the little inn of the "Buon Pesce,"
impatient to meet and conquer his fate, while above, in an upper room,
the ladies Marina and Beata tried to sleep; but before the dawn they
were off again, down by the way of the brown, rolling river, taking the
weary length to Brondolo and the sea.

There were two gondolas now, and the men in each pulled as if the prize
of a great regatta awaited them--Nicolotti against Castellani--and
silently, saving voice and strength for a great need.

It might have seemed a pleasure party, save for the stress of their
speed, as they swept by the groves of poplar and catalpa, which bordered
the broad flood, to the sound of the waters only and the song of the
birds in the wood; water-lilies floated in the pools along the shore;
currents of fragrance were blown out to them on wandering winds; and in
the felze, as they were nearing Brondolo, Marina and the Lady Beata,
soothed by the gliding motion and the monotonous plash of the oars into
the needed sleep which the night had failed to bring them, were unaware
of the colloquy between Piero and his gondolier.

"Antonio!" Piero called cautiously to the man who was rowing behind the
felze, "I have somewhat to say to thee; are there those within thy
vision who may hear our speech?"

"Padrone, no; but the time is short for speaking much, for we reach the
lock with another turn of the Brenta."

"May the blessed San Nicolo send sunshine to dazzle the jewels in the
eyes of Messer San Marco till we are safe beyond it and out of
Chioggia!" Piero exclaimed fervently. "And thou, Antonio, swear me again
thy faith--or swear it not, as thou wilt. But thou shalt choose this
moment whom thou wilt serve; and it shall go ill with thee if thou keep
not thy troth."

"By San Marco and San Teodoro," Antonio responded readily, crossing
himself devoutly as he spoke, "I swear to do thy bidding, Messer
Gastaldo."

"And thou wilt die for the people against the nobles if need should be?"

"If thou leadest, Gastaldo Grande."

"Hast thou a pouch beneath thy stiletto where thou mayest defend with
thy life what I shall give thee?"

Antonio displayed it silently.

"This for the need of the cause in thy hand," said Piero, passing him a
purse of gold. "But gold is worthless to this token which shall win thee
the hearing of the bancali, and the aid of every loyal son of San
Nicolo, and shall be proof that thou bearest my orders and my trust."

The trust was great--the bancali were the governing board of the
traghetti.

Antonio unfastened his doublet and secured the precious token under his
belt.

"Command then, caro padrone."

"Slacken thy pace, for this may be our last speech together. Are those
who follow true as thou?"

"Messer Gastaldo," Antonio answered with reluctance, "by signs which be
but trifles to relate,--by a word dropped in Padua, and not for mine
ear,--one of them--I know not which--hath, perchance, affair with a
master mightier than thou." He made the usual gesture which indicated
the Three of that terrible Inquisition whose name was better left
unsaid--a sign much used in Venice where the very walls had ears.

It was a blow to Piero, but he wasted no words.

"They then--both--are apart from this and all my counsel. It shall be
for thee alone, Antonio."

"So safer, Messer Gastaldo. I listen--and forget, save as it shall serve
thee."

"First, then, Antonio; I have sworn to escort the Lady of the
Giustiniani in safety to Rome, from which naught shall keep me--save if
the Ten have other plans, the Madonna doth forgive the broken vow!"

It was a strange admission from a man stalwart and fearless like Piero,
but he made it without shame, as a soldier acquiescing in destiny.

"Santissima Maria!" Antonio ejaculated with unusual fervor and crossing
himself in full realization of the meaning.

"At Brondolo a brig is waiting--orange and yellow of sail, device of a
blazing sun; a hunchback, with doublet of orange above the mast for
luck, and a fine figure of a _gobbo_ upon the deck--a living
hunchback--by which thou shalt know it for mine, and bound to my order
whether it come by me or by my token. If we reach and board her it shall
be well--and Rome, so will it heaven, before us all! But if the dreaded
ones are on the search and overtake us----"

Again the sign.

The tragedy of the situation was in his face as he looked steadily at
Antonio, who did not flinch.

"Thy duty, then, Antonio, shall lie elsewhere. Thou must escape, unseen,
while they lay hands upon the lady and me, whom first they will secure
before they give thee a thought."

Antonio instantly touched his stiletto, and looked his question with a
fearless glance.

"Nay," said the gastaldo scornfully, and drawing a line quickly about
his own throat. "Thou wilt serve me better with thy head in its place.
Thou shalt return to Venice--by Fusina or Brondolo, as thy wit shall
serve thee--leaving the precious gondolieri to prove whether their
silken sashes be badges of men or traitors! Art thou listening?"

"Command me, padrone!"

"Within two days, if I be free, the bancali shall have news of me.
Listen well, Antonio,"--again the hand and eyes went up with the dreaded
unmistakable sign,--"if thou seest THEM seize me before thou takest
leave, wait no longer than to plan with the bancali to come and demand
my release. Thou shalt tell the bancali that I sent thee; thou shalt
tell them there are affairs of moment for the Nicolotti which shall go
hard for the traghetti if I be not there to work them--Art listening,
Antonio?" he questioned feverishly.

Antonio's eyes were fastened upon his. "Padrone, yes!" he answered
breathlessly.

"With my token thou canst command the loyalty of every Nicolotto--is it
thine oar that made that rustle?--and perchance, if there were a rising
of the traghetti to demand aught of the Signoria--come nearer,
Antonio!--the Castellani also, if they willed to join with their
traghetti in asking for justice--would not serve under my token the less
heartily for the word, confided low to their bancali--dost
understand?--_that if their taxes and their fines oppress them_, these
also, I being free, will pay this year to the maledetto Avvogadoro del
Commun."

Antonio gravely bowed his head in assent.

"This at thy discretion--thou understandest, Antonio--and so that no
violence come from the massing of the people, but only the proof of its
will and of the numbers who make the demand. Only--if it be not granted,
they shall make a stand at the traghetti and _fight_----"

"Padrone, yes!"

"For--thou dost mark me, Antonio?--this Lady of the Giustiniani hath
been a saint among the people; she hath given them much in gifts--she
hath given almost her life in prayers and penances, that heaven may
avert its wrath from Venice, which she in truth believeth the Holy
Father--may the saints make him suffer for it!--hath brought upon the
people by his curse--may heaven forbid! And she, being now noble, hath
preferred the cause of the _people_ to the cause of the _nobles_, and
bringeth upon her the displeasure of the Signoria by her flight to
Rome. For--see it well, Antonio!--if the Senate hold the Lady of the
Giustiniani for fault in this,"--Piero paused and uttered the last words
with a slow, mysterious emphasis, while Antonio listened with an
intensity that missed no shading of meaning,--"_it will be the cause of
the people against the nobles_."

"If they harm her not," he resumed in his usual tone, after a moment's
pause, "my fate shall be avenged in the judgment and command of the
bancali of the Nicolotti only. They shall not risk the people's good for
the poor life of one leader!"

"Padrone!" Antonio cried, with flashing eyes. "Commandi altro?" ("Hast
thou other commands?")

"None, save that if I return not--and not otherwise--thou shalt seek
with my token the Master Girolamo Magagnati; thou shalt tell him of this
my confidence, holding nothing back; and thou shalt pray him, of his
honor, to discharge the debt which may be found lacking in the treasury
of the Nicolotti,--since the moneys have been taken for the need of the
lady on her journey,--the which, if I return, I have means, and more, to
repay."

The two men grasped hands and looked into each other's eyes for a brief
recording moment, having each touched that _best_ in the other which was
not shown to all men, and so begotten trust each in each.

"By the Holy Madonna and San Nicolo, I will not fail!" Antonio promised,
and in a moment had seized his oar again and was springing forward on
the bridge of his gondola, as if his thoughts were light and rhythmic as
his motions.

They sped on with a few swift, silent strokes--then, "Brondolo!" he
cried brightly; but a sudden desperate steadying of resolution was felt
in the fierce stroke which sent the gondola forward with a jerk.

The fishing-skiffs of Chioggia fluttered like gaudy butterflies before
them, dipping their wings of orange and crimson and every conceivable
sunset tint to catch the breeze; and the air was suddenly vibrant with
sounds of traffic and busy life. Men called to each other with song and
jest from heavily laden barks, while they waited the hour of sailing; or
lay at ease on the top of their wares, smoking luxurious draughts of
content from their comrade pipes,--lords of their craft, though their
couch was but a pile of cabbages or market produce,--exchanging some
whimsical comment upon the affairs of busier neighbors which brimmed
these frequent hours of _dolce far niente_ with unflagging interest.

And there, among the lighter shipping, was the brig bound to the order
of the gastaldo grande, with the yellow sails and device of the rising
sun--with the gobbo in orange doublet on the masthead for good luck, and
the gobbo on the deck to make it sure. Piero turned and looked for it,
as they passed the lock. And there too----

"_Corpo di San Marco_!" ejaculated Antonio under his breath, for he
stood higher than Piero upon the bridge of the gondola and facing
forward.

There, full in sight, and riding proudly at anchor, the beautiful curves
of her swan-like prows made cannon proof with plates of shining
steel,--and below, in lieu of figurehead to promise victory, those
letters of dread omen, C.D.X.,--with thirty oars-men from the arsenal
of Venice, to ensure her speed, each ready at his oar-lock to wield his
oar, with a band of marksmen trained to finest tempered arms to quell
the resistance which no Venetian would dare offer with those letters on
the prow; the gold and scarlet banner of San Marco, for good fortune, at
her masthead; the wind swelling her impatient sail, as the curb but
frets the steed--_the galley of the Ten was not waiting without a
purpose_!

The shock of the boats as they passed through the lock had roused the
sleepers rudely, and Piero had time but for a swift glance of command to
Antonio, bidding him escape, when a gondola bearing the ducal colors
floated out from the sea of small waiting craft and saluted them
courteously. The dignified signor who addressed them wore the violet
robe and stole of a secretary of the Doge, and his face was the face of
that secretary in whose silken hand the gastaldo's had lain prisoned
when he took the oath of office!

Resistance was impossible.

"Messer Gastaldo," said the secretary suavely, "it hath pleased those
who have ever the welfare of Venice at heart to provide for the most
noble Lady of the Giustiniani an escort which better fitteth her rank
than the size of thy _barchetta_ permitteth, and a dwelling more
honorable than the 'Osteria del Buon Pesce,' where, in company of the
Lady Beata Tagliapietra, she hath passed the night."

The secretary paused and placidly noted the effect of his words upon
Piero, who could have gnashed his teeth for anger at those talking walls
of Venice which had betrayed him--so cautiously had he told his secret
to the Lady Beata only, in that short moonlight stroll!

At a sign from the secretary a second gondola, wearing the ducal livery
and filled with the gorgeous costumes of the palace guards, came out
from the floating mass and approached the gondola of the people, where
the Lady Marina sat trembling like a frightened fawn.

There was a struggle among the lesser craft to draw closer to this
dramatic centre; they jostled each other unceremoniously; a splash, like
a falling oar, was heard, but scarce noted in the absorbing interest of
the moment; only a bare-legged boy jumped off from a tiny fishing-skiff
near which the oar had floated, and swam with it to to the gondola from
which it had fallen--since it was this boat which was making the
carnival for them! Piero, alone, had slightly turned his head and noted
that no one now stood on the _ponte piede_ behind the felze of his
gondola.

"The galley waits to receive the noble ladies to whom I am commissioned
_by those who have sent me_ to offer my respectful homage," said the
secretary, bowing low before the felze. "The noble ladies will proceed
thither in the ducal gondola which attends them. And thou, Messer
Gastaldo, wilt graciously aid me in their escort--since, verily, they
owe much to thy chivalry."

It was a pleasant scene for the onlookers.

But the Lady Marina sat motionless, and gave neither word nor sign in
response to the invitation of the ducal secretary.

"Shall the pleasure of the lady of this noble house not be consulted?"
Piero questioned, struggling to cover his defiance under a tone of
deference.

But his answer was only in the secretary's eyes,--smiling,
imperious,--more defiant than his own impotent will; and in the courtly
waiting attitude, which had not changed, and which seemed unbearably to
lengthen out the passing seconds.

The Lady Beata, winding compassionate arms around her friend, had raised
her veil, whispering words of tenderness.

But there was no recognition in the glance that met hers--only the
immeasurable pathos of a hopeless surrender; the fervent passion of
Marina's will and faith had made all things seem possible of
achievement, though Venice was against her, for had not the mission been
given her in a vision by the Holy Madonna of San Donato--Mother of
Sorrows--and was not the issue sure? And yielding all thought of self
she had braced every faculty to accomplish the holy task of which she
alone felt the urgency. But the overtaxed heart and brain could endure
no longer thwarting; their activity and unquestioning purpose had been
her only power; and the moment she ceased to struggle will and reason
fled together.

Pitifully acquiescent, she went with them unresisting.

       *       *       *       *       *

A haze that was not luminous hung in the sky; night was creeping on
without a sunset, as they battled their way up the Giudecca against the
current which rushed like a boiling torrent around San Giorgio--the blue
calm of the waters turned to a frenzied, foam-lashed green.

The men rowed fast, with tight-furled sail, but the storm came faster;
ranks of threatening clouds were hurrying from the east, gathering like
armies of vengeful spirits, darker, closer about them, shutting off
every breath of air; an oppression, throbbing with nameless fears, was
upon them--a hush, as if life had ceased; then the scorching, withering
torment of a fierce sirocco, and the moan of the wind, like a soul in
pain.

Marina grew faint and wide-eyed for terror, but they could not soothe
her by word or touch; she sat with clasped hands, gasping for breath,
listening to the low, long boom on the shores of the Lido, like muffled
thunder, ceaselessly recurring--the terrible noise of the great waves
beating against the sea-walls--beating and breaking in fury, tossing
their spray high in air and whirling it in clouds, like rain mists, far
across the lagoon. Would the barriers stand--or yield and leave them to
their doom? Were the great waters of the Adriatic uprising in vengeance
to overwhelm this city in her sin? Boom upon boom sounded through all
the voices of the storm. Santa Maria! was it this that the Tintoretto
had foretold!

A dazzling, frenzied flash of light,--a vast peal of thunder that was
like the wrath of a mighty, offended God,--then darkness, and a torrent
of rain--the waters in the shifting path of the wind leaping up to meet
the waters from the sky!

The vesper bells of Venice came sobbing through the storm, tossed and
broken by the tornado into a wraith of a dirge; and now, by some
fantastic freak of nature, as the winds rose higher, the iron tongues
from every campanile--for a brief moment of horror--came wrangling and
discordant, as if tortured by some demon of despair.

  "_Ave Maria, Gratia plena_!"

the women cried together, falling on their knees, while the men toiled
and struggled to hold the invincible galley of the Ten outside the
whirling path of the storm--advancing and retreating at the will of the
elements, against which their own splendid, human strength was like the
feeble, untaught effort of a helpless infant.

"_Mater Dei, Ora pro nobis peccatoribus, nunc et in hora mortis
nostrae_."

The words rose in a wail between the gusts.

For measureless moments, mighty as hours, they battled between San Marco
and San Giorgio, tossed to and fro--now nearer the haven of the great
white dome, now--as a lightning flash unveiled San Marco--near enough to
see a cloud of frightened doves go whirling over the flood which swept
the Piazza from end to end and poured out under the great gates of the
Ducal Palace into the lagoon.

"_Summa Parens clementia--nocte surgentes_----"



XXXII

A Day momentous for Venice--or was it Rome?--had come and passed; it
chronicled the right of the Crown to make its own laws within its own
realm, without reference to ecclesiastical claims which had hitherto
been found hampering; it defined the limits of Church and State, as no
protest had hitherto done.

But Venice was calm in her triumph as she had been unmoved in disaster,
and would not reflect the jubilant tone of the cardinal when he had
returned from Rome empowered to withdraw the censures upon the terms
stipulated by the Republic.

Yet, at this latest moment, the cardinal mediator, from lack of
discretion, had come near to failure; for the terms being less favorable
than he had desired to obtain for the Holy Father, he could not resist
attempting to win some little further grace before pronouncing the final
word, when the Signoria, weary of temporizing, told him plainly that his
Holiness must come at once to a decision, or Venice would forget that
she had so far yielded as to listen to any negotiations.

There was no pageant at the close of this long drama of which the
princes of Europe had been interested spectators. Venice sat smiling and
unruffled under her April skies when the ducal secretary escorted the
two famous prisoners from the dungeons of the Palace to the residence of
the French ambassador, and there, _without prejudice to the Republic's
right of jurisdiction over criminal ecclesiastics_, explicitly
stipulated, bestowed this gift--so fitting for the gratification of a
"Most Christian Majesty"--upon the representative of France, who must
indeed have breathed more freely when this testimonial of favor, with
its precious burden of nameless crimes, had been consigned by him to one
who waited as an appointee of the Pope.

The Doge and the Signoria sat in their accustomed places in their
stately Assembly Chamber when the cardinal came with congratulations
upon the withdrawal of the interdict, and the words of the Serenissimo,
as he gave the promised parchment, were few and dignified.

"I thank the Lord our God that his Holiness hath assured himself of the
purity of our intentions and the sincerity of our deeds."

And the writing of that parchment, sealed with the seal of Saint Mark,
stood thus:

"Essendo state levate le Censure e restate parimente rivocato il
Protesto." ("The censures having been taken off the protest remains
equally revoked.")

It was whispered low that the cardinal, under his cape, made the sign of
the cross and murmured a word of absolution. But if the Signoria
suspected his intention there was no movement of acquiescence; only,
when the short ceremony of the passing of the document was completed,
they observed the usual forms of courtesy with which the audience of so
princely an envoy is closed when his mission is accomplished.

If Paul V had surrendered with reluctance his hope of a sumptuous
ceremony in San Pietro, where delegates of penitent Venetians should
kneel in public and confess and be graciously absolved--if the Cardinal
di Gioiosa had indulged flattering visions of a procession of priests
and people to the patriarchal church in the Piazza, with paeans of
joy-bells and shouts of gladness that Venice was again free to resume
her worship, and that her penitent people were pardoned sons of the
Church--he was doomed to disappointment. The cardinals of Spain and
France, attended only by their households, celebrated Mass in the ducal
chapel of San Marco; and the people came and went--as they did before
and after, through that day and all the days since the interdict had
been pronounced, in this and all the churches of Venice--and scarcely
knew that their doom was lifted, as they had hardly realized that the
curse had ever penetrated from those distant doors of San Pietro to the
sanctuary of San Marco!

But the world knew and never forgot how that stately court of Venice had
met the thunder of the Vatican and lessened its power forever.

The cause had been won in moderation and dignity upon a basis of civil
justice that was none the less accredited because the Teologo Consultore
who sat in chancelor's robes behind the throne was a zealous advocate of
the primitive principles of Christianity, and defended, without fear of
obloquy or death, the right of the individual conscience to interpret
for itself the laws of right,--as founded upon the words of
Christ,--because the extraordinary keenness, fineness, and breadth of
his masterly mind enabled him to conceive with unusual definiteness the
limits of civil and spiritual authority, and to ascribe the overgrowth
of error upon the Church he loved to the misconception and weakness of
human nature. He did not place Venice, the superb,--with her pride and
pomp and power and intellectual astuteness, with her faults and
worldliness and her magnificent statesmanship,--against the _spiritual_
kingdom of Christ's Church on earth and declare for Venice _against_ the
Church.

But he weighed in the clear poise of his brain the Book of the Divine
Law--which none knew better than he--with the laws of the princes of
this world--which also few knew better--and declared that _One_, lowly
and great, had defined the limits of the Church's jurisdiction when He
said, "My kingdom is not of this world."

But in Rome the reasoning was not so simple, and threats of vengeance
pursued this "terrible friar," whose bold judgments had ruled the
councils of rebellious Venice.

But though peace was declared with Rome the labors of the Senate were
scarcely lessened; there were still adjustments to be made which were
not whispered abroad--there were embassies to be dissolved and
appointed, gifts to be voted, honors to be heaped upon the head of the
man whose counsels had led to such results, and in whose person the
Senate now united the three offices of the Counsellors to the Doge,
making Fra Paolo sole Teologo Consultore.

It was the first time in the history of the Republic that such honors
had been voted, for Venice was not wont to be over-generous in
recognition of individual service; and this friend of statesmen,
scholars, and princes temporal and spiritual, preserved the greatness of
his simplicity unspoiled in prosperity and power--as was possible only
to a spirit ruled by inflexible principle and faith.

When the Senate voted him a palace near San Marco he preferred his
simple quarters among his brethren of the Servi. When, in proof of their
appreciation, they doubled his salary and would have trebled it
again--"Nay," said he, "it is but my duty that I have done. May the
honorable words of the Senate's recognition but hold before me that
which, by God's help, I may yet accomplish"; and he would take but so
much as he might bestow in charity and gifts to his convent, having for
himself no need nor tastes that were not met by the modest provision of
his order.

And when, having refused to go to Rome for reconciliation--being not
penitent--or for preferment, which would not come without penitence, Fra
Paolo still pursued, unmoved, the quiet tenor of his daily round, from
convent to palace, without pause or tremor, in spite of continued
warning;--"My life," he said, "is in the hands of God. My duty hath he
confided to mine own effort."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Lady Marina was a guest in the Ducal Palace, detained under
surveillance, yet treated with much honor; her friends might see her in
the presence of the ducal guards who watched within the doors of her
sumptuous chambers, but she was not free to go to her own, who had
guarded her with such laxity that in striving to reach the court of the
enemy she had imperiled the dignity of the Republic by her silent
censure. Marcantonio had trembled more when, the morning after the
storm, news had reached him that the fugitive was in the keeping of the
Signoria, than if the message had announced her death. What might he not
expect of their jealousy!

But a ducal secretary had received him with courtesy and conducted him
at once into the audience chamber of the Doge, who bade him send for her
maidens that she might be cared for tenderly, for her stay at the Palace
would be indefinite. It was a royal command, against which pleading or
rebellion were alike useless.

"Most Serene Prince!" cried Marcantonio in agony, "I beseech thee leave
me that gift which a gracious Senate once so generously bestowed! I have
never swerved in loyalty--though my heart was nigh to breaking that I
might not grant her prayer!"

But one in attendance spoke quickly; for the face of the good Leonardo
Donato was full of compassion, and he might not be trusted to serve the
higher interests of the Republic.

"It is of the clemency of the Serenissimo," said that inflexible voice,
"that the Lady Marina reaps not the penalty of her flight and of her
disloyalty to the State, since she hath sought to place her private
judgment beyond the wisdom of the rulers of Venice."

The figure stood motionless in the shadow of a column, muffled in a long
black mantle, a black beretta partially concealing the face.

There was an icy inflection in the tones which sent a chill to
Marcantonio's heart as he listened. One of the Chiefs of the Ten was
always a member of the still more dreaded Inquisition, whose identity
was never known, and the passionless voice held a hint of indisputable
authority--was his suffering wife to rely upon the mercy of the most
puissant member of this terrible commission!

"Take my life for hers!" he implored, so beside himself with grief and
terror that he disclosed his fear for Marina; "and bid her return to
care for our little one."

"Not so," said the emotionless voice; "the Lady Marina hath disproved
her right to care for a noble of Venice. It would be to imperil his
loyalty to leave the child under his mother's influence."

"My God!" cried Marcantonio bitterly; "take me to her and let us die
together--if the Republic may grant us so much grace!"

Again the Doge would have spoken compassionate words, but the other
interposed:

"The State hath little use for the lady's life--save in her keeping. And
she herself, perchance, hath less. For so hath her strange whim wrought
upon her that she knoweth naught of that which passeth around her, and
one face to her is like another."

The young Senator turned from the cruel speaker to the Doge in mute
appealing agony. The old man grasped his hand in a steadying clasp.

"Let us go to her," said Leonardo, very low, when he could command his
voice. "She is like a lovely child--resisting nothing. It is some
shock--it will pass."

       *       *       *       *       *

And now there came a day when the proud heart of Venice was stirred to
its core, for a messenger dashed breathless into the Council Chamber--an
excited, protesting throng of the populace surging in through the open
door behind him. "Fra Paolo! Il caro Padre! Morto!"

"_Dead_!" They started to their feet with ready imprecations. Fra Paolo,
who had left them an hour before, with the Signor Malipiero and his
devoted secretary! They exchanged glances of terrible comprehension--the
triumph of Venice was avenged upon the faithful servant of the State!

The Consiglio broke up in confusion.

"Eccellentissimi," the messenger explained to the horror-stricken
questioners, "they were five,--rushing out from the dark of the convent
wall against him when he came alone down the steps of the Ponte della
Pugna,--the villains held the others down. And Fra Paolo lay dead on the
Fondamenta--stabbed in many places, as if one would cut him in bits--and
the stiletto still in his forehead! And they sent me----"

"'Alone'? you ask me, Illustrissimi?--Santissima Vergine! the whole city
pouring in to the cries of those that found him; and the murderers off
before one could touch them, and never a guard near! They carried him
into the Servi.--And the people--furious--are storming the palazzo of
the nuncio as I pass; and some one cries that the envoy is off to the
Lido, with his fine friends, who start for Rome. A thousand devils!--May
the good San Nicolo send them to feed the fishes!"

The Senate, to testify its honor, grief, and sympathy for the beloved
Counsellor, had instantly adjourned, and its members repaired in great
numbers to the convent to make personal inquiries, returning to a new
session prolonged through the night; for Fra Paolo, who had fainted from
loss of blood on his pallet in the Servite cell, had recovered
consciousness and hovered between life and death--his humble bed
attended by the most famous physicians and surgeons whom the Republic
could summon to her aid. The secretaries, meanwhile, were busy in
preparing resolutions of affection by which to honor him in the sight of
the Venetian people; letters of announcement to foreign courts, as if he
had been of the blood royal; proclamations of reward for the persons of
the criminals, alive or dead, which, before the day had dawned, the
Signori della Notte had affixed to the doors of San Marco, along the
Rialto, on the breast of Ser Robia, that all might read. And for means
of bringing the offenders to justice they plotted and schemed as none
but Venetians could do.

It was three days since the storm, and the gastaldo had not yet been
released, he also was simply detained, without ignominy or discomfort in
rooms set apart for prisoners of State before they had been brought to
trial; for the events of these days had been too absorbing to permit of
an examination of his case. And now, in the gray dawn which broke upon
that night of anxiety and excitement, alternating between hope and fear
as frequent messengers, each guarded by a detachment of palace guards,
appeared with fresh news from the convent, the weary senators strolled
up and down in the great chambers opening on the sea facade of the Ducal
Palace discussing the event in a more desultory way--its meaning, its
dangers, the achievements of the great man who might, even now, be
receiving the viaticum in the convent of the Servi.

He was first named with terms of endearment strange upon the lips of
that stately assembly--"Il caro Padre," "Teologo amato di Venezia"--yet
the guards had failed to seize those villains who lay in wait at the
Ponte della Pugna! The bridges and traghetti must be closely
watched.--Ah--the gastaldo grande!

"Hath one yet been named _Condottiere_ for this frontier service?"
questioned one of the older senators, among a group of the more
important men who had detached themselves from the others and strolled
out into the great loggia on the sea facade for a reviving breath of the
morning air. "For such an employ there is none like Piero Salin for
daring and intrigue; and the assassins may linger long in hiding on the
route to Rome."

And so they first remembered Piero in these crowded days and discussed
his fault with a degree of leniency that would have been foreign to the
traditions of Venice had he not been needed for important secret
service.

Meanwhile, Fra Paolo was still the theme among the senators at large in
the Council Chamber. "Il miracolo del suo secolo," they called him, as
they rehearsed the opinions of the learned men of their age in every
field of science.

"It cannot be from knowledge, acquired as all men learn, that he taketh
this position in such varied sciences," said the Senator Morosini; "for
a life-time doth suffice to few men for such attainment in one field as
he hath reached in all. It must be that the marvel of his mind doth hold
some central truth which maketh all science cognate."

"Else were he not 'friend and master' to Galileo of Padua."

"And it is told that Acquapendente, who hath been summoned by the
Signoria to bestow his skill, hath learned of him some matters which he
taught in the medical school of Bologna. The world hath not his equal
for learning."

"By the blessed San Marco!" ejaculated one under his breath, who had
been idly leaning on the balustrade, as he crossed himself and looked
furtively around to note whether he had been overheard.

But the others of the group, keenly alive to danger, had instantly
joined him.

"Was this some new intrigue?" "Was the night not already full with
horror?" they questioned of each other, thrilled with dread and
superstition.

Dawn was growing over the water, and the gray and oily surface of the
lagoon was closely dotted with gondolas, distinct and black in the
morning twilight; they came sweeping on from San Nicolo and
Castello--black and red, breast to breast--gathering impetus as they
neared the Piazzetta, in numbers which must have left every traghetto of
Venice deserted; Nicolotti and Castellani--_allies_, since they never
had been friends! It was some intrigue of the people, or some favor they
had come to ask--_to-day_, when the Senate might not spare one thought
for disorder among the masses!

Weary and overwrought, after their night of sorrowful labor, they looked
at each other in consternation.

"It is their gastaldo whom they are come to seek," a secretary of the
Ten confided by inspiration to his Chief, as an old man, wearing the
robe of a bancalo, was escorted from the landing by a band of gondoliers
with black and crimson sashes, who disappeared under the entrance to the
palace courtyard.

"Let him be summoned and honorably discharged; he hath done no harm that
may be compared with the disaffection of the traghetti."

"Rather, let them receive him back, appointed by the Senate to honor, as
Condottiere of the border forces"; a second Chief hastened to respond,
for the moment was grave, "and the command will most excellently fit the
gastaldo."

"And for the Lady of the Giustiniani, it matters little--Rome or
Venice," said an old senator, compassionately, as he followed his
colleagues into the Council Chamber. "She hath so spent herself in
grieving that she knoweth naught. For the Senator Marcantonio hath
vainly sought to teach her that the interdict hath been lifted; yet even
this she comprehendeth not."

"We are come, your Excellencies, for news of our Gastaldo Grande, whose
presence is verily needful for the traghetti," said the white-haired
bancalo, when an audience had been granted him.

"How many of you have come as escort?" the secretary questioned
carelessly.

"Eccellenza, we are enough," the bancalo answered fearlessly, and with a
significant pause, "_to prove the will of the people--as well Nicolotti
as Castellani_. And to escort our Gastaldo Grande with honor, since it
hath pleased your excellencies to receive him--_as a guest_--in the
Ducal Palace."

He was the eldest of the officers of the traghetti, accustomed to
respect, upheld by the united forces of the people; this man of the
people and this mouthpiece of the nobles measured each other fearlessly
as they looked into each other's faces--each coolly choosing his phrases
to carry so much as the other might count wise.

"It is well," said the secretary of the Ten, after a brief private
conference with his Chiefs, "that ye are come in numbers to do him
honor. Since the Senate hath need of his brave service and hath named
Piero Salin, for exigencies of the Republic, Condottiere, with honors
and men of artillery to do him service."

And so it chanced, that because of the stress of the time, Piero Salin
floated off in triumph to Murano, named General of the Border Forces,
with secret orders from the Ten.



XXXIII

The great bell in the tower of the arsenal told twelve of the day, and
already the broader waters near the rios which led to the high
machicolated walls surrounding this famous Venetian stronghold were
crowded with gondolas of the people and barges from the islands filled
with men, women, and children, jubilant with holiday speech and
brilliant in gala colors; for this was one of those perpetually
recurring festas which so endeared this City of the Sea to its
pleasure-loving people.

This splendid ceremony of inspection by the Doge was a day of annual
triumph, for nowhere in all the world was there such an arsenal, and
nowhere such an army of workmen,--thirty-five thousand men trained to
the cunning from father to son in lifelong service,--with sailors,
sixteen thousand more, who should presently make a brave review within
those battlemented walls, to tickle the fancy of the Serenissimo and his
guests. For these pageants of Venice were not guiltless of timely hints
to the onlookers of the futility of opposition to a naval force so great
and so admirably controlled; and well might the Republic be proud of the
foundry, the docks, the galleys, which the Doge and the Signoria came
each year in state to visit, with all the nobles of the Maggior
Consiglio and many of the high officials.

This year it was to be a fete more magnificent than usual, for the
households of the ambassadors were bidden to the banquet which was
prepared in the Great Hall of the arsenal--the attractions of which were
invitingly rehearsed, as the speakers leaned across from gondola to
gondola, to exchange their pleasant bits of gossip with dramatic
exaggerations. "And the gondolas of the ambassadors! Santa Maria! the
Signori, 'i provveditori alle pompe' have nothing to say, for there is a
dispensation! the velvets and satins and golden fringes--it will be a
true glimpse of the _paradiso_!"

"And the great Signor medico, Acquapendente, will be made this day
Cavaliere of the Republic, since he hath had the wonderful fortune to
save the life of our Padre Maestro Paolo; for it is well known there was
little hope of matins or vespers more for him, the night the _maledetti
bravi_ left the stiletto in his face!"

"And thou, Giuseppe!" cried a smiling mother from Mazzorbo, proudly
indicating her boy as an object of interest, and pushing him into a more
prominent position--"the bambino hath seen it with his own eyes, since
he is prentice at the metal graver's shop of Messer Maffeo Olivieri on
the Rialto; thou, tell us, Giuseppe, of this great goblet of graven
silver which the Master Olivieri hath ready for the presentation, by
order of the Signoria. E bello, ah? _Bellissimo_! And the Lion of San
Marco on the crown of it--_e vero_ Giuseppe?--with wings--_magnifico_!
And jewels of rubino in the eyes of it; and a tongue----"

"Cosi!" interposed Giuseppe, with dramatic effectiveness, thrusting out
his own with relish. "_Thus_!"

"Ma c'e altro!" cried a gondolier from Murano. "There is more yet! For
the magnificent galley which the little one of the Ca' Giustiniani--he
that is grandson to our Messer Girolamo Magagnati--hath given to the
Republic will be floated out from the basin of the arsenal and
christened this day!"

The spirits of the light-hearted crowd effervesced in a jubilant cheer.

"_I Giustiniani_!"

On every page of the history of Venice the name of the Giustiniani stood
brilliantly forth, and the stained and tattered banners in the great
hall of the arsenal were so many laurel leaves for this patrician house,
keeping the memory of the brilliant victory of Lepanto green in the
hearts of the Venetians. It was a Giustinian, "Gonfaloniere," _standard
bearer_, who had brought the glorious news on his triumphant galley, the
solemn Lion of San Marco waving his banner above the drooping crescent
of the Turk from every green wreathed mast. It was this Giustinian who
had been carried in triumph on the shoulders of the people, before the
Doge and the Signoria--who had been the hero when that solemn Mass, in
honor of the victory, had been offered up in the ducal chapel--when the
Rialto and the Merceria, for the extravagant joy of Venice, were draped
in blue and scarlet and gold, bound laurel wreaths and decorated with
the art treasures of Titian and Giorgone. It was a name which the people
were accustomed to honor. "I Giustiniani!" they shouted.

There was a sudden hush, for the bells of the Campanile of San Marco
had given the signal, and there was a great stir before the Piazza--a
train of gondolas was sweeping into line far down the Canal Grande; the
guards on the watch-towers of the arsenal were full of animation; the
gondolas of the orderlies were buzzing like bees about the barge of the
grand admiral, who awaited the coming of the Doge, in all his
magnificence of satin ceremonial robes. He was like a noble to-day, this
man of the people. _Viva San Marco_!

The moment was approaching; orderlies glided back and forth among the
excited people, prescribing their distance; the raft of small craft
shifted its position and presently a salute was fired from all the
cannon of the arsenal; the Doge, in his great State barge, was near.

The people shouted themselves hoarse when the smoke cleared away and
revealed the splendid train of private barges from Venice; there were
banners of the Republic and streaming pennons of the nobles; the
gondoliers wore the colors of their house, and were welcomed by the
people on these days of pageant as a distinct addition to the glories of
the festa--though on other days the barcarioli of the traghetti poured
out full vials of contempt upon their sashes of rose and silver and the
blazonry of arms upon their silken sleeves.

The gondolas and barges of the people drifted back again, close about
the train of magnates from Venice.

"I Giustiniani," they shouted; "il Marconino!"

There was a movement on one of the splendid barges bearing the colors of
the Giustiniani; a little child was caught up and held for a moment
high in the air; he waved his tiny hands gleefully--it was such
beautiful play!

"It is the grandson of Messer Girolamo Magagnati, of the Stabilimenti!"
they cried from the barges of Murano, surging nearer in the waterway.
"He belongs to us--to the people!" for the story was well known, and the
people of Venice were not less proud than the nobles who ruled them.
"Viva Messer Magagnati!"

The group upon the deck parted and disclosed an old man with bowed head
and faltering movements, supported by the young Senator Giustiniani, who
gravely recognized their salute; but there was no answering smile upon
his face; and Girolamo Magagnati, who had proudly confronted the
senators in their Council Chamber when he had declined their proffer of
nobility, in this day of triumph scarcely raised his eyes.

The mothers on the barges lifted their little ones in their arms and
taught them to call a name--"Il Marconino!" they ventured, in hesitant,
treble tones.

But now the splendid moment was near. The admiral, in his crimson robes
of state, had mounted to his place on the Doge's barge, and all the
floating crowd had fallen into ordered position, in a hush of vibrant
suspense, as, with slow majesty and grace, one by one the galleys of
Venice came forth in procession from the great basin of the arsenal,
sweeping round from the Punta della Motta into the lagoon, and passing
the Signoria with a salute. And now the great bell sounded again from
the arsenal tower, and was answered from the Campanile of San Marco,
and the suppressed excitement of the eager spectators burst forth in
cries of greeting to the _Marconino_--just set afloat--as she came
gracefully around in front of the Doge's barge, full manned and
saluting, magnificently equipped, the colors of the Giustiniani waving
below the crimson banner of San Marco, with its regnant Lion, and on her
prow the beautiful sculptured figure of a little child.

"_Il Marconino! Il Marconino_!"

There was a brief moment of confusion from the coming and going of
barges,--a short delay which brimmed their excitement to the fever
pitch,--then the waters cleared again of their floating craft, and the
Senator Marcantonio Giustiniani stepped forth on the deck to christen
the gift of his child.

The people looked, and would have shouted--but forebore--gazing
awestruck.

As he stood, firmly planted upon the prow, the crimson drapery of his
senator's robe parted and disclosed the firm young vigor of his limbs,
in their silken hose, and his very attitude showed power. But he wore
the face of a young Greek god who had lightly dreamed that he could
fashion Life out of grace and sunshine, and had waked to carve Endurance
out of Agony.

The child, held high in his arms, was radiant in the sunshine, its
rosebud mouth parting over pearly teeth in dimpling glee, the breeze
lifting the light rings of hair that caressed his soft, round throat,
the hands waving in childish ecstasy and grace. As they stood, just over
the beautiful bust of the "Marconino" which Vittorio had carved upon the
prow, child and father were an embodiment of the play of the crested
foam over the deep trouble of the waves beneath.

"Was it thus that the nobles took their triumphs?" the people questioned
low of each other. "And where was the Lady Marina, the daughter of
Messer Magagnati--_their_ lady, who had been good to the people?"

"She was there--within," some one answered, "she was not strong--the
salutes were too much for her. She was waiting within, with her
maidens."

"To miss such a beautiful festa! Santa Maria!"--the strong peasant
mothers, clasping their infants in their arms, with prattling,
barefooted children clinging to their mantles--so glad for this glimpse
of holiday--looked again at the beautiful, stern face of this father who
had youth and gifts and wealth, his seat in the Consiglio, his boy in
his arms--but no smile for the people pressing around him ready to shout
his name, and they crossed themselves with a nameless yearning and
dread.

But the nobles, with more understanding, looked upon him and forgot
their jealousy.

For the Lady Marina was within, waiting with her maidens in a private
chamber of the arsenal until the hour of the banquet, when her presence
had been required by the Signoria. Only so much had her father--the
giver of the gift--and Marcantonio, on this day of honor to his
name--been able to obtain of the imperious Republic. There were rumors
afloat, questions were asked, and the body of nobles must bear witness
to the clemency of the State, who could be gracious in forgiving. If the
Lady of the Giustiniani might not have the custody of her child, it was
not that because of her transgressions they would refuse her any grace
or honor.

Meanwhile Giustinian Giustiniani, standing proudly erect among the
nobles of the Doge's suite, searched the crowd for further homage, and
wondered at the silence when the charming figure of the baby Marconino
danced in his father's arms--a very embodiment of life and glee.

It was over in a moment, and the crowd of smaller barges fell back in
disorder, for the Doge was passing through the gates of the arsenal; the
galleys were returning back by San Pietro in Castello, and that which
was to follow of the glories of the day was only for the great ones now
gathering behind that charmed gate, where the golden chair was waiting
in which the Serenissimo should make his royal progress. There was
nothing more for the people until the hour of the Ave Maria should call
the stately procession forth on its homeward way.

But the brilliant memories of this morning would gladden many a less
golden day--Viva San Marco! Their voluble tongues were suddenly
unloosed, and those who had been favored with near glimpses of the
heroes of the day became centres of animated discussion. Life was good
in Venice! "And thou, Nino, forget not that the Madonna hath been
'gentile' to thee! Thou shalt tell thy little ones, when thou art old,
that thou hast this day seen, with thine own eyes, the Marconino, who
hath given the great galley to the Republic!"

The banquet was over, and there was a stir among the Signoria when the
infant Giustinian was called for that he might receive the thanks of
the Republic for his princely gift; and a murmur of admiration circled
from lip to lip as the blooming child was brought into the banquet hall.
All eyes were now turned upon the Lady Marina, who had hitherto remained
surrounded by her household and inconspicuous among the group of noble
Venetian ladies who gave distinction to this festa.

It was Marcantonio who, with a tenderness that was pathetic and a touch
that was a caress, led her down from her place and folded the little
one's hand in hers. He would have led her to the throne; but a gesture
that was scarcely more than a glance conveyed a command he dared not
disobey.

They looked to see a flush of pride on her beautiful face as, in answer
to the Doge's summons, she came slowly forward, with the tiny hand of
the boy clasped in hers--his unsteady, childish footsteps echoing
unevenly on the marble pavement between her measured movements. But she
walked as in a dream, as if she were no longer one of this bright
company, yet strangely beautiful to see, with a face like some noble
spirit,--pale and grieving,--and in her eyes a great trouble that was
full of dignity and love. Over the dark velvet of her robe the
bountiful, white waves of her hair streamed like a bridal veil,
wreathing her brows and her young, pathetic face with silken rings of
drifted snow.

But before she had reached the dais prepared for the Signoria at the end
of the great hall she paused, as if unable to proceed further, swaying
slightly and throwing out her hands to steady herself; a sudden change
swept over her face, and for a moment it seemed that she would fall; the
child, losing hold of her hand, clung sobbing to her skirts, hiding his
pretty head.

Her husband sprang to her aid, tenderly supporting her, but as instantly
she seemed to recover her strength, smiling upon him graciously, while
she gently disengaged herself from his hold, leaving the little one with
him, and gliding rapidly forward, looked around her with unrecognizing
eyes.

It had pleased the whim of the Republic to make some ecclesiastical
parade on this festa of Venice which followed so closely upon the
prosaic closing scene of the quarrel with Rome, wherein no churchly pomp
had been permitted; and as Marina's bewildered gaze steadied itself upon
the noble group of the Signoria, with whom to-day, in great state, sat
the Patriarch of Venice with mitre and hierarchical robes and all the
attendant group of Venetian bishops, a look of intense relief suddenly
flashed over the trouble in her eyes--as if that which she had sought
with such long suffering no longer eluded her.

"Madre Beatissima!" she cried, clasping her crucifix closely to her
breast, and raising her eyes to heaven, "I thank thee!"

The light grew upon her face.

As her whole life had been merged in this struggle which had only
conquered her overwrought heart and brain when she had felt that the
Madonna had deserted her and delivered her to the wrath of Venice, so
now, in her hallucination,--since the Madonna had brought her to
Rome,--her faith and power of speech suddenly returned, and she rallied
all her strength to fulfil her mission.

In that great and sumptuous Hall, flaunting and gay with banners which
chronicled the victories and the power of the Republic--in the
impregnable stronghold of the realm, under the astonished gaze of the
entire Venetian court and the brilliant throng of the households of
nobles and ambassadors who looked down from the circling galleries,
expectant and awestruck under the spell of so strange a vision--this
pale, slight champion of a desperate spiritual struggle, with no host to
help her save her prayers and faith, with no standard but the cross
clasped to her breast, knelt at the feet of the Patriarch, while the
sunset light through the broad western window made a radiance where she
knelt--as if Heaven at last had smiled upon her.

"Oh, Holy Father!" she implored, "have mercy upon Venice! Forgive her
unfaithfulness, because she hath meant no sin!

"The Madonna hath granted me to reach Rome at last, because she hath
laid her command upon me in a vision and it could not fail. But all
those, my loved ones, have I lost by the weary way; and save for her
mercy I could not have reached thee.

"With prayers and penance have I striven--and ceased not--since the
anguish of thy displeasure came upon Venice. Oh, Holy Father! for all
the mothers who understand and grieve, and for our innocent little ones,
and for all those, our beloved, who are good and noble--and yet know not
the hard way of submission, because the Lord hath taught them some other
way--lift thy wrath from Venice, that our Heavenly Father hide not his
face in clouds too heavy for our prayers to reach him!

"It is the will of the Madonna San Donato--thou canst not refuse to lift
the doom!"

The words leaped over each other like a torrent--impetuous, passionate,
as if the moments for speech were few.

"These do I bring--and these, for an offering!" she cried, feverishly
unclasping the lustrous pearls from her throat and girdle and laying
them at the feet of the Patriarch. "And all the dear happiness of my
life have I given, that I might reach thee with this prayer for Venice!
Oh, Holy Father, accept my sacrifice!"

She reverently pressed the hem of the priestly robe to her lips, and
those who knew of her flight from Venice understood that she fancied she
had reached the Roman Court and was kneeling in the presence of the
Sovereign Pontiff; but in their amazement that she alone, who was dying
from the grief of it, did not know that the interdict had been removed,
it had not seemed possible to answer her.

But there was no room for anger as they listened--though her plea was a
judgment on the court of Venice--for her voice thrilled them with its
unearthly sadness, and, looking into her beautiful, spirit face, they
saw that all her consciousness was merged in her intense realization of
the utmost terror of the curse, and in her one burning hope--to which
all things else were as nothing and in which she herself was wholly
lost.

The Patriarch, moved with immeasurable compassion, raised her tenderly.
"My daughter," he said, in a voice that trembled with feeling, "Venice
is restored to favor. The Interdict is removed!"

Through the stern assembly a wave of sympathy surged irresistibly,
impelling them to comfort this lovely, grieving lady, distraught by
anguished brooding. Scarcely knowing that their emotion expressed itself
in words, they caught up the Patriarch's answer and echoed it from group
to group--from gallery to gallery--until it gathered impetus and rolled
like a Hallelujah Chorus through the vast, vaulted chamber.

"Venice is restored to favor; the Interdict is removed!"

The light grew upon her face.

How should it seem strange to her that her prayer at the feet of the
Holy Father had wrought this pardon for Venice--was it not for this that
the blessed Madonna of San Donato had sent her? She had promised
blessing for sacrifice!

She stood for a moment, radiant, while the chorus of many voices
throbbed around her--her face like an angel's for joy and love--a
glorified vision in the parting rays of the evening sun--then her faint
fluttering breath died in a _Benedicite_!

       *       *       *       *       *
The vesper bells of Venice came softly through the twilight, calling to
Ave Maria.








End of Project Gutenberg's A Golden Book of Venice, by Mrs. Lawrence Turnbull

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A GOLDEN BOOK OF VENICE ***

***** This file should be named 10455.txt or 10455.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/4/5/10455/

Produced by Ted Garwin, Annika and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


