The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punchinello, Volume 2, No. 37, December 10,
1870, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Punchinello, Volume 2, No. 37, December 10, 1870

Author: Various

Release Date: December 30, 2003 [EBook #10544]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCHINELLO 37 ***




Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Steve Schulze and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.







  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                        TIFFANY & CO.,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                        UNION SQUARE,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |              Offer a large and choice stock of               |
  |                                                              |
  |                       LADIES' WATCHES,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |   Of all sizes and every variety of Casing, with Movements   |
  |                    of the finest quality.                    |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                      We will Mail Free                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                           A COVER,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |          Lettered and Stamped, with New Title-Page,          |
  |                         FOR BINDING                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                        FIRST VOLUME,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                   On Receipt of 50 Cents,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                            OR THE                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                   TITLE-PAGE ALONE, FREE,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                      On application to                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                 PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                      83 Nassau Street.                       |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                  HARRISON, BRADFORD & CO.'S                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                         STEEL PENS.                          |
  |                                                              |
  |     These Pens are of a finer quality, more durable, and     |
  | cheaper than any other Pen in the market. Special attention  |
  |  is called to the following grades, as being better suited   |
  |     for business purposes than any Pen manufactured. The     |
  |                                                              |
  |            "505," "22," and the "Anti-Corrosive,"            |
  |                                                              |
  |            we recommend for Bank and Office use.             |
  |                                                              |
  |                      D. APPLETON & CO.,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                Sole Agents for United States.                |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+


Vol. II. No. 37.


SATURDAY, DECEMBER 10, 1870.


PUBLISHED BY THE


PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,

83 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK.


PRANG'S LATEST PUBLICATIONS: "Joy of Autumn," "Prairie Flowers,"
"Lake George," "West Point," "Beethoven," large and small.

PRANG'S CHROMOS sold in all Art Stores throughout the world.

PRANG'S ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE sent free on receipt of stamp.

L. PRANG & CO., Boston.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: See 15th Page for Extra Premiums.]


  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                     Bound Volume No. 1.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |    The first volume of PUNCHINELLO--the only first-class,    |
  |  original, illustrated, humorous and satirical weekly paper  |
  | published in this country--ending with No. 26, September 24, |
  |                            1870,                             |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Bound In Extra Cloth,                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                  is now ready for delivery,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                         PRICE $2.50.                         |
  |                                                              |
  | Sent postpaid to any part of the United States on receipt of |
  |                            price.                            |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of the paper for one year, from October 1st, No. 27,  |
  |  and the Bound Volume (the latter prepaid), will be sent to  |
  |                  any subscriber for $5.50.                   |
  |                                                              |
  | Three copies for one year, and three Bound Volumes, with an  |
  |  extra copy of Bound Volume, to any person sending us three  |
  |                  subscriptions for $16.50.                   |
  |                                                              |
  | One copy of paper for one year, with a fine chromo premium,  |
  |                          for $4.00                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                Single copies, mailed free .10                |
  |                                                              |
  |     Back numbers can always be supplied, as the paper is     |
  |                        electrotyped.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |           Book canvassers will find this volume a            |
  |                                                              |
  |                      Very Salable Book.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |         Orders supplied at a very liberal discount.          |
  |                                                              |
  |    All remittances should be made in Post-Office orders.     |
  |                                                              |
  |   Canvassers wanted for the paper everywhere. Send for our   |
  |                      Special Circular.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                           Address,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Punchinello Publishing Co.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                     83 NASSAU ST., N.Y.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                      P.O. Box No. 2783.                      |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |               APPLICATIONS FOR ADVERTISING IN                |
  |                                                              |
  |                        "PUNCHINELLO"                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                    SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                       JOHN NICKINSON,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                         ROOM No. 4,                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                  No. 83 Nassau Street, N.Y.                  |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                           NEW YORK                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                       DAILY DEMOCRAT,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                     _AN EVENING PAPER._                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                      JAMES H. LAMBERT,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                    EDITOR AND PROPRIETOR.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |   All the news fifteen hours in advance of Morning Papers.   |
  |                                                              |
  |                       PRICE TWO CENTS.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |              Subscription price by mail, $6.00.              |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                       TO NEWS-DEALERS.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Punchinello's Monthly.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                The Weekly Numbers for October                |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Bound in a Handsome Cover,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                Is now ready. Price 40 cents.                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                          THE TRADE                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                       Supplied by the                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                    AMERICAN NEWS COMPANY,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |           Who are now prepared to receive orders.            |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                 Bowling Green Savings-Bank,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                         33 BROADWAY,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                          NEW YORK.                           |
  |                                                              |
  |            Open Every Day from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.             |
  |                                                              |
  |             _Deposits of any sum, from Ten Cents             |
  |         to Ten Thousand Dollars, will be received._          |
  |                                                              |
  |                   Six Per Cent. Interest,                    |
  |                   Free of Government Tax.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                   INTEREST ON NEW DEPOSITS                   |
  |                                                              |
  |            Commences on the First of every Month.            |
  |                                                              |
  |                  HENRY SMITH, _President._                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                REEVES E. SELMES, _Secretary._                |
  |                                                              |
  |        WALTER ROCHE, EDWARD HOGAN, _Vice-Presidents._        |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                    FACTS FOR THE LADIES.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |  I have a Wheeler & Wilson machine (No. 289), bought of Mr.  |
  |  Gardner in 1853, he having used it a year. I have used it   |
  | constantly, in shirt manufacturing as well as family sewing, |
  | sixteen years. My wife ran it four years, and earned between |
  |   $700 and $800, besides doing her housework. I have never   |
  |  expended fifty cents on it for repairs. It is, to-day, in   |
  |   the best of order, stitching fine linen bosoms nicely. I   |
  | started manufacturing shirts with this machine, and now have |
  | over one hundred of them in use. I have paid at least $3,000 |
  |  for the stitching done by this old machine, and it will do  |
  |              as much now as any machine I have.              |
  |                                                              |
  |                         W.F. TAYLOR.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                         BERLIN, N.Y.                         |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                     500 VOLUMES IN ONE:                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                        AGENTS WANTED                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                             FOR                              |
  |                                                              |
  |               The Library of Poetry and Song.                |
  |                                                              |
  |        _Being Choice Selections from the Best Poets,_        |
  |                                                              |
  |            ENGLISH, SCOTCH, IRISH, AND AMERICAN,             |
  |                                                              |
  |                   With an Introduction by                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                    WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT.                    |
  |                                                              |
  | This volume is the handsomest and cheapest subscription book |
  | extant, and contains in itself more to give it enduring fame |
  |      and make it universally popular than any book ever      |
  |  published. It is something in it, of _the best_, for every  |
  |   one--for the old, the middle aged, and the young. It has   |
  |   intellectual food for every taste and for every mood and   |
  | phase of human feeling, from the merriest humor up, through  |
  |   all the gradations of feeling, to the most touching and    |
  |  tender pathos. Excepting the Bible, this will be the book   |
  |    most loved, and the most frequently referred to in the    |
  |                           family.                            |
  |                                                              |
  | The whole work, page by page, poem by poem, has passed under |
  |  the educated criticism and scholarly eye of WILLIAM CULLEN  |
  |    BRYANT, a man reverenced among men, a poet great among    |
  |                            poets.                            |
  |                                                              |
  | _This is a Library of over_ 500 _Volumes in one book_, whose |
  |   contents, of no ephemeral nature or interest, will never   |
  | grow old or stale. It can be, and will be, read and re-read  |
  | with pleasure as long as its leaves hold together. Over 800  |
  | pages beautifully printed, choicely illustrated, handsomely  |
  |      bound. Sold only through Agents, by subscription.       |
  |                                                              |
  | Teachers, Clergymen, active Men, intelligent Women, can all  |
  | secure good pay with light work by taking an agency for this |
  |                  book. Terms very liberal.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |       Send for Circular containing full particulars to       |
  |                                                              |
  |              J.B. FORD & CO., 39 Park Row, N.Y.              |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                           FOLEY'S                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                          GOLD PENS.                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                    THE BEST AND CHEAPEST.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                         256 BROADWAY                         |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |          The only Journal of its kind in America!!           |
  |                                                              |
  |                    The American Chemist:                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                      A MONTHLY JOURNAL                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                              OF                              |
  |                                                              |
  |       Theoretical, Analytical, and Technical Chemistry       |
  |                                                              |
  |          DEVOTED ESPECIALLY TO AMERICAN INTERESTS.           |
  |                                                              |
  |    EDITED BY Chas. F. Chandler, Ph.D., & W. H. Chandler.     |
  |                                                              |
  |     The columns of THE AMERICAN CHEMIST are open for the     |
  | reception of original articles from any part of the country, |
  | subject to approval of the editor. Letters of inquiry on any |
  |    point of interest within the scope of the Journal will    |
  |                  receive prompt attention.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                     THE AMERICAN CHEMIST                     |
  |                                                              |
  |             Is a Journal of especial interest to             |
  |                                                              |
  |    SCHOOLS AND MEN OF SCIENCE, TO COLLEGES, APOTHECARIES,    |
  |    DRUGGISTS, PHYSICIANS, ASSAYERS, DYERS, PHOTOGRAPHERS,    |
  |                        MANUFACTURERS.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |   And all concerned in scientific pursuits. Subscription,    |
  |  $5.00 per annum. In advance. 50 cts. per number. Specimen   |
  |                       copies, 25 cts.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                Address WILLIAM BALDWIN & CO.,                |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Publishers and Proprietors,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                 434 Broome Street, New York.                 |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1870, by the
PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY, in the Office of the Librarian of
Congress at Washington.

       *       *       *       *       *

MAN AND WIVES.

A TRAVESTY.

By MOSE SKINNER.

CHAPTER FOURTH.

THE HALF-WAY HOUSE

The first person to discover that ANN BRUMMET had left the house, was
Mrs. LADLE, Now, ever since the Hon. MICHAEL had asked ANN to go to the
circus, Mrs. LADLE had hated her. But when he took ANN to the
Agricultural Fair, and bought her a tin-type album and a box of initial
note-paper, Mrs. LADLE was simply raving. Whether she herself was
viewing the Hon. MICHAEL with an eye matrimonial, and was jealous of
ANN, must remain an open question. At any rate, she was the first to
start the scandal about ANN and JEFFRY, and lost no time in conveying it
to the ears of the Hon. MICHAEL, with profuse embellishments. At the
croquet party the Hon. MICHAEL had been particularly sweet on ANN, his
ardor finding vent in such demonstrations as throwing kisses at her
slyly, holding up printed lozenges for her inspection, or tossing sticks
at her and dodging behind a tree. And when Mrs. LADLE went to ANN'S room
next day, for a good square scold, she found her out.

Now Mrs. LADLE was a mother-in-law, and consequently a pretty old fowl
in ferreting out things of this sort. She determined to discover the why
and wherefore of ANN'S departure. If she could confront the Hon. MICHAEL
with proofs of ANN'S indiscretion, it would be the loudest kind of
feather in her cap.

She examined everybody in the house, and everybody that went by the
house, but without the smallest result. She was out in the front yard
waiting for a fresh victim, when she saw HERSEY DEATHBURY coming up the
road. She signed to her to come in.

She came in.

HERSEY DEATHBURY was an extraordinary woman. A woman of genius, sir.
What if her make-up _was_ limited? What if, when she was born, nature
_was_ economizing, and gave her only one eye, and she was lame and
hump-backed, and hadn't got any eyebrows and wore a wig; what of that?
It's to her credit, _I_ say. You saw her just as she was. No airs
_there_. And in this lay the great charm of H. DEATHBURY'S character.
Looking at her closely, you would see a fixed and stony eye and a
chronic scowl, and you would say: "Disposition a little morose; some man
has soured on her." Looking at her more closely, you would see under her
right arm a common blackboard, such as is used in schools, and over her
shoulder a canvas bag containing lumps of chalk, and you would say: "A
little eccentric; likes to write on the blackboard instead of talking.
Would make a nice wife. Looks, on the whole, like a country schoolma'am,
whom the boys have stoned out of town, with the fixtures of the
school-house tied to her." But she has talents. What is she, an
authoress? "Yes, she is." But, like other authoresses, she isn't
appreciated, and has returned to her legitimate occupation, the
Wash-Tub; but still doth she itch for fame, and so, between times, she
writes verbose essays on Female Suffrage, composed during the process
known as "wringing." And when there's a Woman's Rights Convention in
that locality, she sits on the platform, and applauds all the Red-Hot
Resolutions with that trenchant female weapon, the umbrella, in one
hand, and an antediluvian reticule the other. In the words of the Hon.
MICHAEL: "She is not only a leading _Re_former, sir, but a great
_Plat_former." And Mrs. LADLE will tell you that, as a washer, she is
superb. She "does up things" in a manner simply celestial.

Mrs. LADLE told her first to shut the door.

"Have you seen ANN BRUMMET to-day?" she said.

HERSEY nodded.

"Where?" was the eager inquiry.

HERSEY DEATHBURY placed her blackboard against the wall, unslung her
chalk, and wrote in very large letters:--

"I C hur a-Goin on The rode 2 forneys Kragg."

"Ah!" ejaculated Mrs. LADLE joyfully, "traced at last." And she ran to
tell the Hon. MICHAEL all about it.

       *       *       *

The Half-Way House at Forney's Crag was a hoary-headed old vagabond of a
house, that had passed the heyday of its youth long before that great
encyclopaedia, the oldest inhabitant, emitted his first infantile
squawk. Each successive season caused it to lean a little more and the
most casual observer must perceive that it couldn't by any possibility
become much leaner without pining entirely away.

Nevertheless, it had been the only hotel that Spunkville could boast,
all within a short period of this writing. Like most Western hotels, it
had been ably supported by a large floating population, known as "New
York Drummers," and many a time had its old walls re-echoed with their
guileless hilarity and moral tales; and, if the ancient and time-honored
spittoon in the bar-room could speak, it could relate wonderful stories
concerning the Sample Gentry; relating, perhaps, to a Spunkville
merchant, who, having retreated precipitately down his cellar stairs
several tunes during the day, to avoid "them confounded drummers, with
their everlasting samples," was, while plodding his lonely way homeward,
seized upon by these commercial freebooters, conveyed forthwith to the
Half-Way House, and there deluged with such a perfect torrent of
brow-beating eloquence as to reduce him to an imbecile state, in which
condition he would willingly order large bills of goods, a custom still
somewhat in vogue, and known as "commanding trade."

At other times, it was refreshing to see a drummer emerge from a week's
carousal, take a drink of plain soda, and write a long letter to his
employers concerning the extreme dulness of trade.

But since the new hotel had been built the Half-Way House had waned, and
its quiet was only invaded by an occasional straggling traveller or a
runaway couple, and its walls resounded with nothing more clamorous than
the orgies of a Sunday-school picnic.

It is, however, with the Ladies' Parlor only (that wretched abode of
female discomfort in all country hotels) that we have to do.

The furniture of the room consisted of the articles usually found in a
_boudoir_ of this kind, to wit: a straight-backed sofa, much worn; the
inevitable and horrid straw carpeting; that old Satanic piano, that
never was in tune; an antique and rheumatic table, and three wheezy old
chairs. The only present attempts at ornament were two in number. The
first was a large engraving of the Presidents of the United States,
which had formerly done duty in the bar-room, where the villagers were
wont to gaze upon it in an awe-struck manner, being impressed with a
vague idea that it was CHRISTY'S Minstrels. The second was a living
statue, none other than ANN BRUMMET waiting for JEFFRY MAULBOY.

"Half-past three, and not come yet," said she. "Look out, JEFFRY
MAULBOY, for if you _do_ go back on me"--

She paused, for she saw a man coming towards the house.

"Well, if that ain't ARCHIBALD BLINKSOP," she added, "I'm regularly
sold. What can _he_ want _here_?"

Yes, it was ARCHIBALD sure enough, biting his finger-nails and breathing
very short, while he cast furtive glances at the windows.

He went slowly up the steps and into the entry just as Mrs. BACKUP, the
landlady of the House, came out of her sitting-room.

Now, Mrs. BACKUP was one of your eminently respectable females, who are
always loaded to the muzzle with Beautiful Moral Essays, which they try
to cram down everybody's throat, but never practise themselves. She
formerly kept a boarding-house in the city, where, at table regularly
after soup, she would regale those present with long dissertations on
the shocking immorality of the present day, varying the monotony,
perhaps, by allusions to the boarders who had just left. "Mr. SIMPSON
was a pleasant-spoken young man as I want to see, and as good as the
bank, but I'm afraid he _was_ agettin' dissipated;" or, "Mr. FIELDING
was quiet and mannerly, and never found fault with his vittles, but he
had _one_ DREAD_ful_ habit;" and then she would sigh heavily. And when
little Miss PINKHAM, who occupied the second floor back (and who, being
a schoolma'am, was naturally debarred from the other sex), indulged in
the smallest possible flirtation with the good-looking young man
opposite, Mrs. BACKUP'S sharp eye not only saw her, but Mrs. BACKUP'S
sharp tongue took occasion to berate her severely on a Sunday morning
(for then the boarders are all in), at the top of the first landing (for
then the boarders could all hear her). "I _am_ saprised, Miss PINKHAM.
Why, when I see that young man asittin' at his winder, and a blowin'
beans. Yes, a blowin' beans, Miss PINKHAM, through a horrible tin
pop-gun at _your'n_, and a winkin' vicious, and you a enjoyin' on it,
Miss PINKHAM, I sot down; yes, I sot right down, and I shuddered. 'Sich
doin's in _my_ house,' says I, 'I am totilly congealed.'" When all the
time, mind you, the virtuous Mrs. BACKUP was a woman who would bear any
amount of watching, having already caused three husbands to frantically
emigrate to parts unknown.

Seeing that ARCHIBALD hesitated, she said:--

"Well, young man, what's wanted?"

"I--I--want to see ANN BRUMMET," said ARCHIBALD.

"Oh, you _do_, do you?" rejoined Mrs. BACKUP, regally; "and _who_, may I
ask, is ANN BRUMMET?"

"A young lady that I was--a--to meet here," replied ARCHIBALD, timidly.

Mrs. BACKUP immediately organized a virtuous tableau, and glared at him
majestically.

"A young lady you was to _meet_ here. _In_-deed. And do you think, young
man, that _my_ house is a place where young chaps can go a-roystorin'
and a-gallivinatin' about, and a meetin' young women?"

"But I don't want to go oysterin'," said ARCHIBALD, "and I don't know
how to galvinate. I only want to tell her something."

"Oh, to _tell_ her something, is it? Well, I'd have _no_ objections,
young man, if you _said_ she was your wife. _Then_ you'd have a right,
but not now, for my cha-_rac_ter is precious to me, young man."

"But she ain't my wife," said ARCHIBALD; "I only--kind of know her, you
see."

"Drat the man," said Mrs. BACKUP to herself; "he's a born fool that
can't take a hint like that. TEDDY!" she cried to a seedy-looking,
pimply man, who was sucking a forlorn-looking pipe on the back-door
step, "you're wanted." She whispered a few words in his ear, and went
up-stairs.

TEDDY MCSLUSH was the General Utility man of the Half-Way House. Born
down East, of an Irish father and Scotch mother, he was eminently
calculated to live by his wits. His natural talents were numerous and
sparkling. He could tell more lies without notes than any man in the
State, or make a beautiful prayer, all in the way of business. When a
runaway couple were married at the Half-Way House, he would not only
give the bride away in a voice broken by emotion, but he would bless the
bridegroom with tears in his eyes, and he would do all this at the
lowest market price. And every Sunday he dressed in a black suit and
sung in the choir, and patted the little children on the head, and was
generally respected.

He approached ARCHIBALD, and poked him in the ribs, facetiously.

"Ah!" he ejaculated; "and it's a cryin' shame, so it is, that a fine lad
like yerself should be took with sich a complaint. It's modeshty what
ails ye, man. And wasn't it Mester JOHN SHAKESPEER himself, him as writ
the illegant versis, Lord luv his ashis, as says to me only jist afore
his breath soured on him, 'TEDDY,' says he, wid much feelin', 'TEDDY,
modeshty is a fine thing in a woman,' says he, 'but it's death to a man.
Promise me now,' says he, 'for I feel as this clay is a coolin'
fast--promise me, TEDDY, as you'll never hev nothink to do with it--no,
not never, my boy.' I promised him, and Hevins knows as I've kep' my
word. But, Lord alive, I'm a keepin' you all the time from yer own dear
wife, as is a dyin' to see you--and a sweet dear it is."

He ushered ARCHIBALD into the Ladies' Parlor, closed the door, and
applied his ear to the key-hole, with an air of the most respectful
attention.

According to TEDDY'S way of thinking, ANN was not hankering for
ARCHIBALD'S society.

"What do you want _here_?" said she, sharply.

"Oh, don't speak cross to me, Miss BRUMMET," said he, looking timidly
around. Then he put his finger on his lip, and shook his head
energetically.

"I know all about it, you see," said he; "JEFF told me. Oh my! wasn't I
struck up, though? But I'll never tell. _He_ couldn't come, you see. His
mother sent for him, and--"

"You lie," she broke in fiercely; "it's a put up job between you two.
But it won't do; do you _hear_? It _won't do_."

"Oh, don't look at me _that_ way," said ARCHIBALD, backing toward the
door; "I want to go home."

"I'd like to see you go home," she replied, placing her back against the
door. "You must think I'm a fool, to let you off as easy as that. You've
got to sit up with me this evening, anyhow."

"But what would folks say?" stammered ARCHIBALD. "Oh, think of my
reputation, Miss BRUMMET, and let me go."

"Your reputation!" she sneered. "Humbug! Men don't have any reputation,
except when they steal a woman's. Come," she added, in a more
conciliatory tone, "we'll have some supper, and then we'll have a game
of euchre."

"Euchre! Oh, don't ask me to play euchre," said he; "I'm so mixed up,
Miss BRUMMET, I couldn't tell the King of Ten-spots from the Ace of
Jacks. Oh, won't BELINDA grab hold of my hair when she hears of this!"

"Yes, she'll pull it till she makes her ARCHIE-_bald_," said ANN,
laughing.

ARCHIBALD sat down, and looked at her in a supplicating manner.

"I'll do anything you say," said he, "if you please won't get off any
more puns. It's awful. I knew a fellow once who had it chronic. He
doubled every word that he could lay his tongue to. When he was going to
a party, he'd take the dictionary and pick out a lot of words that could
be twisted, and set 'em down and study on 'em, so he could be ready with
a lot of puns, and when he got 'em off folks would laugh, but all the
time they'd wish he'd died young. And that's the way he'd go on. He
finally drove his mother into a consumption, and at her funeral, instead
of taking on as he ought to, he only just looked at the body, and said,
'Well, that's the worst _coffin-fit_ the old lady ever had.' And then he
turned round and began to get off puns on the mourners. Wasn't it
dreadful?--But what's that?"

Somebody was knocking at the door.

"What's wanted?" said ANN.

"It's your minister as has come, mum," said TEDDY, from the outside.
"What word shall I give him?"

"Tell him I shan't want him," said ANN.

In a few minutes TEDDY came back.

"He says, mum, as he won't go without marryin' somebody, or a gittin'
his pay anyway, for it's a nice buryin' job as he's lost by comin'."

"But," said ANN, "I can't--" She hesitated, and seemed to form a sudden
resolution. "Tell him," she continued, "tell him--"

(To be continued.)

       *       *       *       *       *

BIOGRAPHICAL.


    There was an agriculturist, philosopher, and editor,
    Who thought the world his debtor and himself, of course, its creditor;
    A man he was of wonderful vitup'rative fertility,
    Though seeming an embodiment of mildness and docility,
    This ancient agriculturist, philosopher, and editor.

    The clothes he wore were shocking to the citizen aesthetical,
    Assuredly they would not pass in circles which were critical,
    So venerable were they, and so distant from propriety,
    So utterly unsuited to respectable society,
    Which numbers in its membership some citizens aesthetical.

    He kept a model farm for every sort of wild experiment.
    Which was to all the neighborhood a source of constant worriment;
    For every one who passed that way pretended to be eager to
    Discover pumpkin vines that ran across the fields a league or two,
    So queer was the effect of each preposterous experiment.

    He had a dreadful passion, which was not at all professional,
    For going for an office, either local or congressional.
    But though often nominated, yet the people wouldn't ratify,
    Because they thought, quite properly, it would be wrong to gratify
    The all-consuming passion that was not at all professional.

    Among the many hobbies which he cantered on incessantly
    Was one he called Protection, and he rode it quite unpleasantly;
    For if any one dissented from his notions injudiciously,
    He went for him immediately, ferociously and viciously,
    Did this absurd equestrian who cantered on incessantly.

    With which remarks the author of this brief, veracious history
    Concludes his observations on the incarnated mystery
    Known as an agriculturist, philosopher, and editor,
    Who thought the world his debtor, and himself, of course, its creditor,
    And who will surely figure on the oddest page in history.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FITTEST PLACE FOR A "PRESERVER" OF THE PEACE. A "Jam" on Broadway.

       *       *       *       *       *

DR. HELMBOLD TO J.G. BENNETT, Jr. "Boo-shoo! fly."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A BRIGHT IDEA.

_Customer_. "WAITER, BRING ME SOME FROZEN CLAMS."

_Waiter (lately caught)_. "YES, SIR; WILL YOU HAVE 'EM ROASTED OR
BILED?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

WORDS AND THEIR USES.

Nothing, except counting your stamps, can be more pleasant and exciting
than tracing out the origin of words by the aid of a second-hand
dictionary. It's the next funniest thing to grubbing after stumps in a
ten-acre lot. Dentists make capital philologists--: they are so much
accustomed to digging for roots. It's rather dull work to shovel around
in the Anglo-Saxon stratum, but, as soon as you strike the Sanscrit,
then you're off, and if you don't find big nuggets, it's because--well,
it's because there are none there. Sometimes you dig down to about the
time when NOAH went on his little sailing excursion, and strike what
seems to be a first-class sockdolager of root, but what is the use?
Unfortunately the philology business is overdone; it's chock full of
first-class broken down pedagogues and unsuccessful ink-slingers, and,
as soon as you offer a curious specimen in the way of roots, they write
a book to prove that the root don't exist, or, if it does, that it
should not.

However, there is an advantage in knowing the roots of words, and the
use to which they were put in former years. Everybody, you know, is very
anxious to read CHAUCER and SPENSER. Now, after you have studied this
subject about forty-two years, you will be able to read CHAUCER with the
aid of an old English dictionary and an Anglo-Saxon grammar.

Many so-called philologists, who have preceded me, have ignorantly
derived words from improper sources. Thus, the compound word, shoofly,
has been traced by some to the Irish word _shoe_, meaning a
hoof-covering, and the French word _fly_, meaning an insect, when it is
apparent to even the casual observer that it comes from the Guinea word
_shoo_, meaning get out, and the English word _fly_, meaning a tripe
destroyer. I propose, therefore, to show you the origin of a few words,
in order that you may use them properly, and in order that you may
subscribe freely for my book on this subject, which will shortly be
placed before an admiring public.

_Theatres_. When the players were servants of the king, they were
compelled to be proficient in reading, riting, rithmetic, rhyming,
riddling, reciting, rehearsing, and romping. These accomplishments were
grouped together and called _the 8 r's_, which name naturally enough was
soon applied to the play-houses. This example shows how simple the whole
subject is, and how easily the philology business could he run by a
child six years of age.

_Country_. The origin of this word is, to say the least, odd. City
people were accustomed to visit the rural districts at about the time
when rye was ripe, and they were generally amused by the farmer's
pereginations around his rye. Farmers always count rye-stacks in the
morning, in order to discover whether any of them have been lifted
during the night. When, upon their return to the City, the visitors were
asked where they had been, they facetiously replied, "To count rye."
This soon became a favorite expression; the "e" was dropped for euphony,
and the rural districts were called country.

_Spittoon_.--This word comes from the Greek word _spit_, meaning to
slobber, and the Scotch word, _tune_, meaning the noise made by the
bag-pipes. As the saliva struck the receptacle it made a noise
delightful to the ears of the smoker, and resembling the note of the
national instrument of Scotland. Hence the receptacle was called the
spittoon.

_Politics_.--Quack philologists, who evidently were insane, have gone
back to the classics for the root of this word, when it is well known
that immediately after the termination of the Revolution, when the
Government of this country was about to be settled, the word came into
existence. A woman, called POLLY, kept a corner grocery in New York, and
all the fellows who wanted offices were accustomed to go to POLLY'S for
their beer, because she trusted. Here they usually divulged their ideas
of the manner in which the Government machine should be run. When asked
why they went to that store, they always answered, "POLLY ticks."
Outsiders, when asked what was going on in POLLY's store, always
answered with a wise look, "POLLY ticks." The words soon spread, and
talking about the Government was facetiously called POLLY ticks. The
expression was finally used in earnest, and, by euphoric changes,
reached its present shape.

_Cheese-it_.--This compound word has by some silly person been traced to
the Saxon _cyse_, meaning condensed cow, and the Celtic _it_, meaning
it. Now every way-faring man, even though _non compos mentis_, knows
that when he is invited to come in and cut a cheese, come in and take a
drop of whiskey is meant. This word, then, is derived from the Sanscrit
_cheese_, meaning drop, and the English _it_, meaning whatever you may
happen to be saying, and the whole expression may be properly translated
"drop that yarn."

I might go on straight through the Dictionary, but I refrain, desiring
only to show you what a light and entertaining subject philology is, and
what quantities of fun you can get out of it on winter evenings.

If any one should desire to pursue this subject further, let him go
through CHAUCER, SPENSER, SHAKSPEARE, and MILTON with a fine-tooth comb
and a pair of spectacles, looking for roots, and then try my book on
"Words and their Uses." He had better not attack the latter work on an
empty stomach. An empty head will be more appropriate.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Mendicant Mission.

Two fresh rumors about that unfortunate English Mission are afloat. One
is that it has been tendered to the Hon. HENRY T. BLOW; the other is
that the--well, no, not exactly Hon.--DAN. SICKLES is to be transferred
from Madrid to the Court of St. JAMES. 'Tis much the same thing. If BLOW
is appointed, it's BLOW; and if SICKLES is appointed, it's Blow, too.

       *       *       *       *       *

Military Intelligence.

The Fifth Regiment N.G.S.N.Y., composed altogether of Germans, have
adopted the Prussian helmet with a spike on top. This is appropriate, as
most Germans are linguists, and like to "spike the French."

       *       *       *       *       *

Where to Commence the Civil Service Reform.

In our Hotels and Restaurants.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PLAYS AND SHOWS.

Regarding me thoughtfully for a moment, MARGARET asks, "What is an 'old
comedy?'"

I say to her, "An old comedy is to the comedy of to-day, precisely what
an old beau, padded, painted, simpering with false teeth, and leering
with rhumy eyes, is to a handsome, gallant young fellow, such as Mr.
LESTER WALLACK impersonates in _Ours_ or _School_."

To which she replies, "What are roomy eyes, dear?" (Being her fourth
cousin by marriage, I am a sort of maiden aunt to her,--whence this
respectful familiarity.) "Eyes in which there is room for the honest
glances that never show themselves?'"

I sternly remark that "nice girls never pun."

"Yes," she replies; "punning, like beer and other vices, is the peculiar
prerogative of men, I suppose. But you need not be afraid. I read
PUNCHINELLO sometimes, and it is a terrible warning to people who are
tempted to pun. I could give you frightful instances of the appalling
depth to which the men who make puns in PUNCHINELLO occasionally sink."

I hastily close the discussion by inviting her to come to WALLACK'S and
see an old comedy. So we find ourselves on the following evening in the
only theatre in the country where that rather important adjunct of a
theatre--a company--is to be found,

There are quantities of elegant dresses in the house,--the ladies having
an idea that an old comedy is one of those things which every
fashionable person ought to see. There are also numbers of nice young
men, who, being the burning and shining lights of fashionable society
(after their day's work behind the counter is ended), come to be bored
by the old comedy, with a heroism which proves how immeasurably superior
to the influences of tape and calico are their youthful souls. By the
by, it is one of the unavoidable _desagrements_ of New York society that
the wearer of the elegant dress is often conscious that her partner in
the waltz knows precisely how many yards of material compose her skirt,
and exactly how much it cost per yard, for the excellent reason that he
himself measured it with his professional yard-stick, and cut it with
his private scissors. This, however, is a subject that belongs not to
old comedy, but to the extremely modern comedy of New York society. The
two resemble each other only so far as they are fashionable and dull.

But to our WALLACKIAN old comedy. The curtain rises upon the veteran
GILBERT and the handsome ROCKWELL. They converse in the following style:

GILBERT.--"Well, you young dog, ha! ha! So you have decided to make your
old uncle happy by marrying my neighbor's daughter. Gad! I remember my
own wedding-day. Well, well; we won't talk about that now, but hark ye,
you young villain, if you don't marry the girl, I cut you off with a
shilling."

ROCKWELL.--"My dear uncle, I can have no greater pleasure than to fulfil
your wishes. But suppose our adorable young neighbor has the
ill-breeding to refuse me."

GILBERT.--"Refuse you! Refuse my nephew? Gad! I'd like to see THOMAS
OLDBOY permit his daughter to refuse my nephew! I'd--d--e, I'd--"
(chokes and stamps with rage.)

Further on we meet with Miss OLDBOY and her mother,--the latter a stout
old lady, addicted to smelling salts and yellow silks.

LYDIA OLDBOY.--"To-day I am expecting the arrival of young WILDOATS, who
comes to pay his addresses to me. I wonder if he is like that dear,
delightful THADDEUS OF WARSAW."

Mrs. OLDBOY.--"Now, Miss, remember that your honored father insists upon
this match. I expect you to be a dutiful daughter, and accede to his
wishes. Here comes the young man himself."

ROCKWELL.--"My. dear Mrs. OLDBOY, I am charmed to see you. You are
looking positively younger than your ravishingly beautiful daughter.
Fair LYDIA, I come to lay my heart at your feet. 'Tis the wish of my
uncle and your honored father that we should unite our respective
houses. Let me touch that exquisite hand. Unseal those ruby lips and
tell me that I am the happiest of men."

Here the UNCLE and OLDBOY enter. They chuckle, and poke one another in
the ribs, remarking "Gad" and "Zounds" at intervals. They bless the
young couple, and order up some of the old Madeira. The curtain falls as
OLDBOY gives the health of the young people, with the wish that they may
have a dozen children, and a cellar never without plenty of this
splendid old Madeira,--"that your father, bottled, Miss LYDIA, the year
our gracious sovereign came to the throne."

This is a fair sample of the old comedy. The oaths are of course
omitted, out of deference to the tender susceptibilities of the editor
of PUNCHINELLO. So are the indecencies, which are the spice of the old
comedy, but which cannot be written in a respectable journal, and are
almost too gross and brutal for the _Sun_. Take from an old comedy its
oaths and its grossness, and nothing is left but a residuum of
boisterous inanity. The condensed old comedy which has just been laid
before the readers of PUNCHINELLO, is as inane and vapid as anything
that WALLACK'S theatre has shown us in the past month. Do you find it
dull? For my part, I don't hesitate to say that the "Essence of Old
Virginny," as furnished by the venerable poet, Mr. DANIEL BRYANT, is
vastly more amusing than the Essence of Old Comedy.

All of which I say, in my most impressive manner, to MARGARET as we
struggle through the crowded lobby. But she irreverently disputes my
assertions, and asks, "How is it that everybody admires these comedies
if they are so wretched as you say they are? Is your judgment better
than that of anybody else?"

There being nothing to say, if I mean to maintain my ground, except that
my judgment is the only infallible critical judgment in this city or
elsewhere, I promptly and unblushingly say so. But MARGARET tells me I
am "a goose"--(I think I have mentioned that she is my aunt, and hence
allows herself these pleasing freedoms of speech)--and says that I shall
take her to see the old comedies every night, until I am willing to say
that I like them.

Who is there that, in view of this threat, will not drop the tear of
sensibility, so neatly alluded to by Mr. STERNE, in sympathy with the
prospective sufferings of

MATADOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

UNIVERSITY-MANIA.

MY DEAR P.:--I have made some curious observations of this disease,
which lead to startling conclusions.

It is a malady peculiar to the United States, being an eruption
resulting from indigestion of unripe knowledge, together with excess of
vanity in individual blood.

Universities spring up among us like mushrooms, in a night. The seed of
knowledge is sown broadcast over our land. In fact, in this particular
we may be said to be very seedy, indeed.

For my part I have no objection to Universities--when they _are_
Universities. But, at the rate at which we are now progressing, we shall
soon have "every man his own University." It will become the fashion to
keep a University in the back-yard. And then, you know, the institution
must have its own particular organ, you know. Every man, and every
member of his family, shall print his or her _Free Press_, and
independence of opinion shall reign.

    Glorious country! Glorious free speech!
    With WALT WHITMAN, we may well exclaim:
    O the BROWN University!
    O the splendid University of SMITH!
    O CORNELL, his University!

                         _&c. ad infinitum._

As for me, dear NELLO, I am in the front rank of civilization. I have
accepted the Chair of Cane-bottom in a Grub-Street garret, and rejoice
in a barrel-organ, which plays with great freedom of speech.

Yours pedagoguically,

JEREMY DOGWOOD.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. Sop for Ireland.

It is stated that Queen VICTORIA has ordered from a Dublin manufacturer
an extensive assortment of Balbriggan hosiery for the wedding outfit of
the Princess LOUISE. There is a stroke of policy in this. In firemen's
phrase it may be called laying on the "hose" to quench disloyalty.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE HOUSE THAT JACK BUILT. The Marine Hospital.

       *       *       *       *       *

TRIALS OF A WITNESS.

MR. PUNCHINELLO:--As all people seem to come to you with their troubles
and grievances, I hope you will not refuse to listen to my woes. And
whether they are woes or not, I leave you to judge for yourself.

At the beginning of last week I made my first appearance in any
court-room, in the character of a witness, in the case of VALENTINE
vs. ORSON; in which the point in dispute was the ownership of a tract
of land in Wyoming Territory. I knew something in regard to the sale of
these lands, and was fully prepared to testify to the extent of my
knowledge in the premises; but judge of my utter surprise and horror on
being obliged to go through such an ordeal as the following extracts
from my examination will indicate.

The counsel for the plaintiff commenced by asking me if I was a married
man, and when I had answered that. I was, he said:--

"Is your wife a believer in the principles of the Woman's Rights party?"

I could not, for the life of me, see what this had to do with the land
in Wyoming, but I answered, that I was happy to say she was not.

The examination then proceeded as follows:--

_Q._ You are happy, then, in your matrimonial relations? _A._ Yes--(and
remembering the oath) reasonably so.

_Q._ Is your wife pretty? _A._ (Witness remembering at once his oath and
his wife's presence in court) She is pretty pretty.

_Q._ What are her defects? _A._ (Witness remembering only his wife's
presence.) I have never been able to discover them.

_Q._ Do you wear flannel? _A._ Yes, in winter.

_Q._ Can you testify, upon your oath, that you do not wear flannel in
summer? _A._ I can.

_Q._ Now be careful in your answer. What do you wear in the spring and
fall? _A._ I--I wear my common clothes.

_Q._ With flannel, or without flannel? _A._ Sometimes with, and
sometimes without.

_Q._ No evasion; you must tell the Court exactly when you wear flannel,
and when you do not.

A series of questions on this subject brought out the fact that I wore
flannel when the weather was cold, or cool; and did not wear it when it
was mild, or warm.

_Q._ Have you a lightning-rod on your house? _A._ I have.

_Q._ How much did it cost you to have it put up? _A._ It has not cost me
anything yet--I owe for it.

_Q._ Is that all you owe for? _A._ No, I have other debts.

_Q._ Have you any money with you now? _A._ I have.

_Q._ How much? _A._ (Counting contents of porte-monnaie.) Sixty-two
cents.

_Q._ Where did you get that? _A._ (With embarrassment.) I borrowed it.

_Q._ Were you present when defendant first offered his land for sale to
the plaintiff? _A._ (Brightening up.) I was.

_Q._ Do you burn gas or kerosene in your house? _A._ Gas.

_Q._ How many burners? _A._ Ten, I think.

_Q._ Are you willing to assert, upon your solemn oath, that there are
only ten? _A._ (Witness counting on his fingers.) I am.

_Q._ Do you wear studs or buttons on your shirt fronts? _A._ Studs.

_Q._ Gold, or pearl? _A._ Mother-of-pearl, as a general thing, but
sometimes I wear one gold one at the top.

_Q._ Were all your studs of mother-of-pearl, at the time when you first
heard this transaction mentioned between the parties? _A._ They were.

_Q._ Do you ever wear your gold stud in the middle of your bosom? _A._
No, sir, I always wear it at the top.

_Q._ Do you ever wear it at the bottom? Can you swear it was not at the
bottom on the day of the transaction referred to? _A._ I distinctly
remember that I did not wear it at all that day.

_Q._ Did you wear it that night? _A._ No, sir.

_Q._ Can you swear that after you went to bed you did not wear it? _A._
I can.

_Q._ Have you ever been vaccinated? _A._ I have.

_Q._ On which arm? _A._ The left.

_Q._ At the of the first mention of this land to the plaintiff, who were
present? _A._ (Witness speaking with hopeful vivacity, as if he hoped
they were now coming to the merits of the case.) The plaintiff, the
defendant, and myself.

_Q._ Do you use the Old Dominion coffee-pot in your house? _A._
(Dejectedly.) No, sir.

_Q._ What kind of a coffee pot do you use? _A._ A common tin one.

_Q._ You are willing to swear it is tin? _A._ I am.

_Q._ Has your wife any sisters? _A._ She has two; ANNA and JANE.

_Q._ Are they married _A._ They are.

_Q._ Are either of them prettier than your wife? _A._ (Quickly.) No,
sir.

_Q._ Have you any children? _A._ Two.

_Q._ Have they had the measles? _A._ They have.

_Q._ Has any other person in your household had the measles? _A._ I have
had them, and my wife has had them.

_Q._ How do you know your wife has had them? _A._ She told me so.

_Q._ Then you did not see her have them? _A._ No, sir.

_Q._ We want no hearsay evidence here; how can you swear that she has
had them when you did not see her have them? _A._ She told me so, and I
believed her.

_Q._ Did she take an oath that she had had them? _A._ No sir.

_Q._ Then, sir, you are trifling with the Court. Do you understand the
obligations of an oath? _A._ I do.

_Q._ Beware, then, that you are not committed for perjury. Is your
gas-metre ever frozen? _A._ Yes, sir.

_Q._ What do you use when the gas will not burn? _A._ Candles.

_Q._ How many to the pound? _A._ Nine.

_Q._ How do you know there are nine to the pound? _A._ They are sold as
nines.

_Q._ Then you never weighed them yourself? _A._ No, sir.

_Counsel_, to the _Court_. May it please your Honor, this is the second
time that this witness has positively testified, under solemn oath, to
important points of which he has no certain knowledge. I ask the Court
for protection for myself and my client.

Here a long discussion took place between the lawyers and the Judge, and
at the end of it the case was postponed for four months. I suppose it is
expected that I will then re-ascend the witness-stand; but I have
determined that when I enter a court-room again I shall appear as a
criminal. These fellows have much the easiest times, and they run so
little risk, nowadays, that their position is far preferable to that of
the unfortunate witnesses.

J. BADGER.

       *       *       *       *       *

Singular Fatuity.

The reason why so few persons emigrate to this country from Poland, is
the general belief prevailing there that we have throughout the Union a
heavy Pole tax.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE A.B.C. OF NEW YORK SOCIALISM. ANDREWS, BRISBANE, AND CLAFLIN.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THRILLING MELODRAMA.

Scene: Lord DE VERE'S Manor: The Blue Chamber.

_Lord De Vere._ "BUT ONE COURSE, LADY CLAUDE, IS LEFT TO RETRIEVE OUR
FALLEN FORTUNES. WITH THESE DEAD CATS WE'LL FLY TO MICHIGAN AND START A
MINERAL SPRING. THE MICHIGANDERS ARE WILD ABOUT THEIR SPRINGS, AND WITH
THIS MATERIAL OURS CANNOT BUT BE A SUCCESS."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ONE OF OUR SOCIAL HUMBUGS.

_Old Gent (figuring up probable receipts of his silver wedding, close at
hand)_. "I'VE HIRED A SPLENDID TEA-SERVICE FOR BROWN TO PRESENT TO US;
IT WILL MAKE QUITE A SENSATION, AND I'VE GOT IT CHEAP FOR THE EVENING."]

       *       *       *       *       *

POEMS OF THE POLICE.

I, MARY SMITH.

    O gallant p'licemen, list to me,
      I'll sing a mournful ditty
    About a poor young serving-gal,
      What lived in this here city.

    She had a name, and SMITH it was
      (The rest of it was MARY);
    Her constant duty, at daybreak,
      Was sweeping out the arey.

    One evening she went to a jig
      (Her missus was attending
    A private hop), when there befel
      What truly was heart-rending.

    She wore her missus' gayest clothes,
      Her muslin dress all fluty,
    Her waterfall and tag-rags all,
      Which well became her beauty.

    But missus found poor MARY out,
      And in a p'liceman took her,
    And walked her up before the Judge,
      On charge of being a hooker.

    The missus swore the girl a thief
      Her property as lifted,
    Which proved beyond all doubt would be
      When things came to be sifted.

    The girl said she'd been to a jig;
      Then out spoke Judge MCCARTY,
    "You must not wear the fixings of
      A party to a party."

    They sent her up for sixteen months,--
      Oh! drop a tear to MARY,
    Whose missus ne'er shall see her more
      A-sweeping out the arey.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sic Transit.

Life being in any event a transitory affair, and especially so in New
York, where, every one lives some miles from his business, our means of
transit are of interest to every one. However well the owners of those
at present in use may insist that they are, yet the public feels they
should be better, and Mr. PUNCHINELLO, having the interest of his
fellow-citizens at heart, most earnestly hopes that the undertakers of
the last new scheme will not so mistake the meaning of this term as to
suppose that their business with it is simply to bury it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Discounting a Bill.

The Germans are disposed to glorify their king, and look upon him as the
Great WILLIAM; but when they commence to calculate the cost of his
glory, in men slaughtered, homes desolated, women beggared, industries
destroyed, taxes increased, and liberty chained, it is more than
probable that they will become disgusted with their Little BILL.

       *       *       *       *       *

Query

Can Russia's designs upon Turkey, at this season of the year, be
attributed to her admiration and imitation of New England Thanksgiving
customs?

       *       *       *       *       *

A Maniac's Mutterings.

PUNCHINELLO'S special Lunatic gives it as his opinion, that a
continuance of a horse-flesh diet in Paris must go far towards
disturbing the Parisian Equine-imity.

       *       *       *       *       *

An Old Saw Sharpened.

Some one has applied the old Latin motto, _"Horas non numero nisi
serenas,"_ to Mr. GREELEY, by making it read, "HORACE is of no account
except when serene," which, by the by, he never is.

       *       *       *       *       *

Query for Naturalists.

How can a person who stands four feet in his boots be called biped?

       *       *       *       *       *

DENTS-LY FILLED. Government offices.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: KING WILLIAM OF PRUSSIA WAITING FOR HIS ALLY.]

       *       *       *       *       *

HIRAM GREEN ON MARK TWAIN'S BABY.

The "Lait Gustice" congratulates the newly organized Papa.

SKEENSBORO, NYE ONTO VARMONT.

Friend TWAIN--Allow an old statesman, which has served his country for 4
yeers as Gustise of the Peece, rite a congratulotery letter to you on
your success as a boy raisest. Altho your name is MARK TWAIN, I notiss
that on this occashon you dident Mark but One.

I am a little older in years and _Parentelism_ than you are, and am able
to call myself the seenyer pardner in a firm who are the sole
proprieters of eleven offspring and 2 grand-children.

Raisin children is a bizziniss which haint every mans best holt, and as
long as you've got into the bizziness, excoose me for givin you a little
wisdom, which you as a parent must swaller without makin up a face.

If your child, in its infantile days, is given to squallin nites, obtain
a beverige, called soothin sirup, and just before you pull off your
butes nites, give the little cuss about 3 tablespoons full, and he will
sleep so sound that you can use him for a piller. Should he kick &
squall, and refuse to take it, lay him down onto the floor, set on him,
then takin hold of his nose, pour the stuff down his throte, and you've
got him, ekal to Jo JEFFERSON'S Rip Van Winkle 20 yeers snooze.

To amoose him--If your wife is too bizzy durin the day, doin the cookin,
washin, &c. 4th, to amoose the child, give him an ink bottle, and set
him down on the parler carpet. If he has any idee of geografy, when you
come home nites you will find a good helthy map of the black sea, which
Rooshy will insist on bein added to your war map.

Another way of amusin him, is to give him a raiser, and let him play
learn to shave. If he should cut his nose off, it would make the little
_shaver smart_.

If you expect to bring your boy up to hold offis,' let him cultivate
cheek. This is done by tyin his grandmother in her rockin cheer, and
lettin him pelt the old lady with snow balls in the winter time. In the
summer time get him a bow and arrer, and let him see how neer he come to
the venerable lady's nose without breakin her spectorcals. If this don't
make him cheeky enuff to hold offis, let him pour a lot of benzine onto
his little cuzzin, then push her onto a red hot cole stove. If he can do
this and think it a joak, he will do for a cabinet offiser.

If he tries to jump over parental authority, fill him with shot, same as
_your_ man did his jumpin frog, only pour it into him with a mustick.

If you've got any regard for our nashnal caracter, don't let your son
rite comic copy for the noosepapers, after which, be so rash as to rite
a book, and have English crickets set up their darn singin, when they
catch your little _innocent abroad_.

JOHN BULL don't tickle easy, remember that. I actually believe you
couldent stir him with a hul bag full of laffin gas.

As your boy has entered the Lecture field, I shouldent be surprised if
he got up quite a _breeze_ on the roast-rum. In fact, when he opens his
mouth before an audience, look out for _squalls_.

When your offspring is big enuff to enjoy chastisin, remember the "good
little boy," and examine your son's garments to see if the lad has been
roostin onto any nitro-gleserine cans, lest the parental hand, when
brought in contact with the youth's _habeas corpus_, mite necessitate the
sweepin up of father and son's scattered remnants.

Let your son reed the works on good morril men's lives.

By the time he gets old enuff to read, I will have my life out in
pamphlet form, and you can draw onto me for a copy. Beware of works of
fiction. Don't let your boy have a great deal to do with such readin as
HOYLE on Games, TOM PAINE on Infidelity, nor HORRIS GREELY on farmin.
Such works are bringin more ruin onto the country, than the numerous
jewrys of twelve talented men, who allow murderers to come the loonatic
dodge over 'em.

I don't believe in spoilin the rod and sparin the child, but I think it
is well enuff to keep a rod hung up in the barn, where your child can
occasionally look at it, to see what he will come to, if he undertakes
to kick over the traces.

Children are a good deal like wimmen. If you don't set _your_ foot down
when you first get married your wimmen will raise _their_ foot up, and
afore you realize any pain, your gentle form will be histed out into the
street.

With boys you must begin talkin _turkey_, when they are young _goblins_,
ef you don't, when they get old enuff, they will "strike for their
sires," and _gobble_ up the old man's scalp.

Teach your son to honor his pa and ma, and decline the English mission,
when it comes his turn.

Between you and I, aspirants for the honor of bordin with St. JIMMY are
on the _decline_, Pitty it haint a gin-cocktail. I shouldent be
surprised, if some big criminal was sentenced to go there yet, which
minds me of a konundrum. Why is the English mission like lager beer?

Give 'er up?

Because it ruins any _minister's_ reputation, who goes for it.

Hopin that when you shovel off your mortil coil, that your mantle may
not pass out of the family, and as time flies on with greased wings, you
may make the family name _sound_ by bein able to Mark Twain in your
family record, I drop the goose feather.

Ewers, parentally,

HIRAM GREEN, ESQ.,

Lait Gustise of the Peece.

       *       *       *       *       *

A SURE WAY OF DOING IT.

Seekers after notoriety must often be at their wits' end for some new
sensation with which to advertise themselves. Mr. TWAIN, for instance,
having gone through Fenianism and France, seems to have collapsed for
the present; and here now comes Mr. WEMYSS JOBSON, who subsided into
oblivion years ago, but has just emerged again into the light of _The
Sun_. The efforts of both these gentlemen to keep themselves prominently
before the public, however, are very inadequate and feeble. They should
suffer more and be stronger. Let TRAIN do a bold stroke of business by
declaring himself the perpetrator of the latest mysterious murder, and
it might be the making of the exhumed JOBSON to revive a fossilized
memory, and confess himself to be the criminal who delivered the fatal
blow to the late Mr. WILLIAM PATTERSON.

       *       *       *       *       *

True to his Colors.

A Bostonian visiting New York, not long since, and reading in the papers
that there was to be a celebration of Mass in an up-town church, decided
to remain over Sunday for it, thinking, Bostonially, that Mass meant
Massachusetts and nothing else.

       *       *       *       *       *

SUITABLE INSCRIPTION FOR A BOATMAN'S RACE-PRIZE. "The noblest
Row-man of them all."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A NEW LEAF IN THE FAMILY HISTORY.

_Jack._ "NOW, I'LL BE PAPA, GOING TO FIX THE FURNACE."

_Sallie_. "OH, YES!--AND I'LL BE THE NEW NURSE, AND YOU MUST KISS ME
BEHIND THE CELLAR DOOR!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: BEHIND THE TIMES.

EXPLANATORY OF MR. JOHN BULL'S VIEWS.]

       *       *       *       *       *

POEMS OF THE CRADLE.

CANTO XIII.

    When I was a bachelor I lived by myself;
    All the bread and cheese I had, I laid upon the shelf.
    But the rats and the mice they made such a strife,
    I was forced to go to London to buy myself a wife.
    The roads were so bad, and the lanes were so narrow,
    I had to bring my wife home in a wheelbarrow.
    The wheelbarrow broke. My wife had a fall;
    Deuce take the wheelbarrow, my wife, and all.

The above lines were written when the author was quite advanced in
years; when he had solved, in his humble way, the great problem of life,
and discovered the futility of mundane things generally, and t
undesirableness of an unsuccessful or unfortunate existence; when he
could look back through a long vista of years, and see the follies of
his youth and the mistakes of his manhood. It should have been placed at
the end of his book, with only the word Finis after it; but somehow,
either by mistake of the author or of the publisher, it was placed among
the records of the simple events of the village, and thus loses half its
force. However, let the history, placed as it is, be a warning to rash
young men who contemplate matrimony; and let them give heed to it, lest
they also have cause to repent of their doings and exclaim with the
poet:--

    "The deuce take it."

Observe how pathetic and touching his reminiscence of his lost youth and
the priceless boon of liberty. He commences in a quiet descriptive way,
leaving one at a loss to know whether it is to be a joyful lyric a dirge
he intends singing.

    "When I was a bachelor I lived by myself;
    All the bread and cheese I had I laid upon the shelf."

Here we have him alone, at peace with himself and the world; happy in
the contemplation of his beloved muse; jotting down, now and then, the
brilliant ideas that flash through his teeming brain; and munching in
solitude his homely meal of bread and cheese. In telling us he laid his
bread and cheese upon the shelf, he at once shows he had left his
parental abode, and the ministering and watchful care of his maternal
parent.

There must, of course, have been a cause for such a step. Some reason
why the gentle being should have been wrought up to that pitch, when he
daringly throws off all restraint, and steps into the world to act and
think for himself. It may have been the want of sympathy that drove him
to the act. They were plain folks, and didn't appreciate his peculiar
turn of mind, and so only laughed at him, and ridiculed his pretensions.
That there was a quarrel there is no manner of doubt, and it was
probably caused by the mortifying act of his mother in fainting when he
read her the poetry he had written at her request. That, in itself, was
enough to break all ties between them. She was horrified and overwhelmed
with dismay that a child of hers could be guilty of such atrocious
rhymes; and he, in turn, was disgusted that a mother of his should be so
unappreciative and earthly. And so, by mutual consent, they separated.

That accounts for his bachelor habit of laying his bread and cheese on
the shelf that he might have it handy, and not forget where he had
placed it. But as

    "The rats and mice made such a strife,"

he found that would never do. Something else must be thought of; and
being an inventive genius, he tried putting it in his trunk, but it
scented his Sunday jacket and trousers, and the girls all turned up
their noses at the odd perfume. So, driven to extremity, he in an evil
hour decided, as many another has since done, that the remedy for his
ills was matrimony, and that it was not well for man to live alone.

A Prophet is without honor in his own country, and so ofttimes is a
Poet. To his bashful supplication of "Wilt thou?" the young maidens if
his village unhesitatingly refused to wilt, and thus it was that
circumstances forced him

    "To go to London to buy himself a wife."

How fortunate that he should give us, inadvertently as it were, the
information so necessary to the unlucky young men of this later day, the
best place to go shopping for wives! No man after reading the above need
say "he doesn't marry because he cannot, as no one will have him." He
need not stop for that hereafter, but just go to London, pick out one to
suit, pay the price, and bag the article. It can all be done in a day,
and save time wonderfully.

He bought his wife--a cheap one undoubtedly--and gave his promise to
pay; then started homeward, feeling his importance as a married man, and
chuckling over the idea of the astonishment and dismay of the rats and
mice when he should set his wife after them, and thereby deprive them of
their daily rations. But while musing thus, he discovers his wile shows
signs of fatigue, as

    "The roads were bad, and the lanes were narrow,"

and not wishing to have her exhausted before commencing business, he
gallantly determined to give her a ride, well knowing she would need all
her strength for the battle he intended she should win.

So borrowing a wheelbarrow of a trusting neighbor, he seated her
therein, and amid great rejoicing at his extraordinary "luck" he set
forward. But now comes the sad part of the story:

    "The wheelbarrow broke--my wife had a fall."

And what a fall was there, my countrymen! Words are inadequate. The
scene was indescribable, and we leave a blank that each may picture it
to suit themselves.

After the excitement occasioned by the catastrophe was somewhat abated,
he picked up the pieces and tried to put the wheelbarrow together again.
But it was too far gone; it was un-put-togetherable, and so he, more in
sorrow than anger, stood gazing at the wreck, while his wife, being a
woman, could not resist the impulse to cry exultingly, "I told you so; I
knew it." That on top of all the rest of his trouble was a little too
much; and after fumbling over the pieces a while, "I told you so"
ringing in his ears, he completely lost his temper, and vented his
passion in the words:--

    "The deuce take the wheelbarrow."--

and then in a low voice, cautiously turning his head aside, he added:--

    "My wife and all."

Together they trudged homeward. Fearful misgivings as to the wisdom of
his step came swooping down upon him, and he almost wished he had not
tried to mend matters, but had patiently borne with the rats, when
suddenly--the vision of a _cat_ swept athwart his mind, and he groaned
aloud in bitterness of spirit.

Not even the ever after clean hearth-stone, with the dead bodies of his
enemies, the rats, piled thereon, could make him forget that one moment
of agonizing consciousness, when he realized for the first time that he
had burdened himself with a wife when a cat would have answered as well.

       *       *       *       *       *

HURLY-BURLY.

    No wonder that the folks turn pale
      And preachers talk of doom,
    Since by each telegram and mail
      Come words of awful gloom:

    Explosions of N. glycerine;
      Expulsion of the Pope;
    Earthquakes along the Eastern line
      And THE PACIFIC SLOPE.

    Surely the world is upside down,
      Its framework out of joint;
    At coming change all things of town
      And country seem to point:

    The very sea some day may try
      To climb the mountain side,
    And hill-folks yet be staggered by
      THE MOANING OF THE TIED.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR PORTFOLIO.

By Diligence from Paris to Versailles--Fastest Time on Record--Happy
Travelling Companions--Mud, Misery, and Malignity--Life on the Road.


NEAR ST. CLOUD, NINTH WEEK OF THE REPUBLIC, 1870.

It would have done you good to see us getting over that muddy, jagged,
rutty old turnpike that leads off from the south of the Bois de Boulogne
toward St. Cloud and Versailles. Since writing my last, I had been to
Paris _par ballon monte,_ and was now returning in the _diligence_ that
took five American ladies and a couple of war correspondents, all
friends of WASHBURNE, away from the temptation of eating horse-flesh in
the beleaguered city, to such edibles as the rapacity of the German
appetite had left undevoured in the neighborhood of the old "stamping
grounds" of Louis XVI. We were not a jolly party. It rained in torrents,
and our little driver perched upon the box in front smoked the most
infernal tobacco I ever smelt. Moreover, the horses were not lively
steeds. They were rather safe than otherwise, and not given to running
away. Although the driver addressed himself to their flanks, between
each puff of smoke, with a pointed stick, they didn't rear and plunge so
as to frighten the ladies, and that was a point gained, albeit we had
leisure to count the pickets in the fences as we dragged toward our
destination. One of our lady passengers came from Connecticut, and she
talked with a nutmeg dialect that made her garrulity oftentimes quite
spicy. We two sat back to back, and when the vehicle lurched heavily her
chignon took me "amidships" (if I may be permitted the expression) with
a concussion that felt like the impact of a muffled ball from a
six-pound field howitzer. "Goodness gracious, dew git eout of the way
and give me some room, man!" she would exclaim as our wagon plunged into
a three-foot "gore" and the coachee plied his pointed ramrod with
increased vigor to the attenuated haunches of the insensible beasts.

"My dear madam, you will perceive that I cannot 'git' any further
without climbing upon the back of my companion in front." Lord knows I
would have given a hundred francs to be out of her reach; but we had
been all ticketed and labelled through under the same "pass," and there
was no such thing as dissolving partnership _now._

"Ugh!" she muttered, putting her handkerchief to her nose, "and that
horrid smoke too!" But the imperturbable director of our flight took no
heed, and drew away at his clay idol with unabated satisfaction. 'Twas
thus we jogged on for five weary hours, "OLD CONNECTICUT" charging head
foremost at my spinal column with a frequency and momentum that made me
believe, finally, she did it on purpose. Three miles out from St. Cloud
we found the road completely blocked up with artillery wagons, and saw
large masses of troops moving through the fields on either side. It
still rained incessantly, and the forlornness of the situation was no
wise relieved by the distant booming of guns, and the sucking sound of
the wheels in the mud.

"Oh, my!" sail a thin, squeaky voice on the back seat. "I believe they
are coming this way. Do let us get out, SARAH. I would rather die on the
road than be murdered in such a sepulchre as this."

She referred to a battalion of the Landwehr that had just denied into
the road, not a hundred yards in front of us.

"Stop your sniffling back there!" peevishly exclaimed "OLD CONNECTICUT."
"It would serve you right if they bayonetted you;" and she added
emphasis to her expostulation by planting her chignon between my
shoulder-blades with terrific force.

I felt at once that either my back or my gallantry would have to give
way; so I took a bond of fate, and sacrificed the latter on the spot.

"That'll do--that'll do," I remonstrated. "No more of that; if you want
to knock the brains out of that haystack on the back of your head, why,
knock away; but spare my bones, if you please."

I looked around, and she looked around with such suddenness as to bring
her nose in contact with the brim of my hat, and force the tears from
her eyes. She started to her feet, and I verily believe would not have
postponed hostilities a moment, had not the door of the _diligence_ just
then been opened, and a Prussian officer demanded to see our papers. I
paraded the "documents," and he said they were "good;" but he also said
that we must make up our minds to halt here until the following morning,
as there was a movement of the troops, and no vehicles would be
permitted to pass this point.

_Gaudeamus!_ I could have sworn, but my wrath sailed away when I saw
what a volcano was working in the bosom of "OLD CONNECTICUT." She didn't
strike the officer, or utter a single complaint in his hearing, but sat
down as if she had been a spile driven through the top of the coach, and
let the vinegar run out of her eyes in pure impotency of speechless
rage.

"SARAH'S" companion on the back seat broke forth afresh, and again
wanted to know as to the probability of our being charged upon and put
to the sword. I couldn't hear "SARAH'S" answers to these harrowing
questions, but it seemed to me as if she were trying to throttle her
timid friend into a perfect sense of security. Whatever she did had the
desired effect, and I heard no more from the "back seat."

It was nightfall ere the several members of our little colony composed
themselves to await in such tranquillity as they could command, the
ordeal of sleeping, sitting bolt upright in a French _diligence,_ upon a
dark, tempestuous night, and surrounded on all sides by the dreadful
presence of "red-handed war." The last thing I remember ere the drowsy
god "MURPHY" sent his fairies to weave their cobwebs about my eyelids,
was "OLD CONNECTICUT." She didn't look like the battering-ram that she
was. She had taken that chignon for a pillow, and fastened it to the
back of the seat. Her head was thrown back; her chin had fallen, and at
the extreme tip of her thin red nose a solitary tear glistened like a
dew-drop on a beet. Once, about midnight, she awoke me by her snoring,
but I gave the old gal's chignon a hitch, and it was all right again.

Yours, somniferously,

DICK TINTO.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THOSE COUNTRY COUSINS AGAIN.

_Celia (just arrived from the country)._ "JUST THINK, JANE, COUSIN JOHN
IS TO BE MY ESCORT TO THE FRENCH BAZAAR AND THE NILSSON CONCERTS, AND
BOOTH'S AND WALLACE'S, AND THE OPERA BOUFFE, AND LOTS OF OTHER
FIRST-CLASS SHOWS!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

FACTS ABOUT THE ENGLISH MISSION.

It is not true that I ever accepted the English Mission; and if any man
says I did, I now deliberately brand him as a Liar and Villain.

I am not going to deny that the place was offered me, but I do
unhesitatingly, say that I never absolutely consented to take it.

Gen. GRANT may have construed my note on the subject as an unqualified
acceptance, but that was owing entirely to his devouring desire to get
the thing off his hands, and not to any ambiguity in my language.

"No, Mr. PRESIDENT," I said in the note, "far be it from me to stand
between my friend, Mr. GREELEY, and the gratification of his noble
desire to wear military things at receptions abroad. Moreover your
Excellency, I would not for the world deprive our cousins and other
relations in England of an opportunity to cultivate the grand old art of
swearing under the instruction of so eminent a professor as HORACE."

This is the sort of language I used, and I don't see how any man except
Gen. GRANT could get hold of it the wrong way.

Of course I had some reasons besides those stated in my note for
declining the Mission, but I did not want to hurt the President's
feelings by going over the whole ground.

It was not unknown to me that the situation had been offered to about
five thousand persons before it came round to my turn, or that the
English Mission had fallen into a general decline. I knew all about that
just as well as Gen. GRANT, but it would not have done any good to
parade my knowledge on the subject.

There was the Hon. THOS. JENKINS who refused to take it, because his
wife had a prejudice against Bulls ever since she was scared by one that
chased her five miles for no other reason than that she was what might
be called a red woman--well-read in the exciting house-wife literature
of the day. JENKINS positively declined.

Then it was offered to Col. CANNONAYDE, who declined it because his
mother-in-law declared that she would go along too, if he went, and he
thought it would be better not to let her have a change of air, as she
was in a fair way to wind up pretty soon by remaining near those swamps.
CANNONAYDE wanted the place kept open till after the funeral, but this
was not granted.

The next offer was made to Gen. BRAYLEIGH; but _he_ refused it on the
ground that he had made arrangements for going into the coal trade, and
he could not be sure of holding the place more than a few weeks. Anyway,
he thought it would not pay to give up the coalition he had entered into
with another party. In fact, old BRAYLEIGH treated the whole matter very
coldly.

It was next tendered to the Hon. THEOPHILUS SKINNER, but peremptorily
declined because SKINNER'S district had become Democratic since he was
elected, and he knew that if he resigned an infamous cannibal copperhead
would be sent to Congress in his stead. SKINNER consulted all the
leaders of his party, and they unanimously agreed that it would be
better to let every court in Europe be without an American
representative than risk the loss of that district.

Everybody knows why the Rev. Dr. BANGWELL, of Chicago, did not accept
it. The Doctor expected his divorce case to come on in a few days, and
could not neglect that; and besides, he had made all the arrangements
for his other marriage, and sent out the invitations. If the President
had just made some inquiries before appointing Dr. BANGWELL, he could
have found out that the Doctor's engagements would not permit him to
leave Chicago on any account.

The offer that was made to Col. KAMPSTUHL was declined solely because
the Colonel had an old score to settle with Gen. GRANT for something in
the way of a court-martial that happened near Tricksburg. He swore that
he would get square with the author of that business sometime, and when
the mission was offered to him (by accident, for Gen GRANT had forgotten
all about the court-martial), he got up a sepulchral voice, and said,
"Ha, ha! R-e-e-e-vendge at last!" and then wrote a bitter letter to
Washington on the subject.

After that it was peddled all round the country in a promiscuous way,
and offered in succession to a blacksmith who used to shoe horses for
Gen. GRANT, a conductor who refused to take fare from a well-known
Presidential excursion party, a dealer in hides who had conferred some
high obligations when a certain official was in the tanning business, a
grocery-keeper, a family shoemaker, a manufacturer of matches, and such
a multitude of people, in fact, that it finally got to be looked upon as
the greatest missionary undertaking of modern times.

The only really prominent man that the place was not tendered to is
GEORGE FRANCIS TRAIN; but I wouldn't say that it won't get around to him
somewhere in Asia before the circle is completed.

All these things were very well known to me before the office was placed
at my disposal, but I did not care to wound the fine sensibilities of
the President by saying anything about them in my note.

My reason for declining in favor of Mr. GREELEY has been stated--I put
the whole matter frankly to Gen. GRANT--but I can't say whether the
suggestion I offered has been acted upon or not. The only thing I am
certain about on this point is, that if the offer should be made to
HORACE, it won't get around to GEORGE FRANCIS afterwards.

There has been so much talk about this business, that I have considered
it a sacred duty to state the facts and let some floods of light shine
upon the whole thing. The duty is now conscientiously, discharged.

DARBY DODD.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Truth In a Nut-shell

CHANCELLOR CROSBY, in his inaugural address, has, we may say, bored
right to the root of the whole vexed question of education, and
extracted it, as will be seen from this extract: "It need hardly be
urged," says the new Chancellor, and we hope, all the discontented will
take the full force of the remark, "It need hardly be urged that the
didaskalos should be didaktitos, and yet perhaps emphasis on so plain a
truth may be sometimes necessary." Let us thank the Chancellor for
forever removing this necessity.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                      A.T. STEWART & CO.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |       Have made very large additions to their stock of       |
  |                                                              |
  |  CLOAK VELVETS, VELVETEENS, PLUSHES, ASTRAKHANS, MILLINERY   |
  |                  and TRIMMING VELVETS, Etc.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                     THE MOST CELEBRATED                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                        CLOAK VELVETS.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                       CONFINED STYLES,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                              AT                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                   UNPRECEDENTED BARGAINS,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |               CONSEQUENT ON PURCHASES MADE IN                |
  |                                                              |
  |                   LYONS AND OTHER CENTRES                    |
  |                                                              |
  |               OF MANUFACTURE, AT PANIC PRICES.               |
  |                                                              |
  | For the convenience of Customers, the above are exhibited in |
  |  the Section of the main floor next to the corner of Tenth   |
  |                           street,                            |
  |                                                              |
  |         BROADWAY, 4th Avenue, 9th and 10th Streets.          |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                      A.T. STEWART & CO.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                        ARE EXHIBITING                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                   An Important Purchase of                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                      Rich Plain Silks,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                   27 INCHES WIDE, KNOWN AS                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                   UNWATERED MOIRE ANTIQUE,                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                    REPRESENTING IN VALUE                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                          $100,000,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                  AT $4 AND $4.50 PER YARD,                   |
  |                                                              |
  |          THE SAME HAVING BEEN SOLD AT $6 AND $6.50           |
  |                          PER YARD.                           |
  |                                                              |
  |            SPECIAL ATTENTION IS INVITED TO THESE             |
  |                 GOODS FOR HOLIDAY PRESENTS.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                    A LARGE ASSORTMENT OF                     |
  |                       BLACK AND WHITE                        |
  |                        STRIPED SILKS,                        |
  |                      AT 75c. PER YARD.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Plain Japanese Silks,                     |
  |                         HIGH COLORS,                         |
  |                      AT 75c. PER YARD.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                   Three Cases Fancy Silks,                   |
  |                IN VARIOUS STYLES-FRESH GOODS,                |
  |                         $1 PER YARD.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                   Five Cases Dress Silks,                    |
  |                        NICE QUALITY,                         |
  |                         $2 PER YARD.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                     A LARGE QUANTITY OF                      |
  |                     BONNET BLACK SILKS,                      |
  |                  AT $3.75 AND $3 PER YARD.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                   REAL IRISH POPLINS, NEW,                   |
  |                         $2 PER YARD.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                        A FULL LINE OF                        |
  |                    IRISH TARTAN POPLINS,                     |
  |               IN TWENTY-FIVE DIFFERENT CLANS.                |
  |                                                              |
  |                    AMERICAN BLACK SILKS,                     |
  |                   GUARANTEED TO WEAR WELL,                   |
  |                        $2 PER YARD.                          |
  |                                                              |
  |               FORMING IN ALL RESPECTS THE MOST               |
  |                  ATTRACTIVE STOCK THEY HAVE                  |
  |                        EVER OFFERED.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                    BROADWAY, Fourth Ave.,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                      9th and 10th Sts.                       |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                         PUNCHINELLO.                         |
  |                                                              |
  | The first number of this Illustrated Humorous and Satirical  |
  |   Weekly Paper was issued under date of April 2, 1870. The   |
  |   Press and the Public in every State and Territory of the   |
  |     Union endorse it as the best paper of the kind ever      |
  |                    published in America.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                  CONTENTS ENTIRELY ORIGINAL                  |
  |                                                              |
  | Subscription for one year, (with $2.00 premium,)  . .  $4.00 |
  |   "         "  six months, (without premium,) . . .     2.00 |
  |   "         "  three months,  . . . . . . . . . . .     1.00 |
  | Single copies mailed free, for  . . . . . . . . . . . .  .10 |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  | "We offer the following elegant premiums of L. PRANG & CO'S  |
  |            CHROMOS for subscriptions as follows:             |
  |                                                              |
  |              A copy of paper for one year, and               |
  |                                                              |
  |     "The Awakening," (a Litter of Puppies.) Half chromo.     |
  | Size 8-3/8 by 11-1/8 ($2.00 picture,)--for. . . . . .  $4.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |        A copy of paper for one year and either of the        |
  |                   following $3.00 chromos:                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                  _Wild Roses._ 12-1/8 x 9.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Dead Game. 11-1/8 x 8-5/8.                  |
  |                                                              |
  | Easter Morning. 6-3/5 x 10-1/4--for. . . . . . . . .   $5.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |        A copy of paper for one year and either of the        |
  |                   following $5.00 chromos                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                      Group of Chickens;                      |
  |                     Group of Ducklings;                      |
  |                       Group of Quails.                       |
  |                      Each 10 x 12-1/8.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                The Poultry Yard. 10-1/8 x 14                 |
  |                                                              |
  |        The Barefoot Boy; Wild Fruit. Each 9-3/4 x 13.        |
  |                                                              |
  | Pointer and Quail; Spaniel and Woodcock. 10 x 12 for   $6.50 |
  |                                                              |
  |        A copy of paper for one year and either of the        |
  |                   following $6.00 chromos                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                     The Baby in Trouble;                     |
  |                   The Unconscious Sleeper;                   |
  |      The Two Friends. (Dog and Child.) Each 13 x 16-3/4      |
  |                                                              |
  |           Spring; Summer; Autumn 12-1/8 x 16-1/2.            |
  |                                                              |
  | The Kid's Play Ground. 11 x 17-1/2--for . . . . .  .   $7.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |        A copy of paper for one year and either of the        |
  |                   following $7.50 chromos                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Strawberries and Baskets.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Cherries and Baskets.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                   Currants. Each 13 x 18.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |              Horses in a Storm. 22-1/4 x 15-1/4              |
  |                                                              |
  | Six Central Park Views. (A set.) 9-1/8 x 4-1/2--for .  $8.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |               A copy of paper for one year and               |
  |                                                              |
  |         Six American Landscapes. (A set.) 4-3/8 x 9,         |
  | price $9.00--for  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   $9.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |        A copy of paper for one year and either of the        |
  |                    following $10 chromos:                    |
  |                                                              |
  |        Sunset in California. (Bierstadt) 18-1/8 x 12         |
  |                                                              |
  |                   Easter Morning. 14 x 21.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |             Corregio's Magdalen. 12-1/2 x 16-1/8             |
  |                                                              |
  |       Summer Fruit, and Autumn Fruit. (Half chromes.)        |
  |   15-1/2 x 10-1/2, (companions, price $10.00 for the two),   |
  |                                                   for $10.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |  Remittances should be made in P.O. Orders, Drafts, or Bank  |
  | Checks on New York, or Registered letters. The paper will be |
  |    sent from the first number, (April 2d, 1870,) when not    |
  |                      otherwise ordered.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |  Postage of paper is payable at the office where received,   |
  |     twenty cents per year, or five cents per quarter, in     |
  |    advance; the CHROMOS will be _mailed free_ on receipt of  |
  |                            money.                            |
  |                                                              |
  |    CANVASSERS WANTED, to whom liberal commissions will be    |
  |        given. For special terms address the Company.         |
  |                                                              |
  |  The first ten numbers will be sent to any one desirous of   |
  |   seeing the paper before subscribing, for SIXTY CENTS. A    |
  |   specimen copy sent to any one desirous of canvassing or    |
  |       getting up a club, on receipt of postage stamp.        |
  |                                                              |
  |                           Address,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                 PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |        P.O. Box 2783. No. 83 Nassau Street. New York.        |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

[Illustration: THE PROPOSAL.

_Ambitious Foreigner._ "AH! MEECE BULLION, BECAUSE I AM POOR YOU SCORN
MY HAND; BUT REMEMBER HOW ZE POET HE TELL YOU ZE MAN'S ZE GOLD."

_Miss B._ "GO DOWN TO PAR, THEN--_I_ HAVE NOTHING MORE TO SAY ON THE
SUBJECT."]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |  "THE PRINTING HOUSE OF THE UNITED STATES" AND "THE UNITED   |
  |                STATES ENVELOPE MANUFACTORY."                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                    GEORGE F. NESBITT & CO                    |
  |                                                              |
  | 163,165,167,169 Pearl St., & 73,75,77,73 Pine St., New-York. |
  |                                                              |
  |                Execute all kinds of Printing,                |
  |                                                              |
  |               Furnish all kinds of STATIONERY,               |
  |                                                              |
  |                Make all kinds of BLANK BOOKS,                |
  |                                                              |
  |           Execute the finest styles of LITHOGRAPHY           |
  |                                                              |
  |   Make the Best and Cheapest ENVELOPES Ever offered to the   |
  |                           Public.                            |
  |                                                              |
  |   They have made all the pre-paid Envelopes for the United   |
  |   States Post-Office Department for the past 16 years, and   |
  | have INVARIABLY BEEN THE LOWEST BIDDERS. Their Machinery is  |
  | the most complete, rapid and economical known in the trade,  |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                Travelers West and South-West.                |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Should bear in mind that the                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                         ERIE RAILWAY                         |
  |                                                              |
  |    IS BY FAR THE CHEAPEST, QUICKEST, AND MOST COMFORTABLE    |
  |                            ROUTE.                            |
  |                                                              |
  |  Making Direct and Sure Connection at CINCINNATI, with all   |
  |                            Lines                             |
  |                                                              |
  |                       By Rail or River                       |
  |                                                              |
  |  For NEW ORLEANS LOUISVILLE, MEMPHIS, ST. LOUIS, VICKSBURG,  |
  |                      NASHVILLE, MOBILE,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |             And all Points South and South-west.             |
  |                                                              |
  | Its DRAWING-ROOM and SLEEPING-COACHES on all Express Trains. |
  |  running through to Cincinnati without change, are the most  |
  |   elegant and spacious used upon any Road in this country,   |
  |   being fitted up in the most elaborate manner, and having   |
  |  every modern improvement introduced for the comfort of its  |
  |   patrons; running upon the BROAD GAUGE: revealing scenery   |
  | along the Line unequalled upon this Continent, and rendering |
  |  a trip over the ERIE one of the delights and pleasures of   |
  |                this life not to be forgotten.                |
  |                                                              |
  |   By applying at the Offices of the Erie Railway Co., Nos.   |
  |  241, 529 and 957 Broadway; 205 Chambers St.; 38 Greenwich   |
  |   St.; cor. 125th St. and Third Avenue, Harlem; 338 Fulton   |
  |  St., Brooklyn; Depots foot of Chambers Street and foot of   |
  |  23d St., New York; and the Agents at the principal hotels,  |
  | travelers can obtain just the Ticket they desire, as well as |
  |                all the necessary information.                |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                         PUNCHINELLO,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                   VOL. I. ENDING SEPT. 24                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                    BOUND IN EXTRA CLOTH,                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                        IS NOW READY.                         |
  |                         PRICE $2.50.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |    Sent free by any Publisher on receipt of price, or by     |
  |                                                              |
  |               PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,                |
  |                                                              |
  |                 83 Nassau Street, New York.                  |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                         PUNCHINELLO.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |     With a large and varied experience in the management     |
  | and publication of a paper of the class herewith submitted,  |
  |    and with the still more positive advantage of an Ample    |
  |           Capital to justify the undertaking, the            |
  |                                                              |
  |                  PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                   OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK                    |
  |                                                              |
  |         Presents to the public for approval, the new         |
  |                                                              |
  |              Illustrated Humorous and Satirical              |
  |                                                              |
  |                        WEEKLY PAPER,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                         PUNCHINELLO,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |          The first number of which was issued under          |
  |                       date of April 2.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                      ORIGINAL ARTICLES                       |
  |                                                              |
  |  Suitable for the paper, and Original Designs or suggestive  |
  | ideas or sketches for illustrations, upon the topics of the  |
  |  day, are always acceptable and will be paid for liberally.  |
  |                                                              |
  |      Rejected communications cannot be returned, unless      |
  |                 postage stamps are enclosed.                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                            TERMS:                            |
  |                                                              |
  |             One copy, per year, in advance $4 00             |
  |                       Single copies 10                       |
  |     A specimen copy will be mailed free upon the receipt     |
  |                        of ten cents.                         |
  |     One copy, with the Riverside Magazine, or any other      |
  |           magazine or paper, price $2.50, for 5 50           |
  |   One copy, with any magazine or paper, price $4, for 7 00   |
  |                                                              |
  |  All communications, remittances, etc., to be addressed to   |
  |                 PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                    No. 83 Nassau Street,                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                   P.O. Box 2783. NEW YORK.                   |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                  PROFESSOR JAMES DE MILLE,                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                          Author of                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                   "THE DODGE CLUB ABROAD"                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                  AND OTHER HUMOROUS WORKS,                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Will Commence a New Serial                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                       IN THE NUMBER OF                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                        "PUNCHINELLO"                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                     JANUARY; 7th, 1871,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |              Written expressly for this Paper.               |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                      A CHRISTMAS STORY,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |              "Written expressly for this Paper,              |
  |                                                              |
  |                    By FRANK R. STOCKTON,                     |
  |                                                              |
  |             Author of "Ting-a-ling," etc., etc.,             |
  |                                                              |
  |     WILL BE COMMENCED IN No. 38, FOR DECEMBER 17TH, AND      |
  |                 CONCLUDED IN THREE NUMBERS.                  |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punchinello, Volume 2, No. 37,
December 10, 1870, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCHINELLO 37 ***

***** This file should be named 10544.txt or 10544.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/5/4/10544/

Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Steve Schulze and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


