The Project Gutenberg EBook of Turkish Prisoners in Egypt, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Turkish Prisoners in Egypt
       A Report By The Delegates Of The International Committee
       Of The Red Cross

Author: Various

Release Date: January 4, 2004 [EBook #10589]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TURKISH PRISONERS IN EGYPT ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Susan Woodring and PG Distributed
Proofreaders





TURKISH PRISONERS IN EGYPT

A Report By The Delegates Of The International Committee Of The Red
Cross

_Extracted and translated from the Official Reports of the Red Cross
Society_

_(Documents publies a l'occasion de la Guerre Europeenne, 1914-1917)_

Published in 1917




_A Report on a visit made in December, 1916, and January, 1917, to the
Camps for Turkish Prisoners of War in Egypt, by the Delegates of the
International Committee of the Red Cross._




Turkish Prisoners in Egypt

~INTRODUCTION~


Being deputed by the Red Cross International Committee to visit Turkish
prisoners of war in Egypt, we presented ourselves on December 3, 1916,
to the officer for Naval Transport in the British office at Marseilles.
By order of the War Office he obtained berths for us on the liner
_Morea_, of the P. and O. Line. We embarked at Marseilles on December
19, 1916, and after an uneventful journey reached Port Said on December
27.

At Cairo General Murray, Commander-in-Chief of the British forces in
Egypt, was good enough to put us in touch with Brig.-General II. G.
Casson, C.M.G., Director-in-Chief of the Prisoners of War Department.
With the help of Colonel Simpson we drew up a programme of visits. A
motor-car was placed at our disposal, and permission given us to take
photographs in the camps, distribute gifts among the prisoners, and
talk freely with them.

We have to express our warmest thanks to General Murray and to the
officers who allowed us to make our enquiries everywhere, without
restriction. We should also like to offer our deepest gratitude to Sir
Reginald Wingate, British High Commissioner in Egypt, for the kindly
care accorded us throughout our stay.




~1. Heliopolis Camp.~

_(Visited on January 2, 1917.)_


This camp is laid out quite close to the new city of hotels and villas
founded in 1905 under the name of The Oasis of Heliopolis. The camp site
is 134 feet above the level of Cairo.


_Strength._--3,906 Turkish non-commissioned officers and men.

3 Turkish soldiers of the Sanitary Corps.

2 Armenian doctors (officers in the Turkish Army).

The camp is arranged to hold a total population of 15,000 men. A
barbed-wire fencing separates it from adjoining property.


_Accommodation._--The barracks for the prisoners are arranged in groups,
in parallel lines separated by passages 65 feet wide. These barracks,
built under the supervision of the Egyptian Engineering Department, are
of uniform construction, and about 42 feet long by 30 feet wide. They
are solid frames of wood with the spaces between filled in with reeds
arranged vertically and held in place by crossbars. The roof is of reed
thatch edged with tarred felt. Thanks to the design, the ventilation is
perfect. The sandy soil shows hardly a sign of dampness. The passage
between the rows of beds is made of hard-beaten earth which is very dry
and easily kept clean. All along this corridor, as in all the camp
roads, buckets full of water are arranged in readiness to meet an
outbreak of fire. The water in these buckets is not meant for drinking,
and therefore contains a little cresol to prevent prisoners drinking it.
The danger of fire is further reduced to a minimum by the fact that the
men smoke only out of doors and that the mildness of the climate does
away with the use of stoves. Each barrack accommodates 50 men.


_Bedding._--Each prisoner lies on a mat of plaited rush, and has four
blankets. Every morning the mats are brushed and rolled up and the
blankets folded, so that during the day there is a large clear space
inside the building. The detention cells have the same sleeping
accommodation.


_Exercise._--The space left between the barracks of the separate
sections is amply sufficient for exercise, which is quite unrestricted
during the regulation hours.


_Food._--Provisions are purchased by the commissariat and brought every
morning into a special barrack, whence each section draws its daily
rations. Bread comes from the Cairo bakeries. It is of good quality and
agreeable to the taste. The kitchens are in the open and heated by wood
fires. They are staffed by a detachment of prisoners under a head cook.
At meal times each section sends men to draw the rations for each room
in large metal bowls. Every man has his own spoon, bowl and drinking
cup, all of metal. The hours of meals are ordinarily as follows:

  5 a.m.; 11 a.m.; and 4 p.m.

The last meal is the principal one of the day.

We have examined the various food materials given the prisoners and
found them to be of excellent quality.

The menu of the Turkish prisoners of war now interned in Heliopolis Camp
consists of bread, meat, vegetables, rice, butter, pepper, salt, onions,
tea (7-1/2 grammes), sugar (42 grammes), cheese and jam or olives.

Each prisoner receives 42-1/2 grammes of cigarettes and two boxes of
matches every week; two lbs. of firewood per day; and soap.

It interested us to make a note of the expenses involved by the support
of each Turkish prisoner, according to figures supplied by the English
authorities.

The calculation is based on a period of six months (in winter).

                                      L    s.   d.
  Clothing and linen                  3    0    0
  Periodical renovation of winter
    clothes                           0    6    6
  Renovation of linen, footwear,
    and towels (twice)                1   10    0
  Food at actual contract prices      5    0    0
  Tobacco                             0   12    6
  Wood (average price)                0    7    6
  Lighting (as for Maadi Camp)        0    2    0
  Water filtration (Maadi)            0    0    6
                                    -------------
  Total                             L10   19    0
                                    =============

Depreciation of buildings, fittings, blankets and other things provided
is not included in these figures.


_Canteen._--The regulation food of the prisoners being ample, the
canteen plays a very minor part in the feeding arrangements. It sells
tea, coffee, and light refreshments. A cup of sweetened tea costs 5
paras, or about one-third of a penny. The canteen also deals in letter
paper, post-cards, thread, needles, buttons and other small odds and
ends.

The men receive 2 ounces of tobacco free every week. They never get
alcohol.


_Clothing._--Each prisoner is supplied with two complete sets of
underwear: shirts, drawers, and socks. The uniform consists of trousers
and coat of dark blue cloth. The brass buttons give it a military
appearance.

All the men wear the red fez. They are allowed to wear their
decorations. That they are prisoners is shown only by their having on
them a white metal plate about 1-1/2 inches in diameter, bearing a
registration number and the two letters P.W. (Prisoner of War). In our
opinion this kind of medallion is a more judicious form of indication
than the bands, armlets or large letters used elsewhere. In summer the
cloth uniforms are replaced by linen uniforms of the same cut and
colour.

All men wear indoors leather slippers of the Eastern kind. Shoes are
used only by prisoners engaged on gardening, and by non-commissioned
officers.

Linen, clothes and footwear are renewed on fixed dates or according to
need.


_Hygiene._--Everything that has to do with hygiene and the sanitation of
the camp is the province of Lieut.-Colonel E.G. Garner, Medical Office
Inspector of Prisoner-of-War Camps in Egypt.

Water is supplied from the Heliopolis town mains, is of good quality,
and is provided in sufficient quantities.

For toilet purposes the prisoners have the use twice a day of shower
baths and water taps. The floor of the lavatories is sloping cement, and
the water drains away through a gulley between the two rows of baths.
Prisoners can get hot water from the kitchen when they need it. Soap is
supplied _ad libitum_.

For washing their clothes the prisoners have some very convenient
arrangements. Once a week each prisoner's blankets and clothes are
passed through the disinfecting chamber and thoroughly sterilised.
Thanks to this precaution, there is not a trace of vermin to be found in
the camp.

Ten Turkish barbers are occupied in cutting the hair of prisoners and
shaving them in a well-managed barber's shop.

The latrines are clean and numerous enough. Some of them are on the
English system; the rest on the Turkish. They are disinfected daily with
carbolineum. All discharge into the sewers.


_Medical attention._--The camp medical service is staffed by Colonel
E.G. Garner and two Armenian doctors (Arsen Khoren and Leon Samuel).
Four English hospital orderlies are assisted by three Turkish orderlies.
An English dentist visits the camp at the doctor's request.

At the infirmary, which is clean and well looked after, all prisoners
not seriously ill are accommodated with beds having mattresses and steel
springs. The consulting room is well supplied with medicines. Serious
cases are sent to the hospitals set apart for prisoners of war.

From 20 to 30 men come to the infirmary daily for medical attention. All
the cases are entered in a register, which we have examined; after each
name is the complaint and the treatment prescribed.

At the time of our visit there were six lying-down cases in the
infirmary; two with tuberculosis in the first stage (prisoners captured
recently at El Arish); one with diarrhoea; one with conjunctivitis; one
with malaria; and one with a wounded leg.

Of the prisoners in camp 3 per cent. have been attacked by malaria--old
cases from the marshy districts of Turkey, such as Angora Yosgath, for
instance. Nine per cent. have been attacked by chronic bacillar
dysentery; these are treated periodically with anti-dysenteric serum.
Some cases of amibian dysentery are being treated with calomel, salol,
and emetine. Twenty per cent. were affected by ophthalmia due to their
stay in the desert before being captured. These were treated with
sulphate of zinc and protargol.

Four prisoners are suffering from trachoma of old standing. Recent cases
are ordinary ailments, bronchitis and simple diarrhoea.

As a general rule the camp prisoners look well, have a good colour and
are well nourished.

The prisoners were inoculated in Turkey against typhoid fever and
smallpox. All who no longer showed traces of vaccination were vaccinated
immediately after being captured. They were also inoculated against
cholera.

There is no typhoid fever in the camp, nor exanthematic typhus, nor any
other infectious disease.


_Work._--The prisoners have no regular work to do. No prisoner is
employed in workshops outside the camp. Even inside, except for ordinary
camp fatigue duties, and some light gardening, no labour is exacted.
During our inspection we saw the digging for a water supply through the
camp being done by Arab workmen, not by prisoners.

In any case, corporals and sergeants are not allowed to work.


_Religion and Recreation._--The prisoners are quite free to follow their
own religious practices, which are performed thrice a day ordinarily,
and six or seven times daily during Ramadan. Music and singing are
permitted; prisoners have manufactured several guitars and violins.


_Correspondence._--Most of the prisoners brought money with them; some
have received sums of money from their families through the Turkish Red
Cross and the International Committee of the Red Cross. They receive the
amount in weekly instalments of 30 piastres (about 6 shillings) per
month. Each person has a separate current account with the camp
accountant.

Letters take from three weeks to three months to get from the sender to
the prisoner to whom they are addressed. Some of them are sent through
the American Consul at Cairo. Very few of the prisoners can write, but
these may do so as often and for as long as they wish. There is no
system of delaying correspondence after delivery or before despatch.


_Prisoners' Aid._--There is no relief committee in the camp; so far, no
general relief funds have been sent. Sergeant-Major Hussein Hissan, a
native of Constantinople, told us that, although there were many poor
prisoners in the camp, there was no need to send help, as all prisoners
are well fed, well clothed and supplied with tobacco.


_Prisoners' Behaviour._--What strikes one more than anything else on
entering the camp is the prevailing orderliness and cleanliness. A
Turkish sergeant-major commands each group of huts, and a Turkish
sergeant is responsible for each dormitory. The prisoners are smart,
give the military salute and come to attention at the orders of the
non-commissioned officers when those in command pass through the camp.

Sergeant-Major Hassar Mohammed, from Angora, and Hamid Abdallah, from
Koniah (Asia Minor), told us, on behalf of their fellow prisoners, that
they had no complaints to make, and assured us of the kind treatment
which they receive.

On their part, the English officers and non-commissioned officers
declared that the prisoners are well disciplined and very willing. In
short, we took away with us an excellent impression of Heliopolis Camp.




~2. Hospital No. 2, at Abbassiah, near Cairo.~

_(Visited on January 2, 1917.)_


This hospital, on the pavilion system, and arranged in accordance with
the requirements of modern practice, is reserved exclusively for
German, Austrian, Bulgarian and Turkish prisoners of war. It is staffed
by head doctor Wickermann, assisted by four English doctors. Some
English Red Cross nurses and 18 Turkish orderlies attend to the sick and
wounded. These nurses and orderlies are engaged only with treatment. The
rough ward work and cleaning are done by native employes. The pavilions
are built of stone and separated by intervals of 32-1/2 feet. The roofs
are of cement. Along one side runs a covered gallery wherein beds and
arm-chairs are placed for the open-air cure of patients for whom it is
prescribed. The floor of the pavilions is a kind of linoleum made of
sawdust and cement, and is covered with palm mats. The windows are
large, and the cubic space per patient ample. The beds are arranged in
two rows and have spring and stuffed mattresses. Blankets are not
stinted. The rooms are scrupulously clean; and the hospital sterilising
chamber serves to disinfect the clothes, which, after being washed and
labelled, are stored in a wardrobe and handed back to the owners when
they leave the hospital. The prisoners have no trouble over them. A
large supply of things for the patients is kept in the laundry.


_Clothing._--The hospital patients wear pyjamas like those of British
soldiers; and, like the latter, convalescents wear a bright blue suit
with white facings and a red necktie. Patients able to sit up have
folding easy-chairs at their disposal.


_Dressings._--The hospital drug department is well stocked. The wounded
are supplied with surgical appliances, and with artificial limbs of the
most perfect make.

The day before our visit 80 wounded prisoners arrived at the hospital
from El Arish in an exhausted and emaciated condition. We saw each case
receive the most suitable treatment. The apparatus most generally used
for dealing with fractures consists of a metal frame with flannel strips
stretched from side to side to form a kind of trough. When the broken
limb is in position the apparatus is suspended from the ceiling by means
of pulleys. We have never seen this ingenious arrangement in any German
or French hospital; it seems to us to be a very practical idea and
likely to prove of great benefit to the wounded. At the head of each bed
is a temperature chart, a diet chart, and a clinical summary of the
case.


_Special Quarters._--The operating theatre is well arranged; a
sterilising stove is heated by paraffin. In the wards for prisoners
suffering from malaria the beds are enclosed by mosquito nets to prevent
the _anopheles_ mosquito infecting itself and then biting other patients
or people of the neighbourhood. Two wards are kept for convalescent
cases, who have a dining-room to stay in during the day.

Cases of venereal disease are also confined to separate premises.

The orderlies live in two comfortable tents in the hospital garden, one
of which, is occupied by those on day duty, the other by those on night
duty.


_Hygiene._--The water is of good quality, supplied from the Cairo water
system. The prisoners can use the well-equipped hot and cold baths at
their pleasure. Invalids wash themselves, or are washed with the aid of
bowls. Convalescents wash at the taps supplied for their use.

The latrines are on the Turkish plan, with automatic water-flush, and
discharge into the town drainage.


_Food._--The hospital management employs a contractor to do the
provisioning. The food is prepared in the kitchen by 4 Egyptian
employes. The dietary of the Turkish soldiers differs somewhat from that
of the German and Austrian prisoners, in order to suit the palates of
each. For example, the Turks prefer flat loaves, which are baked for
them; while European prisoners get what is called English bread,
toasted. Bulgarian curdled milk is prepared for dysentery patients, and
the English doctors testify to its good effects.

An ice-box in each pavilion keeps such provisions as must stay there
quite fresh. The diet for invalids is divided into full diet and milk
diet.

1. FULL DIET.
   _Breakfast_: Bread; milk.
   _Lunch_: Meat stew; vegetables; rice; bread.
   _Supper_: Bread; soup; rice; milk.
   _Extra, when ordered_: Chicken; pigeon; rabbit; butchers'
   meat; lemons; eggs; cheese; curdled milk.

2. MILK DIET.
   _Breakfast_: Bread; milk.
   _Lunch_: Soup; bread; milk; rice.
   _Supper_: Bread; milk; sugar.

The quantities of food allowed to invalids are given below:

                                                _Diet for
                         _Ordinary      _Milk      Fever
                            Diet.        Diet.     Patients.
                            grm._        grm._     grm._

  Native bread (baladi)     937          625
  Beef                      115          100
  Vegetables                120
  Rice                      115           50
  Milk                      200          800       1,200
  Fat                        20
  Sugar                      20           25
  Salt                       15            5
  Pepper                      3            1
  Onions                     20
  Tomatoes                   10

We examined all these provisions and found them to be excellent in
quality.


_Sickness._--Sick prisoners are transferred from the camps to the
hospital in specially fitted motor vehicles. The English doctors without
exception praise the patience and brave endurance of pain shown by the
Turkish prisoners. The cases treated in the hospital up to January 2,
1917, the date of our visit, are analysed below.

                           Turks    Bulgarians    Germans
  Tuberculosis               27          0           0
  Bacillar dysentery         37          3           2
  Malaria                     3          0           0
  War wounds                 74          2           4
  Anaemia and weakness       30         12           5
  Various                    96          5           0
                            ---        ---         ---
  Totals                    267         22          11
                            ===        ===         ===

There is no epidemic disease in the hospital.


_Deaths._--Sixty-six Turkish prisoners died in the Abbassiah hospital
between August 8, 1916, and January 1, 1917.

  From Dysentery         45
    "  Tuberculosis       9
    "  Beri-beri          1
    "  Malaria            1
    "  War wounds         9
    "  Typhoid fever      1
                        ---
                         66
                        ===

In addition, one German prisoner died of pneumonia. As regards deaths
from dysentery, most of the prisoners attacked by the disease came from
the Hedjaz, and were in a seriously weak and exhausted condition.

Turkish prisoners are prepared for burial in the manner prescribed by
their religion. They are buried in a Moslem cemetery. British soldiers
from the garrison pay them the last honours, and the prisoners are
represented at the cemetery.




~3. Maadi Camp.~

_(Visited on January 3, 1917.)_


The chief camp at Maadi is 9-1/3 miles south of Cairo, on the right bank
of the Nile. All prisoners are taken to it after capture, and thence
distributed among the other camps in Egypt.


_Strength._--Five thousand five hundred and fifty-six Turkish
non-commissioned officers and men, including 1,200 men recently captured
at El Arish in the Sinai peninsula.

No officers are interned in this camp. Three imaums (priests) were not
classed with the officers, as they had served as privates.

The prisoners include--besides Turks--Arabs, Armenians, Greeks, Jews
from Palestine and Mesopotamia, and some Senoussi. Only a small number
have been captives ever since the beginning of the war; a large
proportion come from Gallipoli. We found among the prisoners a boy 8
years old, named Abd-el-Mohsen, who lives in camp with his father.

The camp is divided into 41 sections and 4 quarters. The last are
divided off from one another by barbed wire fences.


_Accommodation._--The quarters of the Turkish prisoners in Maadi Camp
include: (1) Old buildings originally erected as a school of music and
subsequently used as a factory; (2) barracks built recently for
prisoners of war.

The first consist chiefly of a huge hall 252 feet long and 49 feet wide,
with many large openings in the walls. The roof, of match-boarding, is
33 feet above the floor. Standpipes are fixed all along the hall. There
are, in addition, some out-buildings used by the management and as
stores.

In the other camp sections new barracks, measuring as a rule 100 by 39
feet, were erected by a building firm. Walls and roof are of wood and
thatch; the floor is hard-beaten earth. All camp quarters are well open
to the air, so that proper ventilation presents no difficulties.


_Sleeping Accommodation._--Lengthwise of all the quarters run platforms
of beaten earth, 6-1/2 feet wide, and 9 inches above the floor. On these
are placed the woven rush mats which serve for beds. Each prisoner has 3
blankets. During the season when the temperature falls appreciably at
night extra blankets are served out. All bedding is cleaned and
disinfected at regular intervals. Shelves whereon the prisoners can keep
their belongings are fixed between the rows of beds.


_Food._--The food of the prisoners of war is according to the scale
already given. Kitchens are provided in each section and staffed by the
prisoners themselves. We tasted the soup and meat stew, and found them
of good quality and very appetising. The prisoners receive _baladi_ or
native bread, which resembles their usual food and is supplied by Cairo
bakeries. We questioned many of the men, who assured us that they were
satisfied with the food. The only complaint noted by us was that of a
man who thought that he got rice too often. A small canteen supplies
black coffee, sweetened, at a farthing per cup. It is run as a private
concern under the supervision of the authorities. Tobacco is
distributed every Thursday on the scale mentioned previously.


_Clothing._--Soon after their arrival in camp the prisoners were taken
to a large courtyard, in which they stripped off all their clothes and
foot-gear. As a health precaution all this stuff was scrapped and
destroyed. After being disinfected, the men received a complete new
outfit consisting of two pairs of drawers and two flannel shirts, a
cholera belt, socks, a pair of trousers and a dark blue cloth tunic with
linen lining and uniform buttons, and a red fez. Leather slippers for
privates and shoes for sergeants and corporals complete the outfit, the
smartness of which leaves nothing to be desired. Although on the day of
our visit the thermometer stood at about 53 deg.F. many of the men were also
wearing their thick cloth overcoats. Every prisoner has fastened in his
tunic a small metal plate bearing his registration number.
Non-commissioned officers are distinguished by a white linen armlet,
crossed by a blue band for corporals, and by a red band for sergeants.
The sergeant-major wears a red armlet.


_Hygiene._--The drinking-water used in camp is drawn by two steam pumps
from a well sunk to a great depth close to the Nile. The Nile water,
after passing through a kind of natural filter, is thus lifted into a
reservoir above the camp, and is distributed in all directions by
gravity. The bacteriological analysis made every week when the supply
was first opened--now once a month--showed the water to be perfectly
pure.

Water for washing purposes is plentiful. Hot and cold shower-baths are
installed throughout the camp. The prisoners are obliged to use them
once a week, but may, if they choose, have a bath four times a day. In
summer especially the baths are never idle.

Prisoners get plenty of soap and wash their own linen on wooden tables
arranged under water taps.

Two high-pressure steam disinfecting chambers serve the camp, and once a
week all blankets are passed through them. The camp contains no fleas,
lice, or bugs.

The day latrines are 100 yards from the living quarters. They are of the
Turkish kind, with movable tubs--1 tub for every 10 men. Every tub
contains some cresol solution. The night-soil is removed daily by the
Cairo road authorities and converted into manure. Some latrines close to
the barracks are kept for night use and are locked up during the day.


_Medical Attention._--The medical service of Maadi Camp is in the hands
of head-doctor Captain Scrimgeour, who in time of peace practised in
Nazareth. He is assisted by an English doctor-adjutant, and 4 Arab
doctors, natives of Syria. All these doctors speak Turkish and Arabic.
Nine English orderlies and 12 Turkish orderlies carry out the sick
duties. A dentist comes to camp when required.

The infirmary included three well-appointed quarters built in masonry,
and able to hold 40 patients.

The infirmary bedding accommodation consists of iron bedsteads with
spring mattress and stuffed mattress. The blankets are warm and
unlimited in number.


_Illness._--Every morning 300-400 prisoners come on sick parade. This
number represents about 8 per cent. of the strength. Although these men
often come to be treated for trifling ailments, such as slight
constipation, or even a small boil, the doctors make it a rule not to
prevent anyone going sick, as this course enables them to keep the
closer watch upon the health of the camp.

On the occasion of our visit there were in the infirmary 7 men laid up:
1 with itch, 1 with diarrhoea, 1 with neuralgia, 1 with an abscess in
the neck, 1 with articular rheumatism, and 1 with gastritis. A prisoner
who had been trepanned by the doctors on account of damage done to his
skull before his capture, was gradually recovering the power of motion
and his normal sensibility.

Since the camp was opened there have been 35 cases of tertian ague, all
from the Hedjaz, Mecca, Taif and Jeddah; but no case of aggravated
malaria. Eleven cases of tuberculosis were sent into the Egyptian Red
Cross hospitals and to that at Abbassiah. Six cases of trachoma are now
undergoing treatment with applications of protargol. In summer there
have been a few cases of ordinary diarrhoea. The camp has not suffered
from dysentery, typhoid, typhus, nor any other epidemic disease.

All prisoners are inoculated against smallpox, typhoid and cholera.


_The Severely Wounded and those who have lost Limbs._--A special
quarter of the camp contains 55 men who have lost limbs in the war. They
are provided with the most perfect prothesis apparatus, jointed
artificial limbs. Among them are 2 blind men. Sixty other wounded who
have escaped more lightly suffer from stiffness of the joints, ankylosis
and atrophy. They are well provided with sticks and crutches.


_Deaths._--Two aged prisoners have died in the camp, both from apoplexy.
They were interred with military honours in the Moslem burial-ground
nearest to the camp.


_Exercise._--No limit is placed upon the time during which exercise may
be taken in the open space round the barracks.


_Work._--The prisoners have not to do work. Several attempts have been
made to teach them boot-making, but their results were so unpromising
that they were given up. Although there are many agriculturists among
the prisoners, it would not do to use them for work on the land along
with the natives, owing to the ease with which they could escape and the
need for having many soldiers to guard them. However, for some weeks
past the camp commandant has made trial of using some prisoners for
market gardening on lands beside the Nile, just outside the camp.


_Discipline._--Under the head of discipline there are hardly any
complaints to make, and punishment has rarely had to be inflicted. One
case of escape was punished with three months' imprisonment without any
alteration in diet. Only tobacco was cut off. An old offender was
brought before a court-martial, and sentenced by it to six months'
imprisonment. The prison quarters are cells built entirely of cement,
with two barred windows well above the ground to light the chamber,
which is of ample size.


_Right to Make Complaints._--The camp commandant makes a general
inspection every day. Every prisoner has the right to step forward and
make his complaints. The commandant converses with the prisoners through
the medium of several British officers who speak Arabic and Turkish.
Moreover, the prisoners have the right of appeal to the
Commander-in-Chief and to Brig.-General Casson, who often make tours of
inspection through the camps.


_Religion._--The prisoners have every opportunity for practising their
religious observances. For the Mahometans a small mosque has been built,
round which they spread their praying carpets. Some of them read the
Koran regularly; others seem indifferent. Despite differences of race,
origin, and even of religion, good-feeling prevails among the prisoners
and quarrels are very few in number.


_Games and Recreations._--As regards games and recreations, the
prisoners are interested only in wrestling, cards and dominoes. They
have been introduced to football without success. Some have shown great
skill in the manufacture of mandolines, guitars, and tambourines. All
materials as well as games are provided gratis by the British
Government. The camp commandant has bought the men some gramophones.
Many prisoners make articles of coloured beads--handbags, purses,
necklaces, bracelets, etc.--which show considerable artistic taste. We
bought one of these beautiful pieces of work as a specimen. The articles
sell readily in the curiosity shops at Cairo. One section of 1,200
prisoners netted from the sales a sum of 2,500 francs in a fortnight.


_Correspondence._--Most of the prisoners receive very few letters or
none. They are allowed to write in their language once a fortnight, but
take very little advantage of the permission. It seems that many letters
addressed to their families in Turkey come back again, as the addressee
has not been found. Some Turks captured near Bagdad and transported to
Burmah received their money from home, but have not received any more
during the one or two months that have elapsed since they were
transferred to Maadi. It is probable that the money was sent home again,
or forwarded officially to the new place of internment, and this takes a
long time. Several prisoners have taken advantage of their captivity to
learn reading and writing with their comrades' assistance. Many men had
money on them when they were taken. This money is lodged, and handed to
them at demand in monthly payments. Many soldiers have received money
orders from their families through the International Committee of the
Red Cross. Parcels, which are seldom received, are opened in the
presence of the addressee. Only knives are confiscated.


_Help for Prisoners._--Leaving out of consideration the wish expressed
by some men to have a little money for buying extra tobacco and coffee,
we are satisfied that there are no needy persons in the camp at Maadi.


_Mentality._--The many questions which we have asked show that there is
no dissatisfaction among the prisoners with regard to the treatment they
receive. Prisoners have mentioned to us chiefly their anxiety about
their families, of whom they have no news. The Armenian clergy at Cairo
look after their fellow-countrymen.




~4. The Egyptian Red Cross Hospital at Cairo~.

_(Visited on January 4, 1917.)_


The Egyptian Red Cross, under the presidency of His Highness Prince Fuad
Pasha, being anxious to help its co-religionists, founded in March,
1915, a hospital for sick and wounded prisoners of war. This hospital is
under the sole management of the Turkish Red Cross, which is in touch
with the British authorities through Dr. Keatinge, Professor of the
Faculty of Medicine at Cairo.


_Sanitary Staff._--All the hospital doctors are Egyptian. In addition to
the doctor-in-chief, Dr. Abbas Bey Helmey, two doctors, three surgeons,
and one druggist live in the hospital.

Consulting doctors come from the town when sent for to treat nose, ear
and eye troubles. A Cairo specialist also places his X-ray apparatus at
the service of the hospital patients. The matron is an American, and has
three English nurses under her.

Thirty-two orderlies do the ward work.


_Accommodation._--The Egyptian Red Cross Hospital is installed in an old
palace of Omar-Pasha Lufti, situated in a large garden, which is very
shady and well kept. The dimensions of the wards assure easy circulation
of air and perfect ventilation. As the building was not designed to
serve its present purpose, the various staffs are somewhat scattered,
but this difficulty has been got over in a most practical manner. A huge
corridor gives communication between the wards, which are usually 23
feet square and 26 feet high. The large wards considerably exceed these
measurements, and their tasteful decoration gives them a characteristic
style. On the first floor, the rooms for the consumptive patients
measure 16 by 16 by 13 feet--a very good cubical allowance for the four
beds in each. The floor is of large flag-stones. Most of the rooms
command the garden and a courtyard planted with trees. The building
occupied by the guard is quite separate from the hospital. Electricity
is used throughout the buildings.


_Bedding._--The iron bedsteads, painted with white ripolin, are
separated from one another by pedestal tables. The spring mattress,
stuffed mattress, sheets and pillows are in very sound condition. There
is no limit set to the number of blankets allowed. The beds are covered
with pretty blue and white quilts, with the Red Cross in the middle.
This quite recent innovation has a very pretty effect.


_Food._--The commissariat is arranged by contract with a head cook. The
menus are drawn up by the doctors according to the diet prescribed. We
tasted the day's food and found it excellent. All provisions examined by
us were of good quality and carefully overlooked. The kitchen, with its
well-fitted ranges and polished utensils, struck us favourably. The
cooking and attendance is done by persons engaged by the chef.

Each man is provided with two bowls of tinned copper and a drinking cup.
All invalids get sweetened tea twice a day. Officers may choose tea or
coffee. The following is the hospital dietary:

FOR OFFICERS.
  _Breakfast_: European bread; fresh milk; 3 eggs; tea; coffee.
  _Lunch_: Mutton; two dishes of vegetables, or macaroni rice;
  salad; rice pudding; coffee; fruit.
  _Dinner_: The same as lunch, but without fruit.

ORDINARY DIET.
  _Breakfast_: Arab bread; sweetened fresh milk.
  _Lunch_: Arab bread; beef; rice, vegetables.
  _Dinner_: Arab bread; rice soup; rice pudding.

MILK DIET.
  _Breakfast_: Bread, 350 grm.; sweetened milk.
  _Lunch_: Arab bread; soup; beef-tea; rice pudding.
  _Dinner_: Bread, 350 grm.; sweetened milk.

FEVER DIET.
  _Breakfast_: Milk, 400 grm., without sugar.
  _Lunch_: 400 grm. of milk without sugar.
  _Dinner_: 400 grm. of milk without sugar.

On Sunday and Thursday mutton is replaced by game. On the same two days
a course of sweetened rice and macaroni is substituted for fruit. The
ration of Arab bread is 780 grammes for ordinary diet; that of European
bread 450 grammes. The proportion of other articles is equally liberal.


_Clothing._--The sick men's garments are consigned to a storehouse, and
are replaced by 2 nightshirts, a hospital jacket with a hood, and a pair
of slippers.


_Hygiene._--Drinking water is drawn from the town main and filtered
before use. There is an ample installation of lavatories with running
water, baths with hot and cold douches, and Turkish baths. Turkish
latrines have been fitted in the annexes of the palace. Natives do the
laundry work and ironing.


_Special Quarters._--The Red Cross Hospital is provided with a spacious,
well-lighted theatre for operations, and all the necessary apparatus. In
a neighbouring ward a powerful fumigating stove, built by natives after
a French model, enables instruments and dressings to be completely
sterilised. Since the introduction of this perfected method of
sterilisation cases of infection and erysipelas have entirely
disappeared from the hospital, and post-operation mortality has been
reduced to barely one quarter per cent.

There is a laboratory devoted to summary analyses; more complete
chemical or bacteriological analyses are carried out in the town
institution. The dispensary is well supplied, containing all the most
modern medicaments.

Six wards are reserved for tuberculous cases, who have their own special
nurses. Such consumptives as are not confined to bed pass most of the
day in one of the palace gardens which is assigned to them.

One ward is occupied by wounded officers; another by the
non-commissioned officers. Two more wards are set apart for patients
suffering from dysentery. Operation cases are assembled in a special
chamber adjoining the theatre. Three comfortable English hospital tents
erected in the garden serve as accommodation for convalescents who have
to vacate their beds in the palace when an unexpected influx of sick or
wounded prisoners takes place. All the wards are clean and well kept; at
the head of each bed is a medical chart detailing the illness and the
temperature.


_Sickness._--Since March 17, 1915, the date of its foundation, up to the
day of our visit, the Egyptian Red Cross Hospital has treated 2,245
wounded or sick prisoners.

There are at the present time 149 prisoners under treatment, 8 Ottoman
officers and 141 soldiers, distributed as follows:

Surgical cases (wounds): 66; among them 13 invalids and 6 who have
undergone amputation and have been detained a long time in the hospital.

Internal ailments: 38; we may mention among the most serious cases of
this kind noticed by us, 4 suffering from bilious haemoglobinurea, all
from Bagdad; 6 from dysentery, anaemic and enfeebled patients; 4 from
chronic nephritis.

Eye affections: 25.

Consumptives: 20.

Which make up the total of 149 cases.

Among the officers under treatment we may mention: 1 wounded right knee,
1 scalp wound, 1 compound fracture of the thigh, 1 neck wound, 1 bullet
wound in the chest, 1 bullet wound in the face, all recent cases coming
from El Arish.

_Deaths_:

                                Number        Number
  Cause of Death.              of Deaths     of Deaths
                                in 1915.      in 1916.
  Surgical cases                  30            17
  Pleurisy                         2             5
  Dysentery                        8            19
  Typhoid                          1             1
  Pericarditis                     1             2
  Pneumonia                        3            11
  Pulmonary tuberculosis          --            26
  Intestinal tuberculosis         --            21
  Nephritis                       --             5
  Gangrene                        --             1
  Hepatitis                       --             1
  Pernicious anaemia              --             1
                                 ---           ---
  Total                           45           110
                                 ===           ===

The dead were buried in the Musulman cemetery with military honours,
such comrades as were well enough attending the ceremony.




~5. The Cairo Citadel Camp.~

_(Visited on January 3, 1917.)_


This camp occupies the curious Jewel-Palace, one of the monuments of the
citadel, and contains only women and children coming from Hedjaz, who
were captured near Mecca.

The dates of arrival are as follows:

  Women and Children.
  1st convoy of 123       September 11, 1916
  2nd   "    "   66         October 16, 1916
  3rd   "    "   26            "    28, 1916
  4th   "    "   82         November 7, 1916
  5th   "    "  132            "    29, 1916


_Numbers._--The total includes 229 women and 207 children (7 of whom
were born in camp), and a further batch of 200 women is expected
shortly.

_The Head Matron_ is Miss Lewis. It is she who has the management and
full control of this camp, which, by its character and its diversity of
nationalities, classes and religions, demands great patience, tact and
kindness--qualities possessed in the highest degree by Miss Lewis. She
devotes herself entirely, and most capably, to this often very
ungrateful task, and we welcome this chance of conveying to her the
expression of our appreciation.

Those interned are divided into three classes. The first class consists
of officers' wives and children; the second class, of those of the
non-commissioned officers; and the third class, of soldiers' wives and
servants. This classification has been adopted in order that the
dormitories shall be occupied by persons of as nearly as possible the
same social standing.


_Accommodation._--The important group of buildings known as Saleh-el-din
(Saladin) comprises a great number of rooms whose size and curious
ornateness contrast strangely with their present use as a concentration
camp for civilian prisoners. From the windows of these apartments one
looks across the panorama of Cairo, with its mosques, its minarets and
the misty background of the desert.

The 40 inhabited rooms are allotted in three sections, corresponding to
the social classification established for the interned women.

The rooms and corridors are paved throughout with marble, but the
general distribution of mats and even beautiful carpets gives an
impression of comfort. The large dimensions of the chambers, as compared
with the smallness of the number of occupants, give plenty of room for
exercise and work. Corridors and vestibules connect the different
buildings. They are lighted with paraffin lamps.

An extensive garden is always at the prisoners' disposal.


_Bedding._--The japanned iron bedsteads are furnished with spring and
stuffed mattresses, sheets, blankets, and pillows. In their arrangement
one notices the influence of personal taste. Embroidered coverlets,
hangings and upholstery give to some of the apartments an aspect of
comfort and even of elegance. The military administration supplies all
the furniture and the regulation bedding, to which the inmates may add
what they like at their own expense.


_Dress._--The English authorities supply women and children with all
their linen and other clothing.


_Food._--Provisioning is a private enterprise, carried out under a
contract. The food is the same for all classes, and is unlimited in
quantity. The women are given as much as they desire of each dish. No
complaint was made concerning the food, which is wholesome and
palatable. We visited the kitchen and sampled the day's menu. Milk in
large quantities is provided for the children. The meals are served in
three well-appointed dining-rooms.

The hours for meals are:
  Breakfast, from 7.30 to 8.30.
  Lunch, from 12.30 to 1.80.
  Supper, from 5.30 to 6.80.


_Hygiene._--Water is supplied from the town mains. Lavatories are
installed in the corridors near the dormitories. The inmates may have
hot and cold baths every day. As to laundry work, those of the first
class can have it done by their own servants or pay the third-class
women to do it.

The W.C.'s consist of movable tubs on the Turkish system, each
containing a solution of cresol. They are emptied daily by contract into
the citadel cesspool, which communicates with the main sewer of Cairo.


_Medical Care and Illnesses._--The Head Physician, Captain Scrimgeour,
comes to the camp every day; a Greek doctor also visits it four times a
week at 9 o'clock in the morning. These two doctors both speak Turkish
and Arabic fluently. Three trained nurses and an English midwife take
charge of the infirmary. As Moslems usually have very good teeth, the
services of a dentist are not often needed.

The infirmary is very commodious. It consists of a consulting-room, with
a couch for examinations; a surgery, and a sick ward.

In the infirmary register the name, the disease, the treatment and the
course of the illness are all duly noted.

When the internment camp was opened a hundred prisoners applied for
treatment daily; many had suffered great privations previous to their
capture. At the present time only 5 or 10 patients take advantage of the
doctor's visit; and these are mild cases, chiefly bronchitis,
constipation, diarrhoea, and eye affections among women and children,
and some cases of heart affections and chronic bronchitis among the old
people.

There is neither malaria, dysentery nor typhus in the camp, and no
epidemic malady. An early case of tuberculosis, without Koch's bacillus
in the sputa, was cured.

On the day of our visit to the infirmary we found 5 patients in bed or
crouched in the oriental manner upon their bedsteads; 1 suffering from
senile paralysis, 2 from bronchitis, 1 from inflammation of the ears,
and 1 from general debility.


_Maternity._--Confinements not being uncommon, it was necessary to
establish a maternity ward. There were 5 births during the last three
months of 1915. Two more occurred upon the day we inspected the camp,
mothers and infants doing well.


_Deaths._--Up to that time there had only been one death at the Citadel
Camp, that of a baby prematurely born, which died from debility at the
age of 18 days.


_Education._--A school has been started in the camp, and all boys as
well as girls up to 12 years old are obliged to attend it. A mistress
teaches them Turkish and Arabic, and also gives them half an hour's
instruction in English daily.


_Religious Services._--The imaum came once to hold a Mahometan service,
but the interned women expressed no desire that he should repeat his
visit. However, an old woman, chosen from among them, reads the Koran
aloud upon feast days.


_Intellectual Diversions._--The women seem to have no needs or desires
on this score. They pass their days in talking and smoking.

The camp has been presented with a gramophone.


_Work._--This is absolutely voluntary. The head nurse has organised a
little dressmaking class, the wife of a former president, Sir B.
McMahon, having given her L10 with which to buy the necessary materials.
The results will be divided equally among those who did the work, but as
most of the women have plenty of money they are not energetic over it.


_Money._--Many of those interned had money on them, sometimes a large
amount, when captured; the whole of which has been left in their hands.
They often send money through the agency of British officers to their
husbands who are prisoners in Maadi Camp, or at Sidi Bishr, near
Alexandria. Others, on the contrary, receive allowances from their
husbands. Some money orders have also come through the International Red
Cross Committee.


_Correspondence._--Each person interned has the chance of writing once a
week; those who do not know how to write get help from their companions.
An interpreter is attached to the camp. Many letters arrive through the
medium of the International Red Cross Committee, but the exchange of
correspondence is not generally very active.


_Wishes of the Interned._--Some of the women express a wish to see their
husbands more often, at least once a month; others wish to see their
sons or brothers who are prisoners at Maadi or at Sidi Bishr. This being
a legitimate and comprehensible desire, the English Government has
several times already allowed the husbands to come from these camps (4
hours distant by train) to spend three or four days with their wives in
the Citadel. A part of the building containing 12 rooms has been
reserved for these visits. But it would clearly be impossible to permit
these indulgences often, as they entail considerable expense, and
require much organisation and surveillance.


_Repatriation._--Some of the women beg to be sent back to Turkey, which
the British Government has already offered to do. Many, on the other
hand, prefer to remain in Cairo. The American charge d'affaires in
Egypt, M. Knabenschuh, is considering this question. He has visited the
camp several times, and has transmitted different propositions of the
English Government to the Sublime Porte. The first offer was to
repatriate the interned women and children by means of an American
vessel, which would land them at the port of Mersina in Asia Minor. The
second was to take them back to Turkey in an English hospital ship,
which should at the same time carry medical supplies, food and clothing
to the English prisoners in Asia Minor, and bring away about 25 English
ladies who had been made prisoners in Mesopotamia. Finally, the English
Government offered to repatriate the Turkish women without any
reciprocity conditions. Unhappily, up to now all these proposals have
borne no fruit. The English Government sincerely desires to be freed
from the maintenance and surveillance of these people, whom it took
under its care merely for reasons of humanity.


_Special Inquiry at the Citadel Camp._--During our visit to the Maadi
Camp, Dr. Suleiman Bey, head physician at Taif, a town of the Hedjaz,
told us that he had personally nothing to complain of in the camp
treatment, but that his wife and children, interned in the Cairo
Citadel, were suffering greatly from the conditions there. What he
especially criticised was the diet and the medical attendance. These
complaints, made in much detail, seemed to us to deserve a specific
inquiry, and we went again to the Citadel next day. We closely
cross-questioned Mme. S. and another of the ladies. Her replies,
collected and confronted with the official data, our personal
observations, and the testimony of the other interned, absolutely
convinced us that Dr. Suleiman's accusations had no real foundation.
Mme. S. assured us that meat was only provided three times weekly. We
have proof that meat is served six times each week, a quarter of an
English pound being supplied to each person. After telling us that the
cheese and olives were of the worst quality, she finished by owning that
she only found the cheese too salt and the olives monotonous. Mme. S.,
who purchased coffee, biscuits, fruit and bonbons at the canteen, would
not touch ordinary bread because it was not good enough for her. This
bread, which is provided by the best bakery in Cairo, is served fresh
twice a day to whoever desires it. Mme. S. has enough money to buy any
food that she wishes, either from the canteen or by ordering it in from
the town. Her companions, less rich and less dainty, find the food
provided by the camp kitchen both excellent and abundant.

As Dr. Suleiman Bey complained that his two sick children, interned at
the Citadel with their mother, received no medical care, they were
examined by Dr. Blanchod. The one suffered on its arrival in camp from
ophthalmia, now completely cured, no trace of photophobia remains, no
redness nor oedema; the other had its sub-maxillary glands enlarged;
these glands are now reduced and nothing to worry about.

These two children have received constant care from (Dr.) Captain
Scrimgeour, their names are repeatedly entered in the infirmary
register, and their mother herself expressed gratitude for the care
which had been lavished upon them.

Dr. Suleiman Bey's complaints upon this point therefore proved equally
inexact.




~6. The Ras-el-Tin Camp.~

_(Visited January 5, 1917.)_


This camp of interned civilians is situated on a rising ground beside
the sea, 5 kilometres (3 miles) from Alexandria.

The camp contains 45 Ottoman civilians of military age, and 24 others;
the latter are all elderly men, or have been exempted from military
service owing to illness. There is one priest (imaum). We also found 400
Austro-Germans interned at Ras-el-Tin; many of them had been in Egypt
when war was declared and could not get home.

Though our mission was to visit the Turkish prisoners, we made a point
of concerning ourselves equally with the Austrians and Germans, and of
entering into conversation with them.

Several Ottoman prisoners in the camp were making the pilgrimage to
Mecca when they were captured by the Sherif's troops and passed over to
the English authorities, who interned them. The camp at Ras-el-Tin was
to be evacuated in a few days' time, and all the occupants were to be
transferred to Sidi Bishr Camp, now prepared to accommodate 5,000 men.
In this camp there will be a special section for civilians.

The commandant of Ras-el-Tin is Major F.G. Owens, who takes the greatest
interest in his prisoners. Every day he personally receives anyone who
has a wish or a complaint to bring forward.

The camp was visited in 1916 by the American Consul from Alexandria, and
also by the American charge d'affaires from Athens.


_Accommodation._--The civilians interned in the camp of Ras-el-Tin are
placed in tents. These circular tents, set up either on the sand or on a
cement base, each contain three men. Those of the Ottoman prisoners form
one sectional group of 24 tents. In the centre of each tent is a
wire-work cupboard to contain personal belongings. The space inside the
tent is ample for the three beds. Some prisoners are provided with
matting and small rugs.

In the stone buildings surrounding the court a certain number of rooms
are reserved which open upon a veranda. Each contains three beds. These
comfortably fitted-up chambers are assigned to elderly prisoners or to
those in weak health. The rest of the camp buildings are occupied by the
administrative quarters, the kitchens, refectories, canteens, etc. The
English guard is lodged under canvas in a special section. The camp is
lighted by electricity.


_Bedding._--The bedsteads are iron provided with a wire-spring
mattress, a squab of vegetable fibre and a sufficient number of
blankets. All the bedding is kept scrupulously clean.


_Food._--The commissariat is supplied by a private contractor. A
committee presided over by the camp commandant, and composed of
delegates from among the prisoners, arrange the menus for each week. The
kitchen is very clean, and the prisoners do not provide the personnel.

Here is the menu for Friday, January 5, 1917,
the day of our visit:
  _Breakfast_: Porridge; milk; chocolate; butter; bread.
  _Lunch_: Haricot soup; ragout of beef and potatoes.
  _Dinner_: Rice soup; hashed meat (moussaka), with vegetables;
  eggs; tea.

The prisoners' menu is extended on Thursdays and Sundays by an extra
dish and cake of some sort. We examined the day's provision in the
kitchen, and found it wholesome and appetising. When pork is included in
the menu, which happens rarely, this item is replaced, in the case of
the Turkish prisoners, by a dish of eggs and vegetables.

A second kitchen staff, installed in a separate room, prepares a special
menu which the prisoners can have by paying for it. The commandant
himself authorised the reservation of this kitchen to provide for such
prisoners as possess ample means.

Here is the extra menu for January 5, 1917:
  _Lunch_: Italian dumplings; roast veal; salad and gherkins.
  _Dinner_: Soup "parmentier"; fish croquettes; braised beef with cabbage.

The meals are served at:
  Breakfast, half-past seven.
  Lunch, one o'clock.
  Dinner, half-past five.

Three canteens furnish all kinds of commodities to the prisoners--ham,
sausages, preserves, cakes, chocolate, fruits, wine, beer, etc. The
prices are exactly the same as in the English army canteens. A shop, run
by a Bulgarian merchant, is permitted for the sale of tobacco, cigars
and cigarettes. Besides this there is a Viennese who makes cigarettes in
the camp itself. On Christmas Day the commandant made a generous
distribution of cigarettes to all the interned men at his own expense.
They can also obtain at the bar tea, coffee and other drinks. In point
of fact, we made sure that the camp administration has organised the
commissariat in a manner that meets all needs.


_Clothing._--The men arrived in camp in their own clothes. When these
began to wear out the administration furnished a new outfit, which
consists of two flannel shirts, two knitted pairs of drawers, a vest and
trousers of blue cloth, an overcoat, a police hat or a fez for the
Turks, socks and slippers. The Mahometans receive Turkish slippers. All
prisoners have a red scarf and two handkerchiefs. A well-found shop
sells under-clothing at moderate prices, and articles of outfit, scent,
post-cards and watches.


_Hygiene._--Drinking water, abundant and wholesome, is brought from the
mains of the town of Alexandria. Besides the toilet lavatories, there
are 4 bathrooms supplied with hot water and cold douches always
available. The prisoners go in parties to bathe in the sea near the
camp, under guard of British soldiers.

The prisoners do their own washing, numerous wash-houses being provided
for the purpose.

The latrines are partly on the English and partly on the Turkish system,
1 to every 10 men, cleanly kept. They are disinfected daily. The floor
and the lower part of the chambers are treated with cresol; the upper
part is whitewashed. The sewers discharge into the sea. The sweepings
are burnt in a special stove.


_Medical Attention._--The sanitary condition of the camp is inspected at
regular intervals by the Colonel, medical director of Hospital No. 21,
Alexandria. Captain (Dr.) Dunne is resident in the camp; he pays a
medical visit each day at 9 o'clock. Eight to ten prisoners out of the
total in camp may present themselves for treatment, among them 1 or 2
Ottomans.

An interned Turkish civilian, Abrahim Assan, by calling an employee in a
Constantinople factory, who speaks French and English perfectly, serves
as orderly-interpreter.

An English Red Cross orderly assists the doctor. An Austrian dentist,
formerly in business at Cairo, gives dental attention to the prisoners;
he has a complete outfit of instruments.

The infirmary is well housed in a stone building. It contains a
consulting-room, supplied with a full-flushed lavatory basin; a sick
ward with 6 iron beds, mattress and coverings _ad libitum_; an isolation
ward, and a dispensary.

Only slight cases are treated at the infirmary; serious cases are
removed to Hospital No. 21 at Alexandria, situated within 10 minutes of
the camp, a large modern hospital overlooking the sea.

On the day of our inspection there were in the infirmary 1 prisoner ill
with bronchitis; at the hospital 1 tuberculous case and 1 with a wounded
elbow.

The sanitary state of the camp has always been excellent. Apart from two
relapse cases of dysentery in 1916, there has been neither trachoma,
typhoid, typhus, malaria, nor any other infectious disease. This is
explained by the fact that the interned civilians were not in bad health
before their captivity, as was the case with soldiers who had sojourned
in the desert, whom we saw in the other Egyptian camps.

There had been no deaths in the camp or at the hospital in Alexandria.
The orderly, Abrahim Hassan, told us of his own accord that the sick
receive the most assiduous attention, and have nothing but praise for
the resident physician.


_Religion and Amusements._--The prisoners offer their prayers daily. A
mosque will be built for them in the new camp at Sidi Bishr.

Catholics are looked after by several Austrian priests, who used to
manage Catholic schools in Upper Egypt.

For the Germans and Austrians there is a good circulating library,
containing English, French and German books.

The prisoners have formed an orchestra, and organised theatrical
performances, for which they have painted pretty scenery.

There is a cinematograph performance every evening. There are a piano
and harmonium. A photographer, who had an establishment in Cairo before
the war, practises his art in the camp.


_Discipline._--The very occasional cases of infraction of rules which
entail one or more days' detention in the police cells, have a special
diet prescribed for them. The military authorities find the general
conduct of the civilians quite satisfactory.


_Exercise and Sports._--The prisoners have at their own disposal that
part of the grounds lying between the tents and the barracks, a broad
space where they can amuse themselves all day long with football and
other games.

They have also a tennis-court, of which the Austro-Germans make more use
than the Orientals; a committee of the prisoners arrange the hours for
each set of players. Skittles are very popular. Fencing is eagerly
learned; the English officer who teaches it being delighted with his
pupils' progress. Lessons in gymnastics, like those in other sports, are
optional.

Periodically a gymkhana is got up, with donkey races, gymnastic
competitions, and the distribution of prizes.


_Work._--No work is demanded from the prisoners.


_Correspondence, Money Orders and Parcels._--Very few money orders are
received. The interned Turks are chiefly illiterate; those whose wives
are interned at Cairo, and who are allowed to occasionally visit them,
seldom write, as they know them to be well treated. Parcels are seldom
sent to the camp, and hitherto no philanthropic society has busied
itself over the necessitous.


_Prisoners' Aid._--The only plea which has been addressed to us by means
of the Ottoman interpreter, who speaks French and English extremely
well, comes from a certain number of destitute prisoners. They wish to
have, in addition to the complete outfit with woollen overcoat supplied
by the English Government, a change of warm garments, which they have
not the means to buy. Many find it difficult to wear the kind of
foot-gear in ordinary use--the heelless leather Turkish slippers--and
wish for laced shoes such as they wear at home. We asked the interpreter
to make out a list of names of the needy; and after submitting it to the
commandant of the camps for verification, we decided to send him from
the Ottoman Red Cross Fund the sum of 2,000 francs, to provide these
prisoners with the extra garments which they require, and with shoes and
tobacco.




~7. Sidi Bishr Camp.~

_(Visited on January 6, 1917.)_


The camp of Sidi Bishr is situated 15 kilometres (9-1/2 miles) to the
north-east of Alexandria in a healthy spot on the sea shore, where the
sand dunes form little hillocks intersected by miniature valleys. Palms
are scattered over it, and it lies open to the fresh breezes. The view
from the highest points of the camp is very extensive. A recently
constructed road for vehicular traffic leads into the camp, all the
appointments of which give the impression that everything has been done
to make the prisoners as comfortable as possible. A kitchen garden has
just been laid out in a sheltered place, and a flat piece of ground
surrounded by palm trees prepared for games, tennis, football, etc.


_Strength._--The camp at Sidi Bishr contains 430 officers, 60 of whom
have been here since February, 1915; 410 orderlies captured with their
officers, on whom they attend, each officer having 1 orderly; 10 imaums
(priests); 20 civilians, who were captured by the Sherif of Mecca and at
once handed over to the English.

The commandant of the camp is Lieut.-Colonel Coates.

The American charge d'affaires in Egypt has twice visited the camp.


_Accommodation._--The equipment of the camp at Sidi Bishr not having
been entirely completed before our visit we found some of the buildings
still in course of erection. But the officers' quarters were ready, and
lacked nothing except some furniture, which was daily expected. The
barracks, 25 metres (81 feet) long and 8 metres (20 feet) wide,
consisted of a solid wooden framework, with partitions either of timber
or cement, constructed in the camp by native workmen. A corridor about 1
metre 75 (6 feet) wide runs all along the front of the building, and
gives access to the chambers. These measure about 3 metres 50 (14 feet)
by 4 metres (17 feet), and 4 metres (17 feet) from the wooden floor to
the ceiling. All the interior walls are lime-washed. Each room has two
windows, glazed and also covered with wire gauze to exclude insects, and
a latched door. Chimneys rise above the roof, which is of timber covered
with tarred felt.

According to regulation, the number of occupants of each chamber depends
upon their grade. Officers up to the rank of captain are quartered four
in each dormitory; captains three, and colonels two. (Some superior
officers have each a separate chamber.) The orderlies are housed
elsewhere. All the buildings are lighted by electricity, generated by a
local plant.


_Bedding._--The iron beds have wire springs, mattresses stuffed with
vegetable fibre, pillows, and sufficiency of blankets, to which many
officers like to add curtains and coverlets. The rest of the furniture
is adequate, and easy-chairs are general.


_Food._--The officers' mess is run by a contractor. One of the officers,
appointed by his comrades, is entrusted with arranging the menus and
seeing them properly carried out. No limit is fixed to the choice and
quantity of food. The cost must not exceed 10 piastres (about 2s.)
daily, including tea, coffee, sugar, preserves, etc. The officers can
get any extras which they desire either from the canteen or from the
town, except alcoholic drinks, which are forbidden. The meat is
previously inspected by the veterinary of the sanitary department. The
bread is particularly good. Officers are given European bread, orderlies
native bread. We tasted the day's menu ourselves. No complaints with
regard to food reached us. The Turkish officers take their meals in two
dining-rooms, each of which seats 150. The tables are covered with
cloths; the china and plate are suitable.

The orderlies' fare is wholesome and sufficient.


_Dress._--The Turkish officers are warmly and suitably clad. They can
procure for themselves all kinds of toilet articles and other equipment.
Most of them wear civilian costume with a fez. An Alexandria tradesman
comes to the camp to take their orders.

When inspecting the orderlies we heard some of them complain of a lack
of linen, especially of drawers. Surprised by this, we made an immediate
inquiry, which produced the following results: the orderlies all
received their regulation supply of linen, and signed a receipt in the
register. A certain number of them subsequently sold the articles to
their officers; these are the men who now complain of a deficiency of
linen.


_Hygiene._--Abundant and wholesome drinking water is laid on from the
town system. The toilet supply comes to cement basins provided with many
taps. The water from the lavatories and kitchens empties itself into a
lake at some distance from the camp.

In the morning the officers use the baths or douches fitted up close to
the barracks, and separated from each other by woven grass partitions.

The officers' linen is washed by their orderlies in very convenient
wash-houses built of wood and cement.

There are 44 Turkish W.C.'s, cemented, at a good distance from the
quarters. They are arranged over cesspools 18 feet deep, disinfected
every day with whitewash and cresol, and are quite odourless.


_Medical Attention._--The health of the inmates of Sidi Bishr Camp is
looked after by an English doctor, Captain Gillespie, assisted by an
Armenian doctor, who practised at Aleppo in Turkey before the war.

These two doctors speak Arabic and Turkish.

An English corporal and 5 English hospital orderlies take care of the
sick.

Twenty-one Egyptian orderlies do the sanitary work of the camp; serious
cases are sent to the English hospital at Alexandria. A Turkish
Surgeon-Major, Dr. Ibrahim, interned at the camp, is present at
operations performed upon his Ottoman comrades in the hospital. He
expressed himself as entirely satisfied with the care bestowed upon
them.

The infirmary contains 12 iron bedsteads, with wool mattresses and
blankets. The consulting room is well fitted up, the cupboards
abundantly supplied with drugs. An isolation ward accommodates
infectious cases in the incubation stage. Bathrooms reserved for the
patients adjoin the infirmary, and there is a kitchen service for
preparing special diet.

Officers troubled by their teeth are taken to a dentist in Alexandria.

The prisoners' garments and bedding are sterilised in a special
apparatus.

All new arrivals pass 14 days in quarantine, in special quarters in one
of the sections of the camp. They are permitted to join their comrades
only when it is certain that they are free from any contagious malady.
At present 36 officers and 34 orderlies are in quarantine.


_Illnesses and Deaths_-All officers imprisoned at Sidi Bishr having been
vaccinated against smallpox, typhoid, and cholera, there are no
epidemics in the camp. Three to five officers come forward each morning
when the doctor makes his rounds. There are perhaps 6 light cases of
malaria weekly, 3 to 5 cases of bacillic dysentery every month, treated
with serum; 1 case of more serious dysentery was sent away to the
English Hospital in Alexandria. In summer there are some mild cases of
diarrhoea. There were 3 cases of trachoma among the officers' orderlies.
Four tuberculous patients, coming from the Hedjaz, were conveyed to the
hospital without any stay at the camp; two died after 20 and 30 days of
treatment respectively. In the infirmary at Sidi Bishr are now:

1 officer with a foot wound, 1 suffering from pharyngitis, and one
passing 1/2 per cent. of albumen.

Some of the Turkish officers were wounded in the war:

One whose thigh was amputated is provided with a fine artificial
substitute; one who had both bones of the lower arm fractured, and was
operated upon four times, is now well on the way to recovery.

One suffering from hemiplegia, owing to a fractured skull, is now able
to move again and to walk with crutches. Another lame officer is
affected by rupture of a main nerve in the leg.

Salik Sidki, judge of Mecca, entrusted us with a letter of thanks to the
English authorities, in recognition of the care which he received at the
hospital where he underwent a severe operation for a chronic affection
of the pylorus.


_Prisoners' Wishes._--Some officers complained of not being allowed to
go to Alexandria to make their purchases; but in the circumstances such
a request could not be gratified. On the other hand, a certain number of
officers have obtained permission to go to Cairo and spend a few days
with their wives interned in the Citadel; it is evident that this favour
is only accorded in exceptional cases and cannot be made general. To
extend it equally to sons, brothers and other relations, as some of the
prisoners desire, is clearly impossible.

The officers were offered two hours' walk every morning outside the
camp, in parties of 26, under the supervision of an unarmed soldier, on
condition of their giving their parole not to escape. This they refused,
declaring that a conditional proposal was no privilege. They can,
however, stroll about freely inside the limits of the camp, which is
very extensive.

We received several complaints concerning rain having recently found its
way into the barracks. But the extreme rarity of such an occurrence
makes it of no importance.


_Pay._--Officers' pay is fixed by the War Office. That of lieutenants
comes to 5 francs daily, that of captains to 5 francs 75, that of
superior officers is proportionate to their rank.

The orderlies, being privates, are not paid. Some of them receive pay
from their officers, others get nothing. Most of them have some money,
but nevertheless we have decided to remit L20 to the camp commandant for
the poorest soldiers' small needs.


_Correspondence._--Prisoners may write as often as they like, but seldom
take advantage of the privilege, and as a rule receive few letters,
which take from 40 to 45 days in reaching them. Few money orders come to
the camp.


_Religion and Amusements._--The prisoners have every chance of
worshipping according to their own creed. The imaums can use a building
arranged as a mosque and lighted by electricity. There is one mosque
inside the camp enclosure.

The camp contains 40 musical instruments; a piano has been hired for
the officers.

The prisoners play football, tennis, cards and chess. Many amuse
themselves with reading.




~8. Bilbeis Camp.~

_(Visited on January 16, 1917.)_


Bilbeis Camp is situated 65 kilometres (40-1/2 miles) to the north-east
of Cairo, on the confines of the cultivated land of the Delta. Founded
in the month of August, 1916, it now contains 540 prisoners grouped as
follows:


_First Division._--One hundred and thirty-five Bedouins from the East
and the Sinai peninsula, and civilians coming from El Arish; 9 Arab
soldiers of the Ottoman army; 5 Turkish soldiers from Syria; 30
Egyptians.


_Second Division._--One hundred and seventy-five Senoussi and soldiers
from Tripoli; 185 Bedouins from the West, and civilian prisoners of
divers nationalities.

Among these prisoners are included several young boys who have relatives
among the interned. The characteristic of this camp is the diversity of
nationalities herein represented. Though the number of Turks is
restricted, we thought it wise to visit this camp in order to assure
ourselves that the treatment of the prisoners is the same as in other
Egyptian camps.

The camp commandant is Colonel Collins.

The camp is surrounded by a barbed wire fence.

The prisoners are lodged under canvas, 8 men to a tent. At the present
time two great barracks of timber framework and reeds are being erected,
each large enough to contain 250 men. Their dimensions ensure perfect
ventilation. The sandy soil shows no trace of damp. Between the tents
little gardens are laid out wherein, thanks to the abundant water, the
prisoners can grow flowers and vegetables.

The camp is lighted by paraffin reflector lamps.


_Bedding._--Mats of plaited rush. Two blankets per man.


_Exercise._--The dimensions of the camp leave large clear spaces where
the prisoners can walk at their pleasure.


_Food._--Cooking is done by the prisoners themselves, provisions being
supplied by the administration. The quantities are the same as in the
other camps. The menu consists of: meat, bread, butter, cheese, lentils,
fresh vegetables, onions, rice, etc. The prisoners whom we interrogated,
either personally or through the medium of an interpreter, declared that
they were well fed. A little canteen, set up in a tent apart, provides
them with such small luxuries as tea, sugar, and so on, at a moderate
price. The prisoners get tobacco regularly. Each man has a plate, an
enamelled bowl, and a spoon.


_Dress._--The prisoners have all received a complete outfit. Their
clothing was clean and warm. The mending of linen and outer garments is
done by tailor prisoners, working in a tent provided for the purpose.
Their headdress is the fez or a red cap.


_Hygiene._--Drinking water is distributed everywhere throughout the camp
by means of pipes well supplied with taps. Water for washing purposes is
abundantly distributed to the lavatories, douches and bathing-places.

The prisoners do their washing in well-fitted wash-houses; a movable
furnace facilitates the weekly disinfection of all the prisoners'
effects.

The latrines, on the Turkish system, consist of movable tubs, emptied
each day by means of a "shadouf," and then disinfected with cresol and
whitewash. There are no smells in the camp.


_Medical Attention._--Dr. Ibrahim Zabaji, a Syrian refugee doctor,
undertakes the medical charge. His work is supervised twice a week by
Lieut.-Colonel Garner and Captain Scrimgeour.

There are 3 Turkish orderlies and 1 Coptic orderly.

The infirmary is clean and well appointed. It is sub-divided into 4
quarters: the consulting room, dispensary, sick ward and isolation ward.

The beds are iron with wire springs, the mattresses stuffed with
vegetable fibre, the number of blankets not limited.

All the men have been vaccinated against smallpox and cholera. We
learned from the infirmary registers that 30-40 men attend daily at 8
o'clock, the doctor's visiting hour.

The advanced age of many of the prisoners, who are suffering from
chronic affections, accounts for this large attendance.

The day we visited the infirmary it contained 8 patients: 3 cases of
malaria, 3 cases of bronchial pneumonia, and 2 cases of dysentery.

As soon as they arrived in camp 25 men were attacked with tertian
malaria; 15 are cured, 10 are still being treated with quinine. Of 7
attacked with dysentery 5 are now cured.

Ten men were suffering from trachoma and are still being treated with
protargol.

There has been no typhoid fever, nor typhus, nor any other epidemic in
the camp.

The serious cases are sent to the Egyptian hospital at Zagazig, where
they are looked after by native doctors. There are 4 prisoners now in
hospital: 1 eye case, 1 of tuberculosis, 1 of bronchitis, and 2 feverish
patients under observation.

Six prisoners have died in the hospital since the camp was established
here. One had tumour on the brain, 2 chronic enteritis, 1 tuberculosis,
and 1 an intestinal obstruction. The dead were buried with military
honours and according to the rites of their religion.


_Work._--With the exception of fatigue duties, nothing is required from
the prisoners besides a little light work in the gardens near the camp.
Some of them make small articles which are sold for their benefit.


_Correspondence._--The number of illiterates being very high (98 per
cent.), letters are comparatively few. The prisoners are allowed to
write three times a week, and a certain number of them get more educated
comrades to write for them. Correspondence is practically impossible for
those who belong to nomadic tribes.


_Religion._--Except one Copt, all the prisoners are Mahometans. There
are many imaums among them. Religious exercises are practised freely and
regularly.


_Discipline and Behaviour._--There are no complaints as to discipline,
and no attempts to escape have taken place. Despite racial diversities,
few quarrels take place among the prisoners, and the authorities seldom
need to interfere. We spoke to an old and infirm sheik who is treated
with particular regard and has a tent to himself; he told us that he is
in every way satisfied.




~CONCLUSIONS~


The Red Cross International Committee, at Geneva, has since the
beginning of the war organised visits to the camps of prisoners of war
and of civilian prisoners in the various belligerent countries.

The members of the mission sent to Egypt, MM. Dr. F. Blanched, E.
Schoch, and F. Thormeyer, had already inspected camps in Germany,
France, Morocco and Russia. They may be allowed to compare the treatment
of the Egyptian prisoners with what they had seen elsewhere.

We express our deep gratitude to the English authorities for all the
facilities which they gave us for the accomplishment of our mission.

We will now sum up the whole set of observations made by us.

We visited the camps of Heliopolis, Maadi, the Citadel of Cairo,
Ras-el-Tin, Sidi Bishr, and the hospitals of Abbassiah and the Egyptian
Red Cross.

The camps are situated in healthy localities, and their dimensions are
amply sufficient for the population that they hold. The accommodation
seems to us exactly suited to the conditions of the country and climate.
Whether barracks are specially constructed for the prisoners, or stone
buildings are adapted to their use, these results are obtained.

Ventilation is sufficient everywhere. Measures of protection against the
cold, so difficult to render effective in other countries, are
unimportant here, owing to the mildness of the climate. Both boarded and
beaten earth floors are kept perfectly clean.

The bedding of the prisoners of war (non-commissioned officers and
privates) is composed of plaited rush mats, such as they are accustomed
to use when at home. These mats are regularly cleansed, and replaced as
they wear out. The officers, civilian prisoners and sick are provided
with iron spring beds, and mattresses generally stuffed with vegetable
fibre. For hospitals and officers, pillows and coverlets are also
supplied.

The blankets assigned to each prisoner vary from 3 to 5, a number which
we have never seen equalled in other places.

As to clothing, the military authorities furnish the men with all that
is necessary: 2 pairs of drawers, 2 flannel shirts, 2 pairs of socks, a
woollen belt, 1 neckerchief, 1 pair of trousers, a tunic of blue cloth
(or beige) and a cloak. All these garments are warm, clean, and of good
quality. All the Turks wear the national head-covering, the fez.
Decorations are allowed to be worn unrestrictedly. Owing to the date of
our visit we were not able to inspect the summer outfit, but the
prisoners told us that in the hot season they wore blue linen suits.

The civilian prisoners whose personal belongings were worn out received
a complete equipment.

The interned civilians were decently and sufficiently clothed.

Officers can order their clothes at their own expense from the town
tailors.

The private soldiers all wear the oriental slippers; non-commissioned
officers are given high-lows. All necessaries for repairs are provided
by the camp administration.

Everywhere we found the prisoners adequately and suitably dressed. No
external mark shows their position as prisoners of war, except a metal
medallion attached to the tunic.

We can assert that the commissariat of the Egyptian prisoners leaves
nothing to be desired. The fact that the prisoners prepare their own
food insures them a diet suitable to their tastes and customs. The
quantities supplied are calculated upon a very liberal scale. The
quality, whether of bread, meat or vegetables, is excellent and
constant.

The officers' mess is entrusted to private contract. They arrange their
own menu. The daily board is very moderate. Well-stocked canteens enable
them to obtain additions at prices fixed by the authorities.

The sick in hospital have a regimen suited to their condition prescribed
by the doctors. The milk provided is of excellent quality.

The health department is remarkably well organised everywhere. Drinking
water and water for washing purposes are equally abundant. There is an
_ad libitum_ supply for douches and baths in every camp. The
arrangements for laundering linen are very efficient.

Each camp is provided with a disinfecting furnace, linen and upper
garments being sterilised once weekly. There are no vermin anywhere.
Special pains are taken over the cleansing of prisoners newly arrived
from the front. The result of these measures and of the system of
vaccination is seen in the entire freedom of the camps from epidemics.

Turkish or English latrines are sufficient in number, odourless, and
regularly disinfected.

In every camp medical attention is given by a staff of first-class
English physicians, assisted by Armenian or Syrian doctors; hospital
orderlies keep the quarters in perfect order. The infirmaries are
spacious, well lighted, thoroughly stocked with drugs and with surgical
apparatus and dressings.

If dentistry be needed, which is rare among Ottomans, it is supplied by
dentists from the town or resident in the camps.

Cases of mutilation are provided with artificial limbs.

An examination of the medical register in all the camps has convinced
us of their good sanitary condition. The small number of sick, and the
slight character of the ailments, corroborate what we have ourselves
observed from the hygienic point of view. The death-rate is very low.

Deceased prisoners are interred with military honours and according to
the rites of their religion.

The space enclosed within the camps permits the prisoners to enjoy
walking exercise as well as outdoor games.

The English military authorities have not sanctioned compulsory work for
prisoners. Except for sanitary fatigue duties, prisoners have the whole
disposal of their own time. The numerous complaints provoked in other
countries by forced labour are entirely absent among the Ottoman
prisoners in Egypt.

Imaums take religious charge, and the prisoners have full liberty to
carry out their daily worship.

Correspondence is less active than elsewhere owing to the large
proportion of illiterate prisoners. Letters are long on the road because
of the great distances traversed. The censorship is carried out in a
liberal spirit and gives rise to no complaints. Money orders sent from
Turkey are paid in full; but their number, as well as that of parcels,
is restricted.

Assaults and corporal punishment are totally unknown in the camps. The
only disciplinary penalty, very seldom applied, consists of arrest for a
period fixed by the military authorities. We were happy to learn that
the discipline of the Turkish prisoners is excellent. Their own
commissariat officers exercise a good influence. We were ourselves
struck by the correct bearing of the men and their good humour. They
fully appreciate the English authorities' kindness to them.

To sum up, our conviction, based upon careful investigations, is that
the inspectors, commandants and officers of the camps treat the
prisoners with humanity and do all in their power to soften their lot.

We form the impression that the English Government's proposals
concerning repatriation of the interned civilians will soon bear fruit;
and we hope that this measure will be extended to all mutilated
prisoners of war.


CAIRO, _January, 1917_.

  The Delegates of the Red Cross International Committee.
    Dr. F. BLANCHOD.
    F. THORMEYER.
    EMMANUEL SCHOCH.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Turkish Prisoners in Egypt, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TURKISH PRISONERS IN EGYPT ***

***** This file should be named 10589.txt or 10589.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/5/8/10589/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Susan Woodring and PG Distributed
Proofreaders


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


