Project Gutenberg's Yorkshire--Coast & Moorland Scenes, by Gordon Home

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Yorkshire--Coast & Moorland Scenes

Author: Gordon Home

Release Date: January 22, 2004 [EBook #10795]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YORKSHIRE--COAST & MOORLAND SCENES ***




Produced by Ted Garvin, Ginny Brewer and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team





YORKSHIRE COAST AND MOORLAND SCENES

Painted and Described

By

GORDON HOME

_Second Edition_


1907




_First Edition published April 26, 1904
Second Edition published April, 1907_




PREFACE


It may seem almost superfluous to explain that this book does not deal
with the whole of Yorkshire, for it would obviously be impossible to get
even a passing glimpse of such a great tract of country in a book of
this nature. But I have endeavoured to give my own impressions of much
of the beautiful coast-line, and also some idea of the character of the
moors and dales of the north-east portion of the county.

I have described the Dale Country in a companion volume to this,
entitled 'Yorkshire Dales and Fells.'

GORDON HOME.

EPSOM, 1907.



CONTENTS


CHAPTER I
  ACROSS THE MOORS FROM PICKERING TO WHITBY

CHAPTER II
  ALONG THE ESK VALLEY

CHAPTER III
  THE COAST FROM WHITBY TO REDCAR

CHAPTER IV
  THE COAST FROM WHITBY TO SCARBOROUGH

CHAPTER V
  SCARBOROUGH

CHAPTER VI
  WHITBY

CHAPTER VII
  THE CLEVELAND HILLS

CHAPTER VIII
  GUISBOROUGH AND THE SKELTON VALLEY

CHAPTER IX
  FROM PICKERING TO RIEVAULX ABBEY



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

  1. On Barnby Moor
  2. Goathland Moor
  3. An Autumn Scene on the Esk
  4. Sleights Moor from Swart Houc Cross
  5. A Stormy Afternoon
  6. East Row, Sandsend
  7. In Mulgrave Woods
  8. Runswick Bay
  9. A Sunny Afternoon at Runswick
 10. Sunrise from Staithes Beck
 11. Three Generations at Staithes
 12. Boulby Cliffs from Staithes Scaur
 13. The Coast at Saltburn
 14. Whitby Abbey from the Cliffs
 15. Robin Hood's Bay
 16. A Street in Robin Hood's Bay
 17. Scarborough Harbour and Castle
 18. Sunlight and Shadows in Whitby Harbour
 19. The Red Roofs of Whitby
 20. Evening at Whitby
 21. The Cleveland Hills from above Kildale
 22. Hutton Woods, near Guisborough
 23. A Wide Expanse of Heather seen from Great Ayton Moor
 24. A Golden Afternoon, Danby
 25. A Sunset from Danby Beacon
 26. An Autumn Day at Guisborough
 27. A Yorkshire Postman
 28. The Skelton Valley
 29. In Pickering Church
 30. The Market-place, Helmsley
 31. Rievaulx Abbey from 'The Terrace'

_Map at end of volume_




CHAPTER I

ACROSS THE MOORS FROM PICKERING TO WHITBY


The ancient stone-built town of Pickering is to a great extent the
gateway to the moors of Northeastern Yorkshire, for it stands at the
foot of that formerly inaccessible gorge known as Newton Dale, and is
the meeting-place of the four great roads running north, south, east,
and west, as well as of railways going in the same directions. And this
view of the little town is by no means original, for the strategic
importance of the position was recognised at least as long ago as the
days of the early Edwards, when the castle was built to command the
approach to Newton Dale and to be a menace to the whole of the Vale of
Pickering.

The old-time traveller from York to Whitby saw practically nothing of
Newton Dale, for the great coach-road bore him towards the east, and
then, on climbing the steep hill up to Lockton Low Moor, he went almost
due north as far as Sleights. But to-day everyone passes right through
the gloomy canyon, for the railway now follows the windings of Pickering
Beck, and nursemaids and children on their way to the seaside may gaze
at the frowning cliffs which seventy years ago were only known to
travellers and a few shepherds. But although this great change has been
brought about by railway enterprise, the gorge is still uninhabited, and
has lost little of its grandeur; for when the puny train, with its
accompanying white cloud, has disappeared round one of the great bluffs,
there is nothing left but the two pairs of shining rails, laid for long
distances almost on the floor of the ravine. But though there are steep
gradients to be climbed, and the engine labours heavily, there is
scarcely sufficient time to get any idea of the astonishing scenery from
the windows of the train, and you can see nothing of the huge expanses
of moorland stretching away from the precipices on either side. So that
we, who would learn something of this region, must make the journey on
foot; for a bicycle would be an encumbrance when crossing the heather,
and there are many places where a horse would be a source of danger. The
sides of the valley are closely wooded for the first seven or eight
miles north of Pickering, but the surrounding country gradually loses
its cultivation, at first gorse and bracken, and then heather, taking
the place of the green pastures.

At the village of Newton, perched on high ground far above the dale, we
come to the limit of civilization. The sun is nearly setting. The
cottages are scattered along the wide roadway and the strip of grass,
broken by two large ponds, which just now reflect the pale evening sky.
Straight in front, across the green, some ancient barns are thrown up
against the golden sunset, and the long perspective of white road, the
geese, and some whitewashed gables, stand out from the deepening tones
of the grass and trees. A footpath by the inn leads through some dewy
meadows to the woods, above Levisham Station in the valley below. At
first there are glimpses of the lofty moors on the opposite side of the
dale, where the sides of the bluffs are still glowing in the sunset
light; but soon the pathway plunges steeply into a close wood, where the
foxes are barking, and where the intense darkness is only emphasized by
the momentary illumination given by lightning, which now and then
flickers in the direction of Lockton Moor. At last the friendly little
oil-lamps on the platform at Levisham Station appear just below, and
soon the railway is crossed and we are mounting the steep road on the
opposite side of the valley. What is left of the waning light shows the
rough track over the heather to High Horcum. The huge shoulders of the
moors are now majestically indistinct, and towards the west the browns,
purples, and greens are all merged in one unfathomable blackness. The
tremendous silence and the desolation become almost oppressive, but
overhead the familiar arrangement of the constellations gives a sense of
companionship not to be slighted. In something less than an hour a light
glows in the distance, and, although the darkness is now complete, there
is no further need to trouble ourselves with the thought of spending the
night on the heather. The point of light develops into a lighted window,
and we are soon stamping our feet on the hard, smooth road in front of
the Saltersgate Inn. The door opens straight into a large stone-flagged
room. Everything is redolent of coaching days, for the cheery glow of
the fire shows a spotlessly clean floor, old high-backed settles, a gun
hooked to one of the beams overhead, quaint chairs and oak stools, and a
fox's mask and brush. A gamekeeper is warming himself at the fire, for
the evening is chilly, and the firelight falls on his box-cloth gaiters
and heavy boots, as we begin to talk of the loneliness and the dangers
of the moors, and of the snowstorms in winter, that almost bury the low
cottages and blot out all but the boldest landmarks. Soon we are
discussing the superstitions which still survive among the simple
country-folk, and the dark and lonely wilds we have just left make this
a subject of great fascination.

Although we have heard it before, we hear over again with intense
interest the story of the witch who brought constant ill-luck to a
family in these parts. Their pigs were never free from some form of
illness, their cows died, their horses lamed themselves, and even the
milk was so far under the spell that on churning-days the butter refused
to come unless helped by a crooked sixpence. One day, when as usual they
had been churning in vain, instead of resorting to the sixpence, the
farmer secreted himself in an outbuilding, and, gun in hand, watched the
garden from a small opening. As it was growing dusk he saw a hare coming
cautiously through the hedge. He fired instantly, the hare rolled over,
dead, and almost as quickly the butter came. That same night they heard
that the old woman, whom they had long suspected of bewitching them, had
suddenly died at the same time as the hare, and henceforward the farmer
and his family prospered.

In the light of morning the isolation of the inn is more apparent than
at night. A compact group of stable buildings and barns stands on the
opposite side of the road, and there are two or three lonely-looking
cottages, but everywhere else the world is purple and brown with ling
and heather. The morning sun has just climbed high enough to send a
flood of light down the steep hill at the back of the barns, and we can
hear the hum of the bees in the heather. In the direction of Levisham is
Gallows Dyke, the great purple bluff we passed in the darkness, and a
few yards off the road makes a sharp double bend to get up Saltersgate
Brow, the hill that overlooks the enormous circular bowl of Horcum Hole,
where Levisham Beck rises. The farmer whose buildings can be seen down
below contrives to paint the bottom of the bowl a bright green, but the
ling comes hungrily down on all sides, with evident longings to absorb
the scanty cultivation. The Dwarf Cornel, a little mountain-plant which
flowers in July, is found in this 'hole.' A few patches have been
discovered in the locality, but elsewhere it is not known south of
the Cheviots.

Away to the north the road crosses the desolate country like a
pale-green ribbon. It passes over Lockton High Moor, climbs to 700 feet
at Tom Cross Rigg, and then disappears into the valley of Eller Beck, on
Goathland Moor, coming into view again as it climbs steadily up to
Sleights Moor, nearly 1,000 feet above the sea. An enormous stretch of
moorland spreads itself out towards the west. Near at hand is the
precipitous gorge of Upper Newton Dale, backed by Pickering Moor, and
beyond are the heights of Northdale Rigg and Rosedale Common, with the
blue outlines of Ralph Cross and Danby Head right on the horizon.

The smooth, well-built road, with short grass filling the crevices
between the stones, urges us to follow its straight course northwards;
but the sternest and most remarkable portion of Upper Newton Dale lies
to the left, across the deep heather, and we are tempted aside to reach
the lip of the sinuous gorge nearly a mile away to the west, where the
railway runs along the marshy and boulder-strewn bottom of a natural
cutting 500 feet deep. The cliffs drop down quite perpendicularly for
200 feet, and the remaining distance to the bed of the stream is a rough
slope, quite bare in places, and in others densely grown over with
trees; but on every side the fortress-like scarps are as stern and bare
as any that face the ocean. Looking north or south the gorge seems
completely shut in. There is much the same effect when steaming through
the Kyles of Bute, for there the ship seems to be going full speed for
the shore of an entirely enclosed sea, and here, saving for the
tell-tale railway, there seems no way out of the abyss without scaling
the perpendicular walls. The rocks are at their finest at Killingnoble
Scar, where they take the form of a semicircle on the west side of the
railway. The scar was for a very long period famous for the breed of
hawks, which were specially watched by the Goathland men for the use of
James I., and the hawks were not displaced from their eyrie even by the
incursion of the railway into the glen, and only recently
became extinct.

Newton Dale Well, at the foot of the scar, used to attract the country
people for miles round, to the fair held there on Midsummer Day, when
strange ceremonies were performed in order to insure the beneficent
influence of the waters. The custom survived until the beginning of last
century, but now it is not easy to even find the position of the well.
Very few people living in Whitby or Pickering had any idea of the
grandeur of the scenery of Newton Dale when the first official journey
was made by railway between the two towns. This was in 1836, but the
coaches were drawn by horses on the levels and up the inclines, for it
was before the days of the steam-locomotive.

However, the opening of the line caused great enthusiasm and local
excitement, necessitating the services of numbers of policemen to keep
the people off the rails. When the separate coaches had been hauled to
the highest part of the dale, the horses were detached, and the vehicles
were joined up with connecting bars. Then the train was allowed to rush
through the pass at what was considered the dangerous speed of twenty
miles an hour. For the benefit of those who enjoyed the great pace, the
driver allowed the train to go at thirty miles an hour, and then, to
show his complete control over the carriages, he applied the brakes and
came to a standstill on the steep gradient. But for the existence of the
long, narrow ravine right through the heart of these lofty moors, we may
reasonably doubt whether Whitby would ever have been joined with York
other than by way of the coast-line to Scarborough.

We can cross the line near Eller Beck, and, going over Goathland Moor,
explore the wooded sides of Wheeldale Beck and its waterfalls. Mallyan's
Spout is the most imposing, having a drop of about 76 feet. The village
of Goathland has thrown out skirmishers towards the heather in the form
of an ancient-looking but quite modern church, with a low central tower,
and a little hotel, stone-built and fitting well into its surroundings.
The rest of the village is scattered round a large triangular green, and
extends down to the railway, where there is a station named after
the village.

The rolling masses of Sleights Moor rise up steeply towards the east,
and from the coach-road to Whitby that we deserted at the Saltersgate
Inn there is an enormous panorama over Eskdale, Whitby, and the sea.



CHAPTER II

ALONG THE ESK VALLEY


To see the valley of the Esk in its richest garb, one must wait for a
spell of fine autumn weather, when a prolonged ramble can be made along
the riverside and up on the moorland heights above. For the dense
woodlands, which are often merely pretty in midsummer, become
astonishingly lovely as the foliage draping the steep hillsides takes on
its gorgeous colours, and the gills and becks on the moors send down a
plentiful supply of water to fill the dales with the music of
rushing streams.

Climbing up the road towards Larpool, we take a last look at quaint old
Whitby, spread out before us almost like those wonderful old prints of
English towns they loved to publish in the eighteenth century. But
although every feature is plainly visible--the church, the abbey, the
two piers, the harbour, the old town and the new--the detail is all lost
in that soft mellowness of a sunny autumn day. We find an enthusiastic
photographer expending plates on this familiar view, which is sold all
over the town; but we do not dare to suggest that the prints, however
successful, will be painfully hackneyed, and we go on rejoicing that the
questions of stops and exposures need not trouble us, for the world is
ablaze with colour.

Beyond the great red viaduct, whose central piers are washed by the
river far below, the road plunges into the golden shade of the woods
near Cock Mill, and then comes out by the river's bank down below, with
the little village of Ruswarp on the opposite shore. The railway goes
over the Esk just below the dam, and does its very best to spoil every
view of the great mill built in 1752 by Mr. Nathaniel Cholmley. However,
from the road towards Sleights the huge building looks picturesque
enough, with the river flowing smoothly over the broad dam fringed by
the delicate faded greens and browns of the trees. The mill, with its
massive roof and projecting eaves, suggests in a most remarkable fashion
one of the huge gate-houses of the Chinese Imperial Palace at Peking.

The road follows close beside the winding river, and all the way to
Sleights there are lovely glimpses of the shimmering waters, reflecting
the overhanging masses of foliage. The golden yellow of a bush growing
at the water's edge will be backed by masses of brown woods that here
and there have retained suggestions of green, contrasted with the deep
purple tones of their shadowy recesses. These lovely phases of Eskdale
scenery are denied to the summer visitor, but there are few who would
wish to have the riverside solitudes rudely broken into by the passing
of boatloads of holiday-makers. Just before reaching Sleights Bridge we
leave the tree-embowered road, and, going through a gate, find a
stone-flagged pathway that climbs up the side of the valley with great
deliberation, so that we are soon at a great height, with a magnificent
sweep of landscape towards the south-west, and the keen air blowing
freshly from the great table-land of Egton High Moor.

A little higher, and we are on the road in Aislaby village. The steep
climb from the river and railway has kept off those modern influences
which have made Sleights and Grosmont architecturally depressing, and
thus we find a simple village on the edge of the heather, with
picturesque stone cottages and pretty gardens, free from companionship
with the painfully ugly modern stone house, with its thin slate roof.
The big house of the village stands on the very edge of the descent,
surrounded by high trees now swept bare of leaves.

The first time I visited Aislaby I reached the little hamlet when it was
nearly dark. Sufficient light, however, remained in the west to show up
the large house standing in the midst of the swaying branches. One dim
light appeared in the blue-gray mass, and the dead leaves were blown
fiercely by the strong gusts of wind. On the other side of the road
stood an old gray house, whose appearance that gloomy evening well
supported the statement that it was haunted. The classic front appeared
behind an imposing gateway approached by a curious flat bridge across a
circular pond which had a solid stone edging. The low parapets of the
bridge were cut into a strange serpentine form. I gazed at the front of
the house, backed by the dim outline of the moor beyond; but, though the
place was silent enough, I could hear no strange sounds, and the windows
remained black and impassive.

I left the village in the gathering gloom and was soon out on the
heather. Away on the left, but scarcely discernible, was Swart Houe
Cross, on Egton Low Moor, and straight in front lay the Skelder Inn. A
light gleamed from one of the lower windows, and by it I guided my
steps, being determined to partake of tea before turning my steps
homeward. I stepped into the little parlour, with its sanded floor, and
demanded 'fat rascals' and tea. The girl was not surprised at my
request, for the hot turf cakes supplied at the inn are known to all the
neighbourhood by this unusual name, although they are not particularly
fat, and are so extremely palatable that one would gladly call them by a
friendlier name.

But though the gloom of an autumn evening emphasizes the loneliness of
the inn, it blots out the beautiful views which extend in every
direction over dales and woodland, as well as the sea and moors. Whitby
shows itself beyond the windmill as a big town dominated by a great
rectangular building looking as much like a castle as an hotel, the
abbey being less conspicuous from here than from most points of view.
Northwards are the dense woods at Mulgrave, the coast as far as
Kettleness, and the wide, almost limitless moors in the direction of
Guisborough. The road to that ancient town goes straight up the hill
past Swart Houe Cross, which forms the horizon in the picture reproduced
as the frontispiece of this volume. Up on that high ground you can see
right across the valley of the Esk in both directions. The course of the
river itself is hidden by the shoulders of Egton Low Moor beneath us,
but faint sounds of the shunting of trucks are carried up to the
heights. Even when the deep valleys are warmest, and when their
atmosphere is most suggestive of a hot-house, these moorland heights
rejoice in a keen, dry air, which seems to drive away the slightest
sense of fatigue, so easily felt on the lower levels, and to give in its
place a vigour that laughs at distance. Up here, too, the whole world
seems left to Nature, the levels of cultivation being almost out of
sight, and anything under 800 feet seems low. Towards the end of August
the heights are capped with purple, although the distant moors, however
brilliant they may appear when close at hand, generally assume more
delicate shades, fading into grays and blues on the horizon.

But however much the moors may attract us, we started out with the
intention of seeing something of Eskdale. We will therefore take a
turning out of the Guisborough road, and go down the hill to Egton
village, where there is a church with some Norman pillars and arches
preserved from the rebuilding craze that despoiled Yorkshire of half its
ecclesiastical antiquities. Making our way along the riverside to
Grosmont, we come to the enormous heaps above the pits of the now
disused iron-mines. This was the birthplace of the Cleveland Ironworks,
and Grosmont was at one time more famous than Middlesbrough. The first
cargo of ironstone was sent from here in 1836, when the Pickering and
Whitby Railway was opened. However interesting Grosmont may sound in
books, it is a dull place; for the knowledge that the name was
originally Grandimont, from the small priory founded about 1200, and
named after the abbey in Normandy to which it was attached, does not
excite much interest when there is nothing to see but a farmhouse on the
site, and the modern place consists of a railway-junction, some deserted
mines, and many examples of the modern Yorkshire house.

Everything that Nature can do to make amends for this uninteresting spot
is lavishly squandered upon the valley, for wherever man has left things
alone there are heavy canopies of foliage, and mossy boulders among the
rushing streams; and if you will but take the trouble to climb up to the
heather, even the mines are dwarfed into insignificance. We will go up
the steep road to the top of Sleights Moor. It is a long stiff climb of
nearly 900 feet, but the view is one of the very finest in this country,
where wide expanses soon become commonplace. We are sufficiently high to
look right across Fylingdales Moor to the sea beyond, a soft haze of
pearly blue over the hard, rugged outline of the ling. Away towards the
north, too, the landscape for many miles is limited only by the same
horizon of sea, so that we seem to be looking at a section of a very
large scale contour map of England. Below us on the western side runs
the Mirk Esk, draining the heights upon which we stand as well as Egton
High Moor and Wheeldale Moor. The confluence with the Esk at Grosmont is
lost in a haze of smoke and a confusion of roofs and railway-lines; and
the course of the larger river in the direction of Glaisdale is also
hidden behind the steep slopes of Egton High Moor. Towards the south we
gaze over a vast desolation, crossed by the coach-road to York as it
rises and falls over the swells of the heather. The queer isolated cone
of Blakey Topping and the summit of Gallows Dyke, close to Saltersgate,
appear above the distant ridges.

The route of the great Roman road from the South to Dunsley Bay can also
be seen from these heights. It passes straight through Cawthorn Camp, on
the ridge to the west of the village of Newton, and then runs along
within a few yards of the by-road from Picketing to Egton. It crosses
Wheeldale Beck, and skirts the ancient dyke round July or Julian Park,
at one time a hunting-seat of the great De Mauley family. The road is
about 12 feet wide, and is now deep in heather; but it is slightly
raised above the general level of the ground, and can therefore be
followed fairly easily where it has not been taken up to build walls for
enclosures. Of greater antiquity, but much more easily discovered, are
the bride stones close at hand on Sleights Moor. Several of the stones
have fallen, but three of them are still standing erect, the tallest
being 7 feet high. It is not easy to discover any particular form from
the standing and recumbent stones, for they neither make a circle nor do
they seem to be directed to any particular point of the compass; but it
is quite possible that these monoliths were put up by Early Man as a
means of recording the seasons, in somewhat the same manner as
Stonehenge is an example of the orientated temple of Neolithic times.

If we go down into the valley beneath us by a road bearing south-west,
we shall find ourselves at Beck Hole, where there is a pretty group of
stone cottages, backed by some tall firs. The Eller Beck is crossed by a
stone bridge close to its confluence with the Mirk Esk. Above the
bridge, a footpath among the huge boulders winds its way by the side of
the rushing beck to Thomasin Foss, where the little river falls in two
or three broad silver bands into a considerable pool. Great masses of
overhanging rock, shaded by a leafy roof, shut in the brimming waters.

It is not difficult to find the way from Beck Hole to the Roman camp on
the hillside towards Egton Bridge. The Roman road from Cawthorn goes
right through it, but beyond this it is not easy to trace, although
fragments have been discovered as far as Aislaby, all pointing to
Dunsley or Sandsend Bay. Round the shoulder of the hill we come down
again to the deeply-wooded valley of the Esk. No river can be seen, but
when we enter the shade of the trees the sound of many waters fills the
air. What was once a thick green roof is now thin and yellow, and under
our feet is a yielding carpet of soft brown and orange leaves. Rare and
luxuriant mosses grow at the foot of the trees, on dead wood, and on the
damp stones, and everywhere the rich woodland scent of decay meets the
nostrils. In the midst of all these evidences of rampant natural
conditions we come to Glaisdale End, where a graceful stone bridge of a
single arch stands over the rushing stream. The initials of the builder
and the date appear on the eastern side of what is now known as the
Beggar's Bridge. It was formerly called Firris Bridge, after the
builder, but the popular interest in the story of its origin seems to
have killed the old name. If you ask anyone in Whitby to mention some of
the sights of the neighbourhood, he will probably head his list with the
Beggar's Bridge, but why this is so I cannot imagine. The woods are very
beautiful, but this is a country full of the loveliest dales, and the
presence of this single-arched bridge does not seem sufficient to have
attracted so much popularity. I can only attribute it to the love
interest associated with the beggar. He was, we may imagine, the
Alderman Thomas Firris who, as a penniless youth, came to bid farewell
to his betrothed, who lived somewhere on the opposite side of the river.
Finding the stream impassable, he is said to have determined that if he
came back from his travels as a rich man he would put up a bridge on the
spot he had been prevented from crossing. It is not a very remarkable
story, even if it be true, but it has given the bridge a fame scarcely
proportionate to its merits.



CHAPTER III

THE COAST FROM WHITBY TO REDCAR


Along the three miles of sand running northwards from Whitby at the foot
of low alluvial cliffs, I have seen some of the finest sea-pictures on
this part of the coast. But although I have seen beautiful effects at
all times of the day, those that I remember more than any others are the
early mornings, when the sun was still low in the heavens, when,
standing on that fine stretch of yellow sand, one seemed to breathe an
atmosphere so pure, and to gaze at a sky so transparent, that some of
those undefined longings for surroundings that have never been realized
were instinctively uppermost in the mind. It is, I imagine, that vague
recognition of perfection which has its effect on even superficial minds
when impressed with beautiful scenery, for to what other cause can be
attributed the remark one hears, that such scenes 'make one feel good'?

Heavy waves, overlapping one another in their fruitless bombardment of
the smooth shelving sand, are filling the air with a ceaseless thunder.
The sun, shining from a sky of burnished gold, throws into silhouette
the twin lighthouses at the entrance to Whitby Harbour, and turns the
foaming wave-tops into a dazzling white, accentuated by the long shadows
of early day. Away to the north-west is Sandsend Ness, a bold headland
full of purple and blue shadows, and straight out to sea, across the
white-capped waves, are two tramp steamers, making, no doubt, for South
Shields or some port where a cargo of coal can be picked up. They are
plunging heavily, and every moment their bows seem to go down too far
to recover.

On mornings when the sea is quieter there are few who can resist the
desire to plunge into the blue waters, for at seven o'clock the shore is
so entirely deserted that one seems to be bathing from some primeval
shore where no other forms of life may be expected than some giant
crustaceans. This thought, perhaps, prompted the painful sensations I
allowed to prey upon me one night when I was walking along this
particular piece of shore from Whitby. I had decided to save time over
the road to Sandsend by getting on to the beach at Upgang, where the
lifeboat-house stands, by the entrance to a small beck. So dark was the
night that I could scarcely be sure that I had not lost my way, until I
had carefully felt the walls of the boat-house. Then I stepped
cautiously on to the sand, which I discovered as soon as my feet began
sinking at every step.

The harbour lights of Whitby were bright enough, but in the other
direction I could be sure of nothing. At first I seemed to have made a
mistake as to the state of the tide, for there appeared to be a
whiteness nearly up to the base of the cliffs; but this proved to be the
suffused glow from the lighthouses. Rain had been falling heavily for
the last few days, and had produced so many wide streams across the sand
that my knowledge of the usual ones merely hampered me. At first I began
stepping carefully over large black hollows in the sand, and then a
great black mark would show itself, which, offering no resistance to my
stick as I drew it across its surface, I could only imagine to be caused
by a flood of ink poured upon the beach by some horrible squid. My
musings on whether sea-monsters did ever disport themselves on the shore
under the cover of sufficiently dark nights would be broken into by
discovering that I had plunged into a stream of undiscoverable
dimensions, whose existence only revealed itself by the splash of my
boots. Retreating cautiously, I would take a run, and then a terrific
leap into the darkness, sometimes finding myself on firm dry sand, and
as frequently in the water.

I had decided that I should probably not reach Sandsend until daylight,
when a red lamp near the railway-bridge shone out as a beacon, and I
realized that I would soon be safe from the tentacles of sea-monsters.

When I awoke next morning, I dashed out on to the beach, and commenced
to walk rapidly in the direction of Whitby, in the hope that the tide
had left some of those black stains still showing. I wanted, also, to
examine some of the queer ridges I had so often stepped over, and some
of the rivers I had leapt. The rivers were there wide enough in places,
but nothing in the way of a ridge or any signs of those inky patches
could I discern. Careful examination showed, however, that here and
there the smooth shore was covered with sand of a rather reddish hue,
quite unworthy of remark in daylight. The foolishness of my
apprehensions seems apparent, but nevertheless I urge everyone to choose
a moonlit night and a companion of some sort for traversing these three
miles after sunset.

The two little becks finding their outlet at East Row and Sandsend are
lovely to-day; but their beauty must have been much more apparent before
the North-Eastern Railway put their black lattice girder bridges across
the mouth of each valley. But now that familiarity with these bridges,
which are of the same pattern across every wooded ravine up the
coast-line to Redcar, has blunted my impressions, I can think of the
picturesqueness of East Row without remembering the railway. It was in
this glen, where Lord Normanby's lovely woods make a background for the
pretty tiled cottages, the mill, and the old stone bridge, which make up
East Row, that the Saxons chose a home for their god Thor. [Since this
was written one or two new houses have been allowed to mar the
simplicity of the valley.--G. H.] Here they built some rude form of
temple, afterwards, it seems, converted into a hermitage. This was how
the spot obtained the name Thordisa, a name it retained down to 1620,
when the requirements of workmen from the newly-started alum-works at
Sandsend led to building operations by the side of the stream. The
cottages which arose became known afterwards as East Row.

A very little way inland is the village of Dunsley, which may have been
in existence in Roman times, for Ptolemy mentions Dunus Sinus as a bay
frequently used by the Romans as a landing-place. The foundations of
some ancient building can easily be traced in the rough grass at the
village cross-roads, now overlooked by a new stone house. But whatever
surprises Dunsley may have in store for those who choose to dig in the
likely places, the hamlet need not keep one long, for on either hand
there is a choice of breezy moorland or the astonishing beauties of
Mulgrave Woods. Before I knew this part of Yorkshire, and had merely
read of the woods as a sight to be visited from Whitby, I was prepared
for something at least as hackneyed as Hayburn Wyke. I was prepared for
direction-boards and artificial helps to the charms of certain aspects
of the streams. I certainly never anticipated that I should one day sigh
for a direction-board in this forest.

It was on my second visit to the woods that I determined to find a
particularly dramatic portion of one of the streams. My first ramble had
been in summer. I had been with one who knew the paths well, but now it
was late autumn and I was alone. I explored the paths for hours, and
traversed long glades ablaze with red and gold. I peered down through
the yellow leaves to the rushing streams below, where I could see the
great moss-grown boulders choking the narrow channels. But this
particular spot had gone. I was almost in despair, when two labourers by
great luck happened to come along one of the tracks. With their help I
found the place I was searching for, and the result of the time spent
there is given in one of the illustrations to this chapter. Go where you
will in Yorkshire, you will find no more fascinating woodland scenery
than this. From the broken walls and towers of the old Norman castle the
views over the ravines on either hand--for the castle stands on a lofty
promontory in a sea of foliage--are entrancing; and after seeing the
astoundingly brilliant colours with which autumn paints these trees,
there is a tendency to find the ordinary woodland commonplace. The
narrowest and deepest gorge is hundreds of feet deep in the shale. East
Row Beck drops into this canyon in the form of a waterfall at the upper
end, and then almost disappears among the enormous rocks strewn along
its circumscribed course. The humid, hothouse atmosphere down here
encourages the growth of many of the rarer mosses, which entirely cover
all but the newly-fallen rocks.

We can leave the woods by a path leading near Lord Normanby's modern
castle, and come out on to the road close to Lythe Church, where a great
view of sea and land is spread out towards the south. The long curving
line of white marks the limits of the tide as far as the entrance to
Whitby Harbour. The abbey stands out in its loneliness as of yore, and
beyond it are the black-looking, precipitous cliffs ending at Saltwick
Nab. Lythe Church, standing in its wind-swept graveyard full of
blackened tombstones, need not keep us, for, although its
much-modernized exterior is simple and ancient-looking, the interior is
devoid of any interest. It is the same tale at nearly every village in
this district, and to those who are able to grow enthusiastic in
antiquarian matters some parts of the county are disappointing. In East
Anglia and the southern counties even the smallest hamlets have often a
good church, with a conspicuous tower or spire; but in how many villages
in this riding do you find no church at all, as in the case of Staithes
and Runswick? Many of the old churches of Yorkshire were in a state of
great dilapidation at the beginning of last century, and a great effort
having been initiated by the then Archbishop, a fund was instituted to
help the various parishes to restore their buildings. It was a period
when architecture was at a low ebb, and the desire to sweep away
antiquity was certainly strong, for those churches not rebuilt from the
ground were so hacked and renovated that their interest and
picturesqueness has vanished. The churches at Pickering, Middleton,
Lastingham, and Kirkdale must, however, be pointed out as priceless
exceptions.

The road drops down a tremendous hill into Sandsend, where they talk of
going 'up t' bonk' to Lythe Church. A little chapel of ease in the
village accommodates the old and delicate folk, but the youth and the
generally able-bodied of Sandsend must climb the hill every Sunday. The
beck forms an island in the village, and the old stone cottages, bright
with new paint and neatly-trained creepers, stand in their gardens on
either side of the valley in the most picturesque fashion.

The walk along the rocky shore to Kettleness is dangerous unless the
tide is carefully watched, and the road inland through Lythe village is
not particularly interesting, so that one is tempted to use the railway,
which cuts right through the intervening high ground by means of two
tunnels. The first one is a mile long, and somewhere near the centre has
a passage out to the cliffs, so that even if both ends of the tunnel
collapsed there would be a way of escape. But this is small comfort when
travelling from Kettleness, for the down gradient towards Sandsend is
very steep, and in the darkness of the tunnel the train gets up a
tremendous speed, bursting into the open just where a precipitous drop
into the sea could be most easily accomplished.

The station at Kettleness is on the top of the huge cliffs, and to reach
the shore one must climb down a zigzag path. It is a broad and solid
pathway until halfway down, where it assumes the character of a
goat-track, being a mere treading down of the loose shale of which the
enormous cliff is formed. The sliding down of the crumbling rock
constantly carries away the path, but a little spade-work soon makes the
track firm again. This portion of the cliff has something of a history,
for one night in 1829 the inhabitants of many of the cottages originally
forming the village of Kettleness were warned of impending danger by
subterranean noises. Fearing a subsidence of the cliff, they betook
themselves to a small schooner lying in the bay. This wise move had not
long been accomplished, when a huge section of the ground occupied by
the cottages slid down the great cliff and the next morning there was
little to be seen but a sloping mound of lias shale at the foot of the
precipice. The villagers recovered some of their property by digging,
and some pieces of broken crockery from one of the cottages are still to
be seen on the shore near the ferryman's hut, where the path joins
the shore.

This sandy beach, lapped by the blue waves of Runswick Bay, is one of
the finest spots on the rocky coast-line of Yorkshire. A trickling
waterfall drops perpendicularly down the blackish rocks from a
considerable height, while above it are the towering cliffs of shale,
perfectly bare in one direction, and clothed with grass and bracken in
another. At the foot of the rocks a layer of jet appears a few inches
above the sand.

You look northwards across the sunlit sea to the rocky heights hiding
Port Mulgrave and Staithes, and on the further side of the bay you see
tiny Runswick's red roofs, one above the other, on the face of the
cliff. Here it is always cool and pleasant in the hottest weather, and
from the broad shadows cast by the precipices above one can revel in the
sunny land and sea-scapes without that fishy odour so unavoidable in the
villages. When the sun is beginning to climb down the sky in the
direction of Hinderwell, and everything is bathed in a glorious golden
light, the ferryman will row you across the bay to Runswick, but a
scramble over the rocks on the beach will be repaid by a closer view of
the now half-filled-up Hob Hole. The fisher-folk believed this cave to
be the home of a kindly-disposed fairy or hob, who seems to have been
one of the slow-dying inhabitants of the world of mythology implicitly
believed in by the Saxons. And these beliefs died so hard in these
lonely Yorkshire villages that until recent times a mother would carry
her child suffering from whooping-cough along the beach to the mouth of
the cave. There she would call in a loud voice, 'Hob-hole Hob! my
bairn's gotten t'kink cough. Tak't off, tak't off.' One can see the
child's parents gazing fearfully into the black depths of the cavern,
penetrating the cliff for 70 feet, and finally turning back to the
village in the full belief that the hob would stay the disease.

The steep paths and flights of roughly-built steps that wind above and
below the cottages are the only means of getting about in Runswick. The
butcher's cart every Saturday penetrates into the centre of the village
by the rough track which is all that is left of the good firm road from
Hinderwell after it has climbed down the cliff. To this central
position, close to the post-box, the householders come to buy their
supply of meat for Sunday, having their purchases weighed on scales
placed on the flap at the back of the cart. While the butcher is doing
his thriving trade the postman arrives to collect letters from the
pillar-box, Placing a small horn to his lips, he blows a blast to warn
the villagers that the post is going, and, having waited for the last
letter, climbs slowly up the steep pathway to Hinderwell.

Halfway up to the top he pauses and looks over the fruit-trees and the
tiles and chimney-pots below him, to the bright blue waters of the bay,
with Kettleness beyond, now all pink and red in the golden light of late
afternoon. This scene is more suggestive of the Mediterranean than
Yorkshire, for the blueness of the sea seems almost unnatural, and the
golden greens of the pretty little gardens among the houses seem perhaps
a trifle theatrical; but the fisher-folk play their parts too well, and
there is nothing make-believe about the delicious bread-and-butter and
the newly-baked cakes which accompany the tea awaiting us in a
spotlessly clean cottage close by.

The same form of disaster which destroyed Kettleness village caused the
complete ruin of Runswick in 1666, for one night, when some of the
fisher-folk were holding a wake over a corpse, they had unmistakable
warnings of an approaching landslip. The alarm was given, and the
villagers, hurriedly leaving their cottages, saw the whole place slide
downwards and become a mass of ruins. No lives were lost, but, as only
one house remained standing, the poor fishermen were only saved from
destitution by the sums of money collected for their relief.

Architecturally speaking, Hinderwell is a depressing village, and there
is little to remember about the place except an extraordinary block of
two or three shops, suitable only for a business street in a big city,
but dumped right into the middle of this village of low cottages. The
church is modern enough to be uninteresting, but in the graveyard St.
Hilda's Well, from which the name Hinderwell is a corruption, may
still be seen.

In 1603 there was a sudden and terrible outbreak of plague in the
village. It only lasted from September 1 to November 10, but in that
short time forty-nine people died. It seems that the infection was
brought by some men from a 'Turkey ship' that had been stranded on the
coast, but, strangely enough, the disease does not appear to have been
carried into the other villages in the neighbourhood.

Scarcely two miles from Hinderwell is the fishing-hamlet of Staithes,
wedged into the side of a deep and exceedingly picturesque beck.
Here--and it is the same at Runswick--one is obliged to walk warily
during the painter's season, for fear of either obstructing the view of
the man behind the easel you have just passed, or out of regard for the
feelings of some girls just in front. There are often no more chances of
standing still in Staithes than may be enjoyed on a popular golf-links
on a fine Saturday afternoon. These folk at Staithes do not disturb one
with cries of 'Fore!' but with that blank Chinaman's stare which comes
to anyone who paints in public.

The average artist is a being who is quite unable to recognise
architectural merit. He sees everything to please him if the background
of his group be sufficiently tumble-down and derelict. If this be
incorrect, how could such swarms of artistic folk paint and actually
lodge in Staithes? The steep road leading past the station drops down
into the village, giving a glimpse of the beck crossed by its ramshackle
wooden foot-bridge--the view one has been prepared for by guide-books
and picture postcards. Lower down you enter the village street. Here the
smell of fish comes out to greet you, and one would forgive the place
this overflowing welcome if one were not so shocked at the dismal aspect
of the houses on either side of the way. Many are of comparatively
recent origin, others are quite new, and a few--a very few--are old; but
none have any architectural pretensions or any claims to
picturesqueness, and only a few have the neat and respectable look one
is accustomed to expect after seeing Robin Hood's Bay.

Staithes had filled me with so much pleasant expectancy that my first
walk down this street of dirty, ugly houses had brought me into a
querulous frame of mind, and I wondered irritably why the women should
all wear lilac-coloured bonnets, when a choice of colour is not
difficult as far as calico is concerned. Those women who were in
mourning had dyed theirs black, and these assorted well with the colour
of the stone of many of the houses.

I hurried down on to the little fish-wharf--a wooden structure facing
the sea--hoping to find something more cheering in the view of the
little bay, with its bold cliffs, and the busy scene where the cobles
were drawn up on the shingle. Here my spirits revived, and I began to
find excuses for the painters. The little wharf, in a bad state of
repair, like most things in the place, was occupied by groups of
stalwart fisher-folk, men and women.

The men were for the most part watching their women-folk at work. They
were also to an astonishing extent mere spectators in the arduous work
of hauling the cobles one by one on to the steep bank of shingle. A
tackle hooked to one of the baulks of timber forming the staith was
being hauled at by five women and two men! Two others were in a listless
fashion leaning their shoulders against the boat itself. With the last
'Heave-ho!' at the shortened tackle the women laid hold of the nets, and
with casual male assistance laid them out on the shingle, removed any
fragments of fish, and generally prepared them for stowing in the
boat again.

It is evidently an accepted state of things at Staithes that the work of
putting out to sea and the actual catching of the fish is sufficient for
the men-folk, for the feminine population do their arduous tasks with a
methodical matter-of-factness which surprises only the stranger. I was
particularly struck on one occasion with the sight of a good-looking and
very neatly dressed young fishwife who was engaged in that very
necessary but exceedingly unpleasant task of cutting open fish and
removing the perishable portions. With unerring precision the sharp
knife was plunged into each cod or haddock, and the fish was in its
marketable condition in shorter time than one can write. A little boy
plunged them into a pail of ruddy-looking water, and from thence into
the regulation fish box or basket that finds its way to the Metropolis.

A change has come over the inhabitants of Staithes since 1846, when Mr.
Ord describes the fishermen as 'exceedingly civil and courteous to
strangers, and altogether free from that low, grasping knavery peculiar
to the larger class of fishing-towns.' Without wishing to be
unreasonably hard on Staithes, I am inclined to believe that this
character is infinitely better than these folk deserve, and even when
Mr. Ord wrote of the place I have reason to doubt the civility shown by
them to strangers. It is, according to some who have known Staithes for
a long while, less than fifty years ago that the fisher-folk were
hostile to a stranger on very small provocation, and only the entirely
inoffensive could expect to sojourn in the village without being a
target for stones. The incursion of the artistic hordes has been a great
factor in the demoralization of the village, for who would not be
mercenary when besought at all hours of the day to stand before a canvas
or a camera? Thus, the harmless stranger who strays on to the staith
with a camera is obliged to pay for 'an afternoon's 'baccy' if he want
an opportunity to obtain more than a snapshot of a picturesque group. He
may try to capture a lonely old fisherman by asking if he would mind
standing still for 'just one second,' but the old fellow will move away
instantly unless his demand for payment be readily complied with.

No doubt many of the superstitions of Staithes people have languished or
died out in recent years, and among these may be included a particularly
primitive custom when the catches of fish had been unusually small. Bad
luck of this sort could only be the work of some evil influence, and to
break the spell a sheep's heart had to be procured, into which many pins
were stuck. The heart was then burnt in a bonfire on the beach, in the
presence of the fishermen, who danced round the flames.

In happy contrast to these heathenish practices was the resolution
entered into and signed by the fishermen of Staithes, in August, 1835,
binding themselves 'on no account whatever' to follow their calling on
Sundays, 'nor to go out with our boats or cobbles to sea, either on the
Saturday or Sunday evenings.' They also agreed to forfeit ten shillings
for every offence against the resolution, and the fund accumulated in
this way, and by other means, was administered for the benefit of aged
couples and widows and orphans.

The men of Staithes are known up and down the east coast of Great
Britain as some of the very finest types of fishermen. Their cobles,
which vary in size and colour, are uniform in design and the brilliance
of their paint. Brick red, emerald green, pungent blue and white, are
the most favoured colours, but orange, pink, yellow, and many others,
are to be seen.

Not only are fish of the present age in evidence at Staithes, but
nowhere along this coast can one find better examples of those of the
Jurassic period. When the tide has exposed the scaur which runs out from
Colburn Nab, at the mouth of the beck, a one can examine masses of
recently fallen rocks, the new faces of which are almost invariably
covered with ammonites or clusters of fossil bivalves. The only
hindrance to a close examination of these new falls from the cliffs is
the serious danger of another fall occurring at the same spot. The
fisher-folk are very kind in pointing out this peril to ardent
geologists and those of a less scientific outlook, who merely enjoy the
exercise of scrambling over great masses of rock. After having been
warned that most of the face of the cliff above is 'qualified' to come
down at any moment, there is a strong inclination to betake one's self
to a safe distance, where, unfortunately, the wear and tear of the waves
have in most cases so battered the traces of early marine life that
there is little to attack with the hammer to compare with what can be
seen in the new falls. The scaur also presents an interesting feature in
its round ironstone nodules, half embedded in the smooth rocky floor.

Looking northwards there is a grand piece of coast scenery. The masses
of Boulby Cliffs, rising 660 feet from the sea, are the highest on the
Yorkshire coast. The waves break all round the rocky scaur, and fill the
air with their thunder, while the strong wind blows the spray into
beards which stream backwards from the incoming crests.

The upper course of Staithes Beck consists of two streams, flowing
through deep, richly-wooded ravines. They follow parallel courses very
close to one another for three or four miles, but their sources extend
from Lealholm Moor to Wapley Moor. Kilton Beck runs through another
lovely valley densely clothed in trees, and full of the richest woodland
scenery. It becomes more open in the neighbourhood of Loftus, and from
thence to the sea at Skinningrove the valley is green and open to the
heavens. Loftus is on the borders of the Cleveland mining district, and
it is for this reason that the town has grown to a considerable size.
But although the miners' new cottages are unpicturesque, and the church
only dates from 1811, the situation is pretty, owing to the profusion of
trees among the houses. Skinningrove has railway-sidings and
branch-lines running down to it, and on the hill above the cottages
stands a cluster of blast-furnaces. In daylight they are merely ugly,
but at night, with tongues of flame, they speak of the potency of
labour. I can still see that strange silhouette of steel cylinders and
connecting girders against a blue-black sky, with silent masses of flame
leaping into the heavens.

It was long before iron-ore was smelted here, before even the old
alum-works had been started, that Skinningrove attained to some sort of
fame through a wonderful visit, as strange as any of those recounted by
Mr. Wells. It was in the year 1535--for the event is most carefully
recorded in a manuscript of the period--that some fishermen of
Skinningrove caught a Sea Man. This was such an astounding fact to
record that the writer of the old manuscript explains that 'old men that
would be loath to have their credyt crackt by a tale of a stale date,
report confidently that ... a _sea-man_ was taken by the fishers.' They
took him up to an old disused house, and kept him there for many weeks,
feeding him on raw fish, because he persistently refused the other sorts
of food offered him. To the people who flocked from far and near to
visit him he was very courteous, and he seems to have been particularly
pleased with any 'fayre maydes' who visited him, for he would gaze at
them with a very earnest countenance, 'as if his phlegmaticke breaste
had been touched with a sparke of love.' The Sea Man was so well behaved
that the fisher-folk began to feel sufficiently sure of his desire to
live with them to cease to keep watch on his movements. 'One day,' we
are told, 'he prively stoale out of Doores, and ere he coulde be
overtaken recovered the sea, whereinto he plunged himself; yet as one
that woulde not unmanerly depart without taking of his leave, from the
mydle upwardes he raysed his shoulders often above the waves, and
makinge signes of acknowledgeing his good enterteinment to such as
beheld him on the shore, as they interpreted yt;--after a pretty while
he dived downe and appeared no more.'

This strangely detailed account says that instead of a voice the Sea Man
'skreaked,' but this is of small interest compared to whether he had a
tail or any fish-like attributes. The fact that he escaped would suggest
the presence of legs, but the historian is silent on this
all-important matter.

The lofty coast-line we have followed all the way from Sandsend
terminates abruptly at Huntcliff Nab, the great promontory which is
familiar to visitors to Saltburn. Low alluvial cliffs take the place of
the rocky precipices, and the coast becomes flatter and flatter as you
approach Redcar and the marshy country at the mouth of the Tees. The
original Saltburn, consisting of a row of quaint fishermen's cottages,
still stands entirely alone, facing the sea on the Huntcliff side of the
beck, and from the wide, smooth sands there is little of modern Saltburn
to be seen besides the pier. For the rectangular streets and blocks of
houses have been wisely placed some distance from the edge of the grassy
cliffs, leaving the sea-front quite unspoiled. It would, perhaps, be
well to own that I have never seen Saltburn during the summer season,
and for this reason I may think better of the resort than if my visit
had been in midsummer. It was during October. The sun was shining
brightly, and a strong wind was blowing off the land. The wide,
new-looking streets were spotlessly clean, and in most of them there was
no sign of life at all. It was the same on the broad sweep of sands, for
when I commenced a drawing on the cliffs the only living creatures I
could see were two small dogs. About noon a girls' school was let loose
upon the sands, and for half an hour a furious game of hockey was
fought. Then I was left alone again, with the great expanse of sea, the
yellow margin of sand, and the reddish-brown cliffs, all beneath the
wind-swept sky.

The elaborately-laid-out gardens on the steep banks of Skelton Beck are
the pride and joy of Saltburn, for they offer a pleasant contrast to the
bare slopes on the Huntcliff side and the flat country towards
Kirkleatham. But in this seemingly harmless retreat there used to be
heard horrible groanings, and I have no evidence to satisfy me that they
have altogether ceased. For in this matter-of-fact age such a story
would not be listened to, and thus those who hear the sounds may be
afraid to speak of them. The groanings were heard, they say, 'when all
wyndes are whiste and the sea restes unmoved as a standing poole.' At
times they were so loud as to be heard at least six miles inland, and
the fishermen feared to put out to sea, believing that the ocean was 'as
a greedy Beaste raginge for Hunger, desyers to be satisfyed with men's
carcases.' There were also at that time certain rocks towards Huntcliff
Nab, left bare at low-tide, where 'Seales in greate Heardes like Swine'
were to be seen basking in the sun. 'For their better scuritye,' says
the old writer, 'they put in use a kind of military discipline, warily
preparing against a soddaine surprize, for on the outermost Rocke one
great Seale or more keepes sentinell, which upon the first inklinge of
any danger, giveth the Alarme to the rest by throweing of Stones, or
making a noise in the water, when he tumbles down from the Rocke, the
rest immediately doe the like, insomuch that yt is very hard to overtake
them by cunning.'

In 1842 Redcar was a mere village, though more apparent on the map than
Saltburn; but, like its neighbour, it has grown into a great
watering-place, having developed two piers, a long esplanade other
features, which I am glad to leave to those for whom they were made, and
betake myself to the more romantic spots so plentiful in this
broad county.



CHAPTER IV

THE COAST FROM WHITBY TO SCARBOROUGH


Although it is only six miles as the crow flies from Whitby to Robin
Hood's Bay, the exertion required to walk there along the top of the
cliffs is equal to quite double that distance, for there are so many
gullies to be climbed into and crawled out of that the measured distance
is considerably increased. It is well to remember this, for otherwise
the scenery of the last mile or two may not seem as fine as the
first stages.

As soon as the abbey and the jet-sellers are left behind, you pass a
farm, and come out on a great expanse of close-growing smooth turf,
where the whole world seems to be made up of grass and sky. The footpath
goes close to the edge of the cliff; in some places it has gone too
close, and has disappeared altogether. But these diversions can be
avoided without spoiling the magnificent glimpses of the rock-strewn
beach nearly 200 feet below. From above Saltwick Bay there is a grand
view across the level grass to Whitby Abbey, standing out alone on the
green horizon. Down below, Saltwick Nab runs out a bare black arm into
the sea, which even in the calmest weather angrily foams along the
windward side. Beyond the sturdy lighthouse that shows itself a dazzling
white against the hot blue of the heavens commence the innumerable
gullies. Each one has its trickling stream, and bushes and low trees
grow to the limits of the shelter afforded by the ravines; but in the
open there is nothing higher than the waving corn or the stone walls
dividing the pastures--a silent testimony to the power of the north-east
wind. The village of Hawsker, with its massive though modern church, can
be seen across the fields towards the west, but it does not offer
sufficient attractions to divert you from the cliffs, unless you have a
desire to see in one or two of the fields, gateways and rubbing-posts
formed of whales' jaws, suggestive of the days when Whitby carried on a
thriving trade with the great cetaceans. To enjoy this magnificent coast
scenery, there must be plenty of time to linger in those places where it
seems impossible not to fling yourself on the long brown grass and
listen to the droning of insects and the sound of the waves down below.
At certain times of the day the most striking colours are seen among the
sunlit rocks, and the boldness of the outlines of overhanging strata and
great projecting shoulders are a continual surprise.

After rounding the North Cheek, the whole of Robin Hood's Bay is
suddenly laid before you. I well remember my first view of the wide
sweep of sea, which lay like a blue carpet edged with white, and the
high escarpments of rock that were in deep purple shade, except where
the afternoon sun turned them into the brightest greens and umbers.
Three miles away, but seemingly very much closer, was the bold headland
of the Peak, and more inland was Stoupe Brow, with Robin Hood's Butts on
the hill-top. The fable connected with the outlaw is scarcely worth
repeating, but on the site of these butts urns have been dug up, and are
now to be found in Scarborough Museum. The Bay Town is hidden away in a
most astonishing fashion, for, until you have almost reached the two
bastions which guard the way up from the beach, there is nothing to be
seen of the charming old place. If you approach by the road past the
railway-station it is the same, for only garishly new hotels and villas
are to be seen on the high ground, and not a vestige of the fishing-town
can be discovered. But the road to the bay at last begins to drop down
very steeply, and the first old roofs appear. The path at the side of
the road develops into a very long series of steps, and in a few minutes
the narrow street, flanked by very tall houses, has swallowed you up.

Everything is very clean and orderly, and, although most of the houses
are very old, they are generally in a good state of repair, exhibiting
in every case the seaman's love of fresh paint. Thus, the dark and worn
stone walls have bright eyes in their newly-painted doors and windows.
Over their doorsteps the fishermen's wives are quite fastidious, and you
seldom see a mark on the ochre-coloured hearthstone with which the women
love to brighten the worn stones. Even the scrapers are sleek with
blacklead, and it is not easy to find a window without spotlessly clean
curtains. The little coastguard station by the opening on to the shore
has difficulty in showing itself superior to the rest in these essential
matters of smartness. However, the coastguards glory in a little stone
pathway protected by a low wall in front of their building. On this
narrow quarter-deck the men love to walk to and fro, just as though they
were afloat and were limited to this space for exercise. At high-tide
the sea comes halfway up the steep opening between the coastguards'
quarters and the inn which is built on another bastion, and in rough
weather the waves break hungrily on to the strong stone walls, for the
bay is entirely open to the full force of gales from the east or
north-east. All the way from Scarborough to Whitby the coast offers no
shelter of any sort in heavy weather, and many vessels have been lost on
the rocks. On one occasion a small sailing-ship was driven right into
this bay at high-tide, and the bowsprit smashed into a window of the
little hotel that occupied the place of the present one.

With angry seas periodically demolishing the outermost houses, it seems
almost unaccountable that the little town should have persisted in
clinging so tenaciously to the high-water mark; but there were probably
two paramount reasons for this. The deep gully was to a great extent
protected from the force of the winds, and, as it was soon quite brimful
of houses, every inch of space was valuable; then, smuggling was freely
practised along the coast, and the more the houses were wedged together,
the more opportunities for secret hiding-places would be afforded. The
whole town has a consciously guilty look in its evident desire to
conceal itself; and the steep narrow streets, the curious passages where
it is scarcely possible for two people to pass, and the little courts
which look like culs-de-sac but have a hidden flight of steps leading
down to another passage, seem to be purposely intricate and confusing.
For I can imagine a revenue cutter chasing a boat into Robin Hood's Bay,
and I can see the smugglers hastily landing on the beach and making for
the town, followed by the Excise officers, who are as unable to trace
the men as though they had been chasing rabbits in a warren. The stream
that made this retreat for the fishing-town is now scarcely more than a
drain when it reaches the houses, for, after passing along the foot of a
great perpendicular mass of shale, it rushes into a tunnel, and only
appears again on the shore.

It is strange that there should be so little information as to the
associations of Robin Hood with this fishing-village. The stories of his
shooting an arrow to determine where he should make his headquarters
sound improbable, although his keeping one or two small ships in the bay
ready for making his escape if suddenly attacked seems a rational
precaution, and if only there were a little more evidence outside the
local traditions to go upon, it would be pleasant to let the imagination
play upon the wild life led by the outlawed Earl of Huntingdon in this
then inaccessible coast region.

The railway southwards takes a curve inland, and, after winding in and
out to make the best of the contour of the hills, the train finally
steams very heavily and slowly into Ravenscar Station, right over the
Peak and 630 feet above the sea. On the way you get glimpses of the
moors inland, and grand views over the curving bay. There is a station
named Fyling Hall, after Sir Hugh Cholmley's old house, halfway to
Ravenscar. It was about the year 1625 that Sir Hugh to a great extent
rebuilt Fyling Hall, which is still standing; but he came in with his
family before the plaster on the walls was thoroughly dry, and the
household seems to have suffered in health on this account. Shortly
afterwards Sir Hugh lost his eldest son Richard, who was only five years
old, and this great trouble decided him to move to Whitby; for in 1629
he sold Fyling Hall to Sir John Hotham, and took up his residence in the
Abbey House at Whitby.

Raven Hall, the large house conspicuously perched on the heights above
the Peak, is now converted into an hotel. There is a wonderful view from
the castellated terraces, which in the distance suggest the remains of
some ruined fortress. At the present time there is nothing to be seen
older than the house whose foundations were dug in 1774. While the
building operations were in progress, however, a Roman stone, now in
Whitby Museum, was unearthed. The inscription has been translated:
'Justinian, governor of the province, and Vindician, general of the
forces of Upper Britain, for the second time, with the younger
provincial soldiers built this fort, the manager of public works giving
his assistance.' There is therefore ample evidence for believing that
this commanding height was used by the Romans as a military post,
although subsequently there were no further attempts to fortify the
place, Scarborough, so much more easily defensible, being chosen
instead. A rather pathetic attempt to foster the establishment of a
watering-place has, however, been lately put on foot, but beyond some
elaborately prepared roads and two or three isolated blocks of houses,
there is fortunately little response to this artificial cultivation of a
summer resort on the bare hill-top.

Following this lofty coast southwards, you reach Hayburn Wyke, where a
stream drops perpendicularly over some square masses of rock. After very
heavy rains the waterfall attains quite a respectable size, but even
under such favourable conditions the popularity of the place to a great
extent spoils what might otherwise be a pleasant surprise to the
rambler. The woodland paths leading down to the cove from the hotel by
the station are exceedingly pretty, and in the summer it is not easy to
find your way, despite the direction-boards nailed to trees here and
there. But there are many wooded and mossy-pathed ravines equally
pretty, where no charge is made for admittance, and where you can be
away from your fellow-mortals and the silver paper they throw away from
the chocolate they eat.

There is a small stone circle not far from Hayburn Wyke Station, to be
found without much trouble, and those who are interested in Early Man
will scarcely find a neighbourhood in this country more thickly
honeycombed with tumuli and ancient earthworks. There is no particularly
plain pathway through the fields to the valley where this stone circle
can be seen, but it can easily be found after a careful study of the
large scale Ordnance map which they will show you at the hotel; and if
there be any difficulty in locating the exact position of the stones,
the people at the neighbouring farm are exceedingly kind in giving
directions. There are about fifteen monoliths making up the circle, and
they are all lying flat on the ground, so that in the summer they are
very much overgrown with rank grass and low bushes. This was probably
the burial-place of some prehistoric chief, but no mound remains.



CHAPTER V

SCARBOROUGH


Dazzling sunshine, a furious wind, flapping and screaming gulls, crowds
of fishing-boats, and innumerable people jostling one another on the
seafront, made up the chief features of my first view of Scarborough. By
degrees I discovered that behind the gulls and the brown sails were old
houses, their roofs dimly red through the transparent haze, and above
them appeared a great green cliff, with its uneven outline defined by
the curtain walls and towers of the castle which had made Scarborough a
place of importance in the Civil War and in earlier times.

The wide-curving bay was filled with huge breaking waves which looked
capable of destroying everything within their reach, but they seemed
harmless enough when I looked a little further out, where eight or ten
gray warships were riding at their anchors, apparently motionless.

From the outer arm of the harbour, where the seas were angrily
attempting to dislodge the top row of stones, I could make out the great
mass of gray buildings stretching right to the extremity of the bay.

I tried to pick out individual buildings from this city-like
watering-place, but, beyond discovering the position of the Spa and one
or two of the mightier hotels, I could see very little, and instead fell
to wondering how many landladies and how many foreign waiters the long
lines of gray roofs represented. This raised so many unpleasant
recollections of the various types I had encountered that I determined
to go no nearer to modern Scarborough than the pier-head upon which I
stood. A specially big wave, however, soon drove me from this position
to a drier if more crowded spot, and, reconsidering my objections, I
determined to see something of the innumerable gray streets which make
up the fashionable watering-place. The terraced gardens on the steep
cliffs along the sea-front were most elaborately well kept, but a more
striking feature of Scarborough is the magnificence of so many of the
shops. They suggest a city rather than a seaside town, and give you an
idea of the magnitude of the permanent population of the place as well
as the flood of summer and winter visitors. The origin of Scarborough's
popularity was undoubtedly due to the chalybeate waters of the Spa,
discovered in 1620, almost at the same time as those of Tunbridge Wells
and Epsom.

The unmistakable signs of antiquity in the narrow streets adjoining the
harbour irresistibly remind one of the days when sea-bathing had still
to be popularized, when the efficacy of Scarborough's medicinal spring
had not been discovered, of the days when the place bore as little
resemblance to its present size or appearance as the fishing-town at
Robin Hood's Bay.

We do not know that Piers Gaveston, Sir Hugh Cholmley, and other
notabilities who have left their mark on the pages of Scarborough's
history, might not, were they with us to-day, welcome the pierrot, the
switchback, the restaurant, and other means by which pleasure-loving
visitors wile away their hardly-earned holidays; but for my part the
story of Scarborough's Mayor who was tossed in a blanket is far more
entertaining than the songs of nigger minstrels or any of the commercial
attempts to amuse.

This strangely improper procedure with one who held the highest office
in the municipality took place in the reign of James II., and the King's
leanings towards Popery were the cause of all the trouble.

On April 27, 1688, a declaration for liberty of conscience was
published, and by royal command the said declaration was to be read in
every Protestant church in the land. Mr. Thomas Aislabie, the Mayor of
Scarborough, duly received a copy of the document, and, having handed it
to the clergyman, Mr. Noel Boteler, ordered him to read it in church on
the following Sunday morning. There seems little doubt that the worthy
Mr. Boteler at once recognised a wily move on the part of the King, who
under the cover of general tolerance would foster the growth of the
Roman religion until such time as the Catholics had attained sufficient
power to suppress Protestantism. Mr. Mayor was therefore informed that
the declaration would not be read. On Sunday morning (August 11) when
the omission had been made, the Mayor left his pew, and, stick in hand,
walked up the aisle, seized the minister, and caned him as he stood at
his reading-desk. Scenes of such a nature did not occur every day even
in 1688, and the storm of indignation and excitement among the members
of the congregation did not subside so quickly as it had risen.

The cause of the poor minister was championed in particular by a certain
Captain Ouseley, and the discussion of the matter on the bowling-green
on the following day led to the suggestion that the Mayor should be sent
for to explain his conduct. As he took no notice of a courteous message
requesting his attendance, the Captain repeated the summons accompanied
by a file of musketeers. In the meantime many suggestions for dealing
with Mr. Aislabie in a fitting manner were doubtless made by the
Captain's brother officers, and, further, some settled course of action
seems to have been agreed upon, for we do not hear of any hesitation on
the part of the Captain on the arrival of the Mayor, whose rage must by
this time have been bordering upon apoplexy. A strong blanket was ready,
and Captains Carvil, Fitzherbert, Hanmer, and Rodney, led by Captain
Ouseley and assisted by as many others as could find room, seizing the
sides, in a very few moments Mr. Mayor was revolving and bumping, rising
and falling, as though he were no weight at all.

This public degradation was too much to be borne without substantial
redress. He therefore set out at once for London to obtain satisfaction
from his Sovereign. But Ouseley was wise enough to look after his own
interests in that quarter himself, and in two letters we see the upshot
of the matter.


  'LONDON,

  'September 22, 1688.

  '....Captain Ouseley is said to be come to
   town to give reasons for tossing the mayor of
   Scarborough in a blanket. As part of his plea he
   has brought with him a collection of articles against
   the said mayor, and the attestations of many gentlemen
   of note.'


  'LONDON,

  'September 29, 1688.

  'The mayor of Scarborough and Captain Ouseley,
   who tossed the other in a blanket, were heard last
   night before the council: the Captain pleaded his
   majesty's gracious pardon (which is in the press)
   and so both were dismissed.'


Aislabie was the last of the only five Mayors the town had then known,
and the fact that the office had only been instituted in 1684 seems to
show that what reverence had gathered round the person of the chief
magistrate was not sufficient to stand in the face of such outrageous
conduct as the public caning of the minister. The townsfolk decided that
they had had enough of Mayors, for on November 16 in the same autumn
Scarborough was once more placed under the control of two Bailiffs, as
had been the case previous to 1684.

If the castle does not show many interesting buildings beyond the keep
and the long line of walls and drum-towers, there is so much concerning
it that is of great human interest that I should scarcely feel able to
grumble if there were still fewer remains. Behind the ancient houses in
Quay Street rises the steep, grassy cliff, up which one must climb by
various rough pathways to the fortified summit. On the side facing the
mainland, a hollow, known as the Dyke, is bridged by a tall and narrow
archway, in place of the drawbridge of the seventeenth century and
earlier times. On the same side is a massive gateway, looking across an
open space to St. Mary's Church, which suffered so severely during the
sieges of the castle. The maimed church--for the chancel has never been
rebuilt--looks across the Dyke to the shattered keep, and so apparent
are the results of the cannonading between them that no one requires to
be told that the Parliamentary forces mounted their ordnance in the
chancel and tower of the church, and it is equally apparent that the
Royalists returned the fire hotly.

The great siege lasted for nearly a year, and although his garrison was
small, and there was practically no hope of relief, Sir Hugh Cholmley
seems to have kept a stout heart up to the end. With him throughout this
long period of privation and suffering was his beautiful and courageous
wife, whose comparatively early death, at the age of fifty-four, must to
some extent be attributed to the strain and fatigue borne during these
months of warfare. Sir Hugh seems to have almost worshipped his wife,
for in his memoirs he is never weary of describing her perfections.

'She was of the middle stature of women,' he writes, 'and well shaped,
yet in that not so singular as in the beauty of her face, which was but
of a little model, and yet proportionable to her body; her eyes black
and full of loveliness and sweetness, her eyebrows small and even, as if
drawn with a pencil, a very little, pretty, well-shaped mouth, which
sometimes (especially when in a muse or study) she would draw up into an
incredible little compass; her hair a sad chestnut; her complexion
brown, but clear, with a fresh colour in her cheeks, a loveliness in her
looks inexpressible; and by her whole composure was so beautiful a sweet
creature at her marriage as not many did parallel, few exceed her in the
nation; yet the inward endowments and perfections of her mind did exceed
those outward of her body, being a most pious virtuous person, of great
integrity and discerning judgment in most things.'

Her husband speaks of her 'sweet good-nature,' and of how she was always
ready to be touched with other people's wants before her own. That such
nobleness of character should shine out brilliantly during the siege was
inevitable, and Sir Hugh tells us that, though she was of a timorous
nature, she bore herself during great danger with 'a courage above her
sex.' On one occasion Sir John Meldrum, the Parliamentary commander,
sent proposals to Sir Hugh Cholmley, which he accompanied with savage
threats, that if his terms were not immediately accepted he would make a
general assault on the castle that night, and in the event of one drop
of his men's blood being shed he would give orders for a general
massacre of the garrison, sparing neither man nor woman.

To a man whose devotion to his beautiful wife was so great, a threat of
this nature must have been a severe shock to his determination to hold
out. But from his own writings we are able to picture for ourselves Sir
Hugh's anxious and troubled face lighting up on the approach of the
cause of his chief concern. Lady Cholmley, without any sign of the
inward misgivings or dejection which, with her gentle and shrinking
nature, must have been a great struggle, came to her husband, and
implored him to on no account let her peril influence his decision to
the detriment of his own honour or the King's affairs.

Sir John Meldrum's proposals having been rejected, the garrison prepared
itself for the furious attack commenced on May 11.

The assault was well planned, for while the Governor's attention was
turned towards the gateway leading to the castle entrance, another
attack was made at the southern end of the wall towards the sea, where
until the year 1730 Charles's Tower stood. The bloodshed at this point
was greater than at the gateway. At the head of a chosen division of
troops, Sir John Meldrum climbed the almost precipitous ascent with
wonderful courage, only to meet with such spirited resistance on the
part of the besieged that, when the attack was abandoned, it was
discovered that Meldrum had received a dangerous wound penetrating to
his thigh, and that several of his officers and men had been killed.
Meanwhile, at the gateway, the first success of the assailants had been
checked at the foot of the Grand Tower or Keep, for at that point the
rush of drab-coated and helmeted men was received by such a shower of
stones and missiles that many stumbled and were crushed on the steep
pathway. Not even Cromwell's men could continue to face such a
reception, and before very long the Governor could embrace his wife in
the knowledge that the great attack had failed.

In between such scenes as these, when the air was filled with the shouts
and yells of attackers and besieged, when the crack of the muskets and
the intermittent reports of the cannon almost deafened her, Lady
Cholmley was assiduously attending to the wounded and the many cases of
scurvy, which was rampant among the garrison. One of her maids who
shared these labours crept out of the castle one night with a view to
reaching the town and escaping further drudgery and privations; but a
Roundhead sentry discovered her and sent her back to the castle,
thinking that she was a spy. When the great keep was partially
destroyed, Lady Cholmley was forced 'to lie in a little cabbin on the
ground several months together, when she took a defluction of rhume upon
one of her eyes, which troubled her ever after, and got also a touch of
the scurvy then rife in the castle, and of which it is thought she was
not well after.' Who can wonder that Sir Hugh appreciated the courage of
this noble lady, and I marvel still more at her fortitude when I read of
the frailties her husband mentions so gently, fearing, no doubt, that
without a few shadows no one would accept his picture as genuine. 'If
she had taken impression of anything, it was hard to remove it with
reason or argument, till she had considered of it herself; neither could
she well endure adversity or crosses, though it pleased the Lord to
exercise her with them, by my many troubles and the calamity of the
times. She would be much troubled at evils which could neither be
prevented nor remedied, and sometimes discontented without any great
cause, especially in her disposition of health; for, being of a tender
constitution, and spun of a fine thread, every disaster took impression
on her body and mind, and would make her both sick and often inclinable
to be melancholy, especially in my absence.'

At last, on July 22, 1645--his forty-fifth birthday--Sir Hugh was forced
to come to an agreement with the enemy, by which he honourably
surrendered the castle three days later. It was a sad procession that
wound its way down the steep pathway, littered with the debris of broken
masonry: for many of Sir Hugh's officers and soldiers were in such a
weak condition that they had to be carried out in sheets or helped along
between two men, and the Parliamentary officer adds, rather tersely,
that 'the rest were not very fit to march.' The scurvy had depleted the
ranks of the defenders to such an extent that the women in the castle,
despite the presence of Lady Cholmley, threatened to stone the Governor
unless he capitulated.

The reduction of Scarborough Castle was considered a profound success to
the side of the Parliament, 'The Moderate Intelligencer' of July 23,
1645, announcing the fact with great satisfaction, 'we heare likewise
that _Scarborough_ is also yeelded into our hands, Sir Hugh hath none
other conditions for himself, but with his wife and children passe
beyond seas. This is excellent good newes, and is a very terrible blow
to the enemy.'

Three years later the castle was again besieged by the Parliamentary
forces, for Colonel Matthew Boynton, the Governor, had declared for the
King. The garrison held out from August to December, when terms were
made with Colonel Hugh Bethell, by which the Governor, officers,
gentlemen, and soldiers, marched out with 'their colours flying, drums
beating, musquets loaden, bandeleers filled, matches lighted, and bullet
in mouth, to a close called Scarborough Common,' where they laid down
their arms.

Before I leave Scarborough I must go back to early times, in order that
the antiquity of the place may not be slighted owing to the omission of
any reference to the town in the Domesday Book. Tosti, Count of
Northumberland, who, as everyone knows, was brother of the Harold who
fought at Senlac Hill, had brought about an insurrection of the
Northumbrians, and having been dispossessed by his brother, he revenged
himself by inviting the help of Haralld Hadrada, King of Norway. The
Norseman promptly accepted the offer, and, taking with him his family
and an army of warriors, sailed for the Shetlands, where Tosti joined
him. The united forces then came down the east coast of Britain until
they reached Scardaburgum, where they landed and prepared to fight the
inhabitants. The town was then built entirely of timber, and there was,
apparently, no castle of any description on the great hill, for the
Norsemen, finding their opponents inclined to offer a stout resistance,
tried other tactics. They gained possession of the hill, constructed a
huge fire, and when the wood was burning fiercely, flung the blazing
brands down on to the wooden houses below. The fire spread from one hut
to another with sufficient speed to drive out the defenders, who in the
confusion which followed were slaughtered by the enemy.

This occurred in the momentous year 1066, when Harold, having defeated
the Norsemen and slain Haralld Hadrada at Stamford Bridge, had to hurry
southwards to meet William the Norman at Hastings. It is not surprising,
therefore, that the compilers of the Conqueror's survey should have
failed to record the existence of the blackened embers of what had once
been a town. But such a site as the castle hill could not long remain
idle in the stormy days of the Norman Kings, and William le Gros, Earl
of Albemarle and Lord of Holderness, recognising the natural
defensibility of the rock, built the massive walls which have withstood
so many assaults, and even now form the most prominent feature of
Scarborough.



CHAPTER VI

WHITBY


  'Behold the glorious summer sea
   As night's dark wings unfold,
   And o'er the waters, 'neath the stars,
   The harbour lights behold.'

E. Teschemacher.

Despite a huge influx of summer visitors, and despite the modern town
which has grown up to receive them, Whitby is still one of the most
strikingly picturesque towns in England. But at the same time, if one
excepts the abbey, the church, and the market-house, there are scarcely
any architectural attractions in the town. The charm of the place does
not lie so much in detail as in broad effects. The narrow streets have
no surprises in the way of carved-oak brackets or curious panelled
doorways, although narrow passages and steep flights of stone steps
abound. On the other hand, the old parts of the town, when seen from a
distance, are always presenting themselves in new apparel.

In the early morning the East Cliff generally appears merely as a pale
gray silhouette with a square projection representing the church, and a
fretted one the abbey. But as the sun climbs upwards, colour and
definition grow out of the haze of smoke and shadows, and the roofs
assume their ruddy tones. At mid-day, when the sunlight pours down upon
the medley of houses clustered along the face of the cliff, the scene is
brilliantly coloured. The predominant note is the red of the chimneys
and roofs and stray patches of brickwork, but the walls that go down to
the water's edge are green below and full of rich browns above, and in
many places the sides of the cottages are coloured with an ochre wash,
while above them all the top of the cliff appears covered with grass. On
a clear day, when detached clouds are passing across the sun, the houses
are sometimes lit up in the strangest fashion, their quaint outlines
being suddenly thrown out from the cliff by a broad patch of shadow upon
the grass and rocks behind. But there is scarcely a chimney in this old
part of Whitby that does not contribute to the mist of blue-gray smoke
that slowly drifts up the face of the cliff, and thus, when there is no
bright sunshine, colour and detail are subdued in the haze.

In many towns whose antiquity and picturesqueness are more popular than
the attractions of Whitby, the railway deposits one in some
distressingly ugly modern excrescence, from which it may even be
necessary for a stranger to ask his way to the old-world features he has
come to see. But at Whitby the railway, without doing any harm to the
appearance of the town, at once gives a visitor as typical a scene of
fishing-life as he will ever find. When the tide is up and the wharves
are crowded with boats, this upper portion of Whitby Harbour is at its
best, and to step from the railway compartment entered at King's Cross
into this busy scene is an experience to be remembered.

In the deepening twilight of a clear evening the harbour gathers to
itself the additional charm of mysterious indefiniteness, and among the
long-drawn-out reflections appear sinuous lines of yellow light beneath
the lamps by the bridge. Looking towards the ocean from the outer
harbour, one sees the massive arms which Whitby has thrust into the
waves, holding aloft the steady lights that


  'Safely guide the mighty ships
   Into the harbour bay.'

If we keep to the waterside, modern Whitby has no terrors for us. It is
out of sight, and might therefore have never existed. But when we have
crossed the bridge, and passed along the narrow thoroughfare known as
Church Street to the steps leading up the face of the cliff, we must
prepare ourselves for a new aspect of the town. There, upon the top of
the West Cliff, stand rows of sad-looking and dun-coloured
lodging-houses, relieved by the aggressive bulk of a huge hotel, with
corner turrets, that frowns savagely at the unfinished crescent, where
there are many apartments with 'rooms facing the sea.' The only
redeeming feature of this modern side of Whitby is the circumscribed
area it occupies, so that the view from the top of the 199 steps we have
climbed is not altogether vitiated. A distinctive feature of the west
side of the river has been lost in the sails of the Union Mill, which
were taken down some years ago, and the solid brick building where many
of the Whitby people, by the excellent method of cooperation, obtained
their flour at reduced prices is now the headquarters of some
volunteers.

The town seems to have no idea of re-erecting the sails of the windmill,
and as I have so far heard of no scheme for demolishing the
unpleasant-looking houses on the West Cliff, we will shut our eyes to
these shortcomings, and admit that the task is not difficult in the
presence of such a superb view over Whitby's glorious surroundings. We
look over the chimney-stacks of the topmost houses, and see the silver
Esk winding placidly in the deep channel it has carved for itself; and
further away we see the far-off moorland heights, brown and blue, where
the sources of the broad river down below are fed by the united efforts
of innumerable tiny streams deep in the heather. Behind us stands the
massive-looking parish church, with its Norman tower, so sturdily built
that its height seems scarcely greater than its breadth. There is surely
no other church with such a ponderous exterior that is so completely
deceptive as to its internal aspect, for St. Mary's contains the most
remarkable series of beehive-like galleries that were ever crammed into
a parish church. They are not merely very wide and ill-arranged, but
they are superposed one above the other. The free use of white paint all
over the sloping tiers of pews has prevented the interior from being as
dark as it would have otherwise been, but the result of all this painted
deal has been to give the building the most eccentric and indecorous
appearance. Still, there are few who will fail to thank the good folks
of Whitby for preserving an ecclesiastical curiosity of such an unusual
nature. The box-pews on the floor of the church are separated by very
narrow gangways--we cannot call them aisles--and the gallery across the
chancel arch is particularly noticeable for the twisted wooden columns
supporting it. Various pews in the transepts and elsewhere have been
reserved for many generations for the use of people from outlying
villages, such as Aislaby, Ugglebarnby, and Hawskercum-Stainsacre, and
it was this necessity for accommodating a very large congregation that
taxed the ingenuity of the churchwardens, and resulted in the strange
interior existing to-day.

The early history of Whitby from the time of the landing of Roman
soldiers in Dunsley Bay seems to be very closely associated with the
abbey founded by Hilda about two years after the battle of Winwidfield,
fought on November 15, A.D. 654; but I will not venture to state an
opinion here as to whether there was any town at Streoneshalh before the
building of the abbey, or whether the place that has since become known
as Whitby grew on account of the presence of the abbey. Such matters as
these have been fought out by an expert in the archaeology of
Cleveland--the late Canon Atkinson, who seemed to take infinite pleasure
in demolishing the elaborately constructed theories of those painstaking
historians of the eighteenth century, Dr. Young and Mr. Lionel Charlton.

Many facts, however, which throw light on the early days of the abbey
are now unassailable. We see that Hilda must have been a most remarkable
woman for her times, instilling into those around her a passion for
learning as well as right-living, for despite the fact that they worked
and prayed in rude wooden buildings, with walls formed, most probably,
of split tree-trunks, after the fashion of the church at Greenstead in
Essex, we find the institution producing, among others, such men as Bosa
and John, both Bishops of York, and such a poet as Caadmon. The legend
of his inspiration, however, may be placed beside the story of how the
saintly Abbess turned the snakes into the fossil ammonites with which
the liassic shores of Whitby are strewn. Hilda, who probably died in the
year 680, was succeeded by Aelfleda, the daughter of King Oswin of
Northumbria, whom she had trained in the abbey, and there seems little
doubt that her pupil carried on successfully the beneficent work of the
foundress.

Aelfleda had the support of her mother's presence as well as the wise
counsels of Bishop Trumwine, who had taken refuge at Streoneshalh, after
having been driven from his own sphere of work by the depredations of
the Picts and Scots. We then learn that Aelfleda died at the age of
fifty-nine, but from that year--probably 713--a complete silence falls
upon the work of the abbey; for if any records were made during the next
century and a half, they have been totally lost. About the year 867 the
Danes reached this part of Yorkshire, and we know that they laid waste
the abbey, and most probably the town also; but the invaders gradually
started new settlements, or 'bys,' and Whitby must certainly have grown
into a place of some size by the time of Edward the Confessor, for just
previous to the Norman invasion it was assessed for Danegeld to the
extent of a sum equivalent to L3,500 at the present time.

After the Conquest a monk named Reinfrid succeeded in reviving a
monastery on the site of the old one, having probably gained the
permission of William de Percy, the lord of the district. The new
establishment, however, was for monks only, and was for some time
merely a priory.

The form of the successive buildings from the time of Hilda until the
building of the stately abbey church, whose ruins are now to be seen, is
a subject of great interest, but, unfortunately, there are few facts to
go upon. The very first church was, as I have already suggested, a
building of rude construction, scarcely better than the humble dwellings
of the monks and nuns. The timber walls were most probably thatched, and
the windows would be of small lattice or boards pierced with small
holes. Gradually the improvements brought about would have led to the
use of stone for the walls, and the buildings destroyed by the Danes
probably resembled such examples of Anglo-Saxon work as may still be
seen in the churches of Bradford-on-Avon and Monkwearmouth.

The buildings erected by Reinfrid under the Norman influence then
prevailing in England must have been a slight advance upon the destroyed
fabric, and we know that during the time of his successor, Serlo de
Percy, there was a certain Godfrey in charge of the building operations,
and there is every reason to believe that he completed the church during
the fifty years of prosperity the monastery passed through at that time.
But this was not the structure which survived, for towards the end of
Stephen's reign, or during that of Henry II., the unfortunate convent
was devastated by the King of Norway, who entered the harbour, and, in
the words of the chronicle, 'laid waste everything, both within doors
and without.' The abbey slowly recovered from this disaster, and if any
church were built on the ruins between 1160 and the reconstruction
commenced in 1220, there is no part of it surviving to-day in the
beautiful ruin that still makes a conspicuous landmark from the sea.

It was after the Dissolution that the abbey buildings came into the
hands of Sir Richard Cholmley, who paid over to Henry VIII. the sum of
L333 8s. 4d. The manors of Eskdaleside and Ugglebarnby, with all 'their
rights, members and appurtenances as they formerly had belonged to the
abbey of Whitby,' henceforward belonged to Sir Richard and his
successors. Sir Hugh Cholmley, whose defence of Scarborough Castle has
made him a name in history, was born on July 22, 1600, at Roxby, near
Pickering. He has been justly called 'the father of Whitby,' and it is
to him we owe a fascinating account of his life at Whitby in Stuart and
Jacobean times. He describes how he lived for some time in the
gate-house of the abbey buildings, 'till my house was repaired and
habitable, which then was very ruinous and all unhandsome, the wall
being only of timber and plaster, and ill-contrived within: and besides
the repairs, or rather re-edifying the house, I built the stable and
barn, I heightened the outwalls of the court double to what they were,
and made all the wall round about the paddock; so that the place hath
been improved very much, both for beauty and profit, by me more than all
my ancestors, for there was not a tree about the house but was set in my
time, and almost by my own hand. The Court levels, which laid upon a
hanging ground, unhandsomely, very ill-watered, having only the low
well, which is in the Almsers-close, which I covered; and also
discovered, and erected, the other adjoining conduit, and the well in
the courtyard from whence I conveyed by leaden pipes water into the
house, brewhouse, and washhouse.'

In the spring of 1636 the reconstruction of the abbey house was
finished, and Sir Hugh moved in with his family. 'My dear wife,' he
says, '(who was excellent at dressing and making all handsome within
doors) had put it into a fine posture, and furnished with many good
things, so that, I believe, there were few gentlemen in the country, of
my rank, exceeded it.... I was at this time made Deputy-lieutenant and
Colonel over the Train-bands within the hundred of Whitby Strand,
Ryedale, Pickering, Lythe and Scarborough town; for that, my father
being dead, the country looked upon me as the chief of my family.'

Sir Hugh had been somewhat addicted to gambling in his younger days, and
had made a few debts of his own before he undertook to deal with his
father's heavy liabilities, and in the early years of his married life
he had been very much taken up with the difficult and arduous work of
paying off the amounts due to the clamorous creditors. During this
process he had been forced to live very quietly, and had incidentally
sifted out his real friends from among his relations and acquaintances.
Thus, it is with pardonable pride that he says: 'Having mastered my
debts, I did not only appear at all public meetings in a very
gentlemanly equipage, but lived in as handsome and plentiful fashion at
home as any gentleman in all the country, of my rank. I had between
thirty and forty in my ordinary family, a chaplain who said prayers
every morning at six, and again before dinner and supper, a porter who
merely attended the gates, which were ever shut up before dinner, when
the bell rung to prayers, and not opened till one o'clock, except for
some strangers who came to dinner, which was ever fit to receive three
or four besides my family, without any trouble; and whatever their fare
was, they were sure to have a hearty welcome. Twice a week, a certain
number of old people, widows and indigent persons, were served at my
gates with bread and good pottage made of beef, which I mention that
those which succeed may follow the example.' Not content with merely
benefiting the aged folk of his town, Sir Hugh took great pains to
extend the piers, and in 1632 went to London to petition the
'Council-table' to allow a general contribution for this purpose
throughout the country. As a result of his efforts, 'all that part of
the pier to the west end of the harbour' was erected, and yet he
complains that, though it was the means of preserving a large section of
the town from the sea, the townsfolk would not interest themselves in
the repairs necessitated by force of the waves. 'I wish, with all my
heart,' he exclaims, 'the next generation may have more public spirit.'

Sir Hugh Cholmley also built a market-house for the town, and removed
the bridge to its present position. Owing to rebuilding, neither of
these actual works remains with us to-day, but their influence on the
progress of Whitby must have been considerable.

On a June morning in the year after Sir Hugh had settled down so
handsomely in his refurbished house, two Dutch men-of-war chased into
the harbour 'a small pickroon belonging to the King of Spain.' The
Hollanders had 400 men in one ship and 200 in the other, but the
Spaniard had only thirty men and two small guns. The Holland ships
proceeded to anchor outside the harbour, and, lowering their longboats,
sent ashore forty men, all armed with pistols. But the Spaniards had
been on the alert, and having warped their vessel to a safer position
above the bridge, they placed their two guns on the deck, and every man
prepared himself to defend the ship.

'I, having notice of this,' writes Sir Hugh, 'fearing they might do here
the like affront as they did at Scarborough, where they landed one
hundred men, and took a ship belonging to the King of Spain out of the
harbour, sent for the Holland Captains, and ordered them not to offer
any act of hostility; for that the Spaniard was the King's friend, and
to have protection in his ports. After some expostulations, they
promised not to meddle with the Dunkirker [Spaniard] if he offered no
injury to them; which I gave him strict charge against, and to trust to
the King's protection. These Holland Captains leaving me, and going into
the town, sent for the Dunkirk Captain to dine with them, and soon after
took occasion to quarrel with him, at the same time ordered their men to
fall on the Dunkirk ship, which they soon surprised, the Captain and
most of the men being absent. I being in my courtyard, and hearing some
pistols discharged, and being told the Dunkirker and Hollanders were at
odds, made haste unto the town, having only a cane in my hand, and one
that followed me without any weapon, thinking my presence would pacify
all differences. When I came to the river-side, on the sand between the
coal-yard and the bridge, I found the Holland Captain with a pistol in
his hand, calling to his men, then in the Dunkirk ship, to send a boat
for him. I gave him good words, and held him in treaty until I got near
him, and then, giving a leap on him, caught hold of his pistol, which I
became master of; yet not without some hazard from the ship, for one
from thence levelled a musket at me; but I espying it, turned the
Captain between me and him, which prevented his shooting.'

When Sir Hugh had secured the Captain, he sent a boatload of men to
retake the ship, and as soon as the Hollanders saw it approaching, they
fled to their own vessels outside the harbour. In the afternoon Sir Hugh
intercepted a letter to his prisoner, telling him to be of good cheer,
for at midnight they would land 200 men and bring him away. This was a
serious matter, and Sir Hugh sent to Sir John Hotham, the High Sheriff
of the county, who at once came from Fyling, and summoned all the
adjacent train-bands. There were about 200 men on guard all through the
night, and evidently the Hollanders had observed the activity on shore,
for they made no attack. The ships continued to hover outside the
harbour for two or three days, until Sir Hugh sent the Captain to York.
He was afterwards taken to London, where he remained a prisoner, after
the fashion of those times, for nearly two years.

It was after the troublous times of the Civil War that Sir Hugh
re-established himself at Whitby, and opened a new era of prosperity for
himself and the townsfolk in the alum-works at Saltwick Nab.



CHAPTER VII

THE CLEVELAND HILLS

On their their northern and western flanks the Cleveland Hills have a
most imposing and mountainous aspect, although their greatest altitudes
do not aspire more than about 1,500 feet. But they rise so suddenly to
their full height out of the flat sea of green country that they often
appear as a coast defended by a bold range of mountains. Roseberry
Topping stands out in grim isolation, on its masses of alum rock, like a
huge seaworn crag, considerably over 1,000 feet high. But this strangely
menacing peak raises its defiant head over nothing but broad meadows,
arable land, and woodlands, and his only warfare is with the lower
strata of storm-clouds, which is a convenient thing for the people who
live in these parts; for long ago they used the peak as a sign of
approaching storms, having reduced the warning to the easily-remembered
couplet:

    'When Roseberry Topping wears a cap, 
     Let Cleveland then beware of a clap.'

In a similar manner the Scarborough folk used Oliver's Mount, the
isolated hill at the back of the town, as a ready-made barometer, for
they knew that

  'When Oliver's Mount puts on his hat,
   Scarborough town will pay for that.'

It is difficult to decide on the correct spelling of Roseberry Topping,
as it is often spelt in the same way as the earldom, and as frequently
in old writings it appears as 'Rosebury.' Camden, who wrote in Tudor
times, called it Ounsberry Topping, which certainly does not
help matters.

From the fact that you can see this remarkable peak from almost every
point of the compass except south-westwards, it must follow that from
the top of the hill there are views in all those directions. But to see
so much of the country at once comes as a surprise to everyone.
Stretching inland towards the backbone of England, there is spread out a
huge tract of smiling country, covered with a most complex network of
hedges, which gradually melt away into the indefinite blue edge of the
world where the hills of Wensleydale rise from the plain. Looking across
the little town of Guisborough, lying near the shelter of the hills, to
the broad sweep of the North Sea, this piece of Yorkshire seems so small
that one almost expects to see the Cheviots away in the north. But,
beyond the winding Tees and the drifting smoke of the great
manufacturing towns on its banks, one must be content with the county of
Durham, a huge section of which is plainly visible. Turning towards the
brown moorlands, the cultivation is exchanged for ridge beyond ridge of
total desolation--a huge tract of land in this crowded England where the
population for many square miles at a time consists of the inmates of a
lonely farm or two in the circumscribed cultivated areas of the dales.

Eight or nine hundred years ago these valleys were choked up with
forests. The Early British inhabitants were more inclined to the
hill-tops than the hollows, if the innumerable indications of their
settlements be any guide, and there is every reason for believing that
many of the hollows in the folds of the heathery moorlands were rarely
visited by man. Thus, the suggestion has been made that a few of the
last representatives of now extinct monsters may have survived in these
wild retreats, for how otherwise do we find persistent stories in these
parts of Yorkshire, handed down we cannot tell how many centuries, of
strange creatures described as 'worms'? At Loftus they show you the spot
where a 'grisly worm' had its lair, and in many places there are
traditions of strange long-bodied dragons who were slain by various
valiant men.

When we remember that the last wolf was killed in Scotland in the
seventeenth century, that Africa is still adding to the list of living
animals, and that the caves at Kirkdale, near Kirby Moorside, revealed
the bones of elephants, tigers, hyenas, and rhinoceroses, in an
excellent state of preservation, though they were all broken, we are
inclined to believe that these strange stories may have had some
basis of fact.

On Easby Moor, a few miles to the south of Roseberry Topping, the tall
column to the memory of Captain Cook stands like a lighthouse on this
inland coast-line. The lofty position it occupies among these brown and
purply-green heights makes the monument visible over a great tract of
the sailor's native Cleveland. The people who live in Marton, the
village of his birthplace, can see the memorial of their hero's fame,
and the country lads of to-day are constantly reminded of the success
which attended the industry and perseverance of a humble Marton boy.

The cottage where James Cook was born in 1728 has gone, but the field in
which it stood is called Cook's Garth. The shop at Staithes, generally
spoken of as a 'huckster's,' where Cook was apprenticed as a boy, has
also disappeared; but, unfortunately, that unpleasant story of his
having taken a shilling from his master's till, when the attractions of
the sea proved too much for him to resist, persistently clings to all
accounts of his early life. There seems no evidence to convict him of
this theft, but there are equally no facts by which to clear him. But if
we put into the balance his subsequent term of employment at Whitby, the
excellent character he gained when he went to sea, and Professor J.K.
Laughton's statement that he left Staithes 'after some disagreement with
his master,' there seems every reason to believe that the story is
untrue. If it were otherwise, the towering monument on Easby Moor would
be a questionable inspiration to posterity.

I have seldom seen a more uninhabited and inhospitable-looking country
than the broad extent of purple hills that stretch away to the
south-west from Great Ayton and Kildale Moors. Walking from Guisborough
to Kildale on a wild and stormy afternoon in October, I was totally
alone for the whole distance when I had left behind me the baker's boy
who was on his way to Hutton with a heavy basket of bread and cakes.
Hutton, which is somewhat of a model village for the retainers attached
to Hutton Hall, stands in a lovely hollow at the edge of the moors. The
steep hills are richly clothed with sombre woods, and the peace and
seclusion reigning there is in marked contrast to the bleak wastes
above. When I climbed the steep road on that autumn afternoon, and,
passing the zone of tall, withered bracken, reached the open moorland, I
seemed to have come out merely to be the plaything of the elements; for
the south-westerly gale, when it chose to do so, blew so fiercely that
it was difficult to make any progress at all. Overhead was a dark roof
composed of heavy masses of cloud, forming long parallel lines of gray
right to the horizon. On each side of the rough, water-worn road the
heather made a low wall, two or three feet high, and stretched right
away to the horizon in every direction. In the lulls, between the fierce
blasts, I could hear the trickle of the water in the rivulets deep down
in the springy cushion of heather. A few nimble sheep would stare at me
from a distance, and then disappear, or some grouse might hover over a
piece of rising ground; but otherwise there were no signs of living
creatures. Nearing Kildale, the road suddenly plunged downwards to a
stream flowing through a green, cultivated valley, with a lonely farm on
the further slope. There was a fir-wood above this, and as I passed over
the hill, among the tall, bare stems, the clouds parted a little in the
west, and let a flood of golden light into the wood. Instantly the gloom
seemed to disappear, and beyond the dark shoulder of moorland, where the
Cook monument appeared against the glory of the sunset, there seemed to
reign an all-pervading peace, the wood being quite silent, for the wind
had dropped.

The rough track through the trees descended hurriedly, and soon gave a
wide view over Kildale. The valley was full of colour from the glowing
west, and the steep hillsides opposite appeared lighter than the indigo
clouds above, now slightly tinged with purple. The little village of
Kildale nestled down below, its church half buried in yellow foliage.

The railway comes through Eskdale from Whitby to Stockton-on-Tees, and
thus gives the formerly remote valley easy communication with the
outside world. It is dangerous, however, not to allow an ample margin
for catching the trains, for there are only two or three in each
direction in the autumn and winter, and a gap of about four hours
generally separates the trains. I had been a long ramble over the moors
on the north side of Eskdale, and had allowed the sun to set while I was
still drawing on the top of Danby Beacon. But, having a good map with
me, I was quite confident of finding the road to Lealholm without
difficulty, as the distance was only a very few miles.

The crimson globe in the west disappeared behind the dark horizon over
the two Fryup valleys, and left the world in twilight. But it would not
be dark for an hour, and except for mistaking the sheep for boulders and
boulders for sheep, and being consequently surprised when what I had
imagined was a mass of gray stone suddenly disappeared on my approach,
nothing unusual happened. I had no fear of losing my way, but what my
map had led me to believe would be a plain road was a mere track in the
heather, and at times it became too indistinct to follow easily.
Lealholm Station lay in the valley on my right, but I could find no road
leading there, and I wasted precious time in frequent consultations with
the map. Coming to a farm, I inquired the way, and was directed over a
number of muddy fields, which gradually brought me down into the valley.
It was now sufficiently dark for all the landmarks I had noticed to be
scarcely visible, but, on inquiring at a cottage, I was told that it
would take only ten minutes to walk to the station. I had a clear
quarter of an hour, and, hurrying forward, soon found myself on a
railway-bridge over a deep cutting. There was just enough light to see
that no station was in sight, and it was impossible to find in which
direction the station lay. There was no time to go back to the cottage,
and there were no others to be seen. Looking at the map again, I could
not discover the position of this bridge, for it was on no road, as it
seemed merely to connect the pastures on either side. However, I felt
fairly certain that I had rather overstepped the station, and therefore
climbed down the bank into the cutting, and commenced walking towards
the west. Coming out into the open, I thought I saw the lamps on the
platforms about half a mile further on; but on pressing forward the
lights became suddenly bigger, and in a minute my train passed me with a
thundering rush. Evidently Lealholm was to the east, and not the west of
that cutting. It was then 5.40, and the next train left for Whitby at
about a quarter to ten. When the tail-lights of the train had
disappeared into the cutting, I felt very much alone, and the silence of
the countryside became oppressive. It seemed to me that this part of
Yorkshire was just as lonely as when Canon Atkinson first commenced his
work in Danby parish, and I was reminded of his friend's remark on
hearing that he was going there: 'Why, Danby was not found out when they
sent Bonaparte to St. Helena, or else they never would have taken the
trouble to send him all the way there!'

The ruined Danby Castle can still be seen on the slope above the Esk,
but the ancient Bow Bridge at Castleton, which was built at the end of
the twelfth century, was barbarously and needlessly destroyed in 1873. A
picture of the bridge has, fortunately, been preserved in Canon
Atkinson's 'Forty Years in a Moorland Parish.' That book has been so
widely read that it seems scarcely necessary to refer to it here, but
without the help of the Vicar, who knew every inch of his wild parish,
the Danby district must seem much less interesting.



CHAPTER VIII

GUISBOROUGH AND THE SKELTON VALLEY


Although a mere fragment of the Augustinian Priory of Guisborough is
standing to-day, it is sufficiently imposing to convey a powerful
impression of the former size and magnificence of the monastic church.
This fragment is the gracefully buttressed east end of the choir, which
rises from the level meadow-land to the east of the town. The stonework
is now of a greenish-gray tone, but in the shadows there is generally a
look of blue. Beyond the ruin and through the opening of the great east
window, now bare of tracery, you see the purple moors, with the
ever-formidable Roseberry Topping holding its head above the green woods
and pastures.

The destruction of the priory took place most probably during the reign
of Henry VIII., but there are no recorded facts to give the date of the
spoiling of the stately buildings. The materials were probably sold to
the highest bidder, for in the town of Guisborough there are scattered
many fragments of richly-carved stone, and Ord, one of the historians of
Cleveland, says: 'I have beheld with sorrow, and shame, and indignation,
the richly ornamented columns and carved architraves of God's temple
supporting the thatch of a pig-house.'

The Norman priory church, founded in 1119, by the wealthy Robert de Brus
of Skelton, was, unfortunately, burnt down on May 16, 1289. Walter of
Hemingburgh, a canon of Guisborough, has written a quaintly detailed
account of the origin of the fire. Translated from the monkish Latin, he
says: 'On the first day of rogation-week, a devouring flame consumed our
church of Gysburn, with many theological books and nine costly chalices,
as well as vestments and sumptuous images; and because past events are
serviceable as a guide to future inquiries, I have thought it desirable,
in the present little treatise, to give an account of the catastrophe,
that accidents of a similar nature may be avoided through this calamity
allotted to us. On the day above mentioned, which was very destructive
to us, a vile plumber, with his two workmen, burnt our church whilst
soldering up two holes in the old lead with fresh pewter. For some days
he had already, with a wicked disposition, commenced, and placed his
iron crucibles, along with charcoal and fire, on rubbish, or steps of a
great height, upon dry wood with some turf and other combustibles. About
noon (in the cross, in the body of the church, where he remained at his
work until after Mass) he descended before the procession of the
convent, thinking that the fire had been put out by his workmen. They,
however, came down quickly after him, without having completely
extinguished the fire; and the fire among the charcoal revived, and
partly from the heat of the iron, and partly from the sparks of the
charcoal, the fire spread itself to the wood and other combustibles
beneath. After the fire was thus commenced, the lead melted, and the
joists upon the beams ignited; and then the fire increased prodigiously,
and consumed everything.' Hemingburgh concludes by saying that all that
they could get from the culprits was the exclamation, 'Quid potui ego?'
Shortly after this disaster the Prior and convent wrote to Edward II.,
excusing themselves from granting a corrody owing to their great losses
through the burning of the monastery, as well as the destruction of
their property by the Scots. But Guisborough, next to Fountains, was
almost the richest establishment in Yorkshire, and thus in a few years'
time there arose from the Norman foundations a stately church and
convent built in the Early Decorated style.

Glimpses of the inner life of the priory are given in the Archbishop's
registers at York, which show how close and searching were the
visitations by the Archbishop in person or his commissioners, and one of
the documents throws light on the sad necessity for these inspections.
It deals with Archbishop Wickwaine's visit in 1280, and we find that the
canons are censured for many short-comings. They were not to go outside
the cloister after compline (the last service of the day) on the pretext
of visiting guests. They were not to keep expensive schools for rich or
poor, unless with special sanction. They were to turn out of the
infirmary and punish the persons lying there who were only pretending to
be ill, and the really sick were to be more kindly treated. There had
evidently been discrimination in the quality of food served out to
certain persons in the frater; but this was to be stopped, and food of
one kind was to be divided equally. A more strict silence was to be kept
in the cloister, and no one was to refrain from joining in the praises
of God whilst in the choir. There seems to have been much improper
conversation among the canons, for they are specially adjured in Christ
to abstain from repeating immoral stories. Some of the canons who had
made themselves notorious for quarrelling and caballing were to be
debarred from promotion, and were commended to the Prior and Subprior
for punishment.

In 1309 Simon Constable, a refractory canon of Bridlington, was sent to
Guisborough to undergo a course of penance, change of residence being
always considered to give an excellent opportunity for thorough reform.
However, in this case no good seems to have resulted, for about five
years later he was sent back to Bridlington with a worse character than
before, and, besides much prayer and humiliation, he was to receive a
_disciplina_ every Friday at the hands of the Prior. This made no
improvement in his conduct, for in 1321 his behaviour brought him
another penance and still greater severity. A few years after this the
Archbishop seems to have reproached the community for the conduct of
this unruly brother, which was scarcely fair. The last vision of Simon
Constable shows him to be as impenitent as ever, and the Archbishop
makes the awful threat that, if he does not reform at once, he will be
put in a more confined place than he has ever been in before! Can this
suggest that the wicked canon was to be bricked up alive?

These internal troubles were not, however, generally known to the
outside world, but the unfaltering searchlight of the records falls upon
such great folk as Peter de Mauley, fifth Baron Mulgrave, whose castle
at Mulgrave, near Whitby, is mentioned elsewhere; Lucy de Thweng, wife
of Sir William le Latimer; Sir Nicholas de Meynyl; and Katherine, wife
of Sir John Dentorp, whose conduct merely reflected the morals of
medieval times. It was, indeed, no uncommon event for the congregation
to hear some high-born culprit confessing his sins as he walked barefoot
and scantily clothed in the procession in York Minster. An exceedingly
beautiful crucifix of copper, richly gilded, was discovered during the
early part of last century, when some men were digging amongst the
foundations of an old building in Commondale. There seems little doubt
that this was a cell or chapel belonging to the monastery, for the
crucifix bears the date 1119, the year of the founding of Guisborough
Priory. Another metal crucifix, probably belonging to the thirteenth
century, was discovered at Ingleby Arncliffe. It was beautifully inlaid
with brilliant white, green, red, and blue enamels, and the figure of
Christ was discovered to be hollow, and to contain two ancient
parchments, written in monkish Latin and scarcely legible. One of them
was a charm, addressed to 'ye elves, and demons and all kind of
apparition,' who were called upon in the name of the Trinity, the Virgin
Mary, the Apostles, Martyrs, Mark, Matthew, Luke, and John, and the
elect generally, to 'hurt not this servant of God, Adam Osanna, by night
nor by day, but that, through the very great mercy of God Jesus Christ,
by the help of Saint Mary, the mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, he may
rest in peace from all the aforesaid and other evils.'

Another intensely interesting relic of the great priory is the
altar-tomb, believed to be that of Robert de Brus of Annandale. The
stone slabs are now built into the walls on each side of the porch of
Guisborough Church. They may have been removed there from the abbey for
safety at the time of the dissolution. Hemingburgh, in his chronicle for
the year 1294, says: 'Robert de Brus the fourth died on the eve of Good
Friday; who disputed with John de Balliol, before the King of England,
about the succession to the kingdom of Scotland. And, as he ordered when
alive, he was buried in the priory of Gysburn with great honour, beside
his own father.' A great number of other famous people were buried here
in accordance with their wills. Guisborough has even been claimed as the
resting-place of Robert Bruce, the champion of Scottish freedom, but
there is ample evidence for believing that his heart was buried at
Melrose Abbey and his body in the church of Dunfermline.

The memory of Mr. George Venables--that most excellent man who devoted
many years to gathering funds for a charity school in the town--is
preserved on a monument in the church. He had retired from business,
but, in order to find the means to start the school, he resumed his
labours in London, and devoted the whole of the profits to this
useful object.

The central portion of the town of Guisborough, by the market-cross and
the two chief inns, is quaint and fairly picturesque, but the long
street as it goes westward deteriorates into rows of new cottages,
inevitable in a mining country.

Mining operations have been carried on around Guisborough since the time
of Queen Elizabeth, for the discovery of alum dates from that period,
and when that industry gradually declined, it was replaced by the
iron-mines of to-day. Mr. Thomas Chaloner of Guisborough, in his travels
on the Continent about the end of the sixteenth century, saw the Pope's
alum-works near Rome, and was determined to start the industry in his
native parish of Guisborough, feeling certain that alum could be worked
with profit in his own county. As it was essential to have one or two
men who were thoroughly versed in the processes of the manufacture, Mr.
Chaloner induced some of the Pope's workmen by heavy bribes to come to
England. The risks attending this overt act were terrible, for the
alum-works brought in a large revenue to His Holiness, and the discovery
of such a design would have meant capital punishment to the offender.
The workmen were therefore induced to get into large casks, which were
secretly conveyed on board a ship that was shortly sailing for England.

When the Pope received the intelligence some time afterwards, he
thundered forth against Mr. Chaloner and the workmen the most awful and
comprehensive curse. They were to be cursed most wholly and thoroughly
in every part of their bodies, every saint was to curse them, and from
the thresholds of the holy church of God Almighty they were to be
sequestered, that they might 'be tormented, disposed of, and delivered
over with Dathan and Abiram, and with those who say unto the Lord God,
"Depart from us; we desire not to know Thy ways."'

Despite the fearful nature of the curse, the venture prospered so much
that the Darcy family, about the year 1600, set up another works in the
neighbourhood of Guisborough; and as this also brought considerable
wealth to the owners, a third was started at Sandsend in 1615. Many
others followed, and in 1649 Sir Hugh Cholmley started the works close
to Saltwick Nab, within a short distance of his house at Whitby. But
although there must have been more than twenty of these works in
operation in the eighteenth century, owing to cheaper methods of
producing alum the industry is now quite extinct in Cleveland.

The broad valley stretching from Guisborough to the sea contains the
beautifully wooded park of Skelton Castle. The trees in great masses
cover the gentle slopes on either side of the Skelton Beck, and almost
hide the modern mansion. The buildings include part of the ancient
castle of the Bruces, who were Lords of Skelton for many years. It is
recorded that Peter de Brus, one of the barons who helped to coerce John
into signing the Great Charter at Runnymede, made a curious stipulation
when he granted some lands at Leconfield to Henry Percy, his sister's
husband. The property was to be held on condition that every Christmas
Day he and his heirs should come to Skelton Castle and lead the lady by
the arm from her chamber to the chapel.

The old church of Upleatham, standing by the road to Saltburn, is a
quaint fragment of a Norman building. The tower, bearing the inscription
'William Crow, Chvrchwarden Bvlded Stepel--1664,' is an addition to what
is probably only part of the nave of the little Norman building. It is
now used merely as a cemetery chapel, but it is picturesquely situated,
and on the north wall the carved Norman corbels may still be seen.



CHAPTER IX

FROM PICKERING TO RIEVAULX ABBEY


The broad Vale of Pickering, watered by the Derwent, the Rye, and their
many tributaries, is a wonderful contrast to the country we have been
exploring. The level pastures, where cattle graze and cornfields abound,
seem to suggest that we are separated from the heather by many leagues;
but we have only to look beyond the hedgerows to see that the horizon to
the north is formed by lofty moors only a few miles distant.

Just where the low meadows are beginning to rise steadily from the vale
stands the town of Pickering, dominated by the lofty stone spire of its
parish church and by the broken towers of the castle. There is a wide
street, bordered by dark stone buildings, that leads steeply from the
river to the church. The houses are as a rule quite featureless, but we
have learnt to expect this in a county where stone is abundant, for only
the extremely old and the palpably new buildings stand Christ. Then
comes Herod's feast, with the King labelled _Herodi_. The guests are
shown with their arms on the table in the most curious positions, and
all the royal folk are wearing ermine. The coronation of the Virgin, the
martyrdom of St. Thomas a Becket, and the martyrdom of St. Edmund, who
is perforated with arrows, complete the series on the north side. Along
the south wall the paintings show the story of St. Catherine of
Alexandria and the seven Corporal Acts of Mercy. Further on come scenes
from the life of our Lord. There seems little doubt that all the
paintings, including a number of others in the transepts and elsewhere
that are now destroyed, were whitewashed over at the time of the
Reformation, and it was during some restoration work carried out in 1851
that indications of the paintings were accidentally laid bare. When the
whole of the walls had been cleaned, careful coloured drawings were
made, then colour wash was applied again, and the priceless paintings
disappeared for a generation. The objections to what had been considered
improper wall decoration for a parish church in the nineteenth century
having been reasoned away, the pictures once more appeared, but in a
very different condition to their first resurrection. However, the
drawings were in existence, so that a careful restoration was possible,
and as we see them to-day the subdued tones closely follow the
original colours.

The simple Norman arcade on the north side of the nave has plain round
columns and semicircular arches, but the south side belongs to later
Norman times, and has ornate columns and capitals. At least one member
of the great Bruce family, who had a house at Pickering called Bruce's
Hall, and whose ascendency at Guisborough has already been mentioned,
was buried here, for the figure of a knight in chain-mail by the lectern
probably represents Sir William Bruce. In the chapel there is a
sumptuous monument bearing the effigies of Sir David and Dame Margery
Roucliffe. The knight wears the collar of S.S., and his arms are on
his surcoat.

When John Leland, the 'Royal Antiquary' employed by Henry VIII., came to
Pickering, he described the castle, which was in a more perfect state
than it is to-day. He says: 'In the first Court of it be a 4 Toures, of
the which one is Caullid Rosamunde's Toure.' Also of the inner court he
writes of '4 Toures, wherof the Kepe is one.' This keep and Rosamund's
Tower, as well as the ruins of some of the others, are still to be seen
on the outer walls, so that from some points of view the ruins are
dignified and picturesque. The area enclosed was large, and in early
times the castle must have been almost impregnable. But during the Civil
War it was much damaged by the soldiers quartered there, and Sir Hugh
Cholmley took lead, wood, and iron from it for the defence of
Scarborough. The wide view from the castle walls shows better than any
description the importance of the position it occupied, and we feel, as
we gaze over the vale or northwards to the moors, that this was the
dominant power over the whole countryside.

Although Lastingham is not on the road to Helmsley, the few additional
miles will scarcely be counted when we are on our way to a church which,
besides being architecturally one of the most interesting in the county,
is perhaps unique in having at one time had a curate whose wife kept a
public house adjoining the church. Although this will scarcely be
believed, we have a detailed account of the matter in a little book
published in 1806.

The clergyman, whose name was Carter, had to subsist on the slender
salary of L20 a year and a few surplice fees. This would not have
allowed any margin for luxuries in the case of a bachelor; but this poor
man was married, and he had thirteen children. He was a keen fisherman,
and his angling in the moorland streams produced a plentiful supply of
fish--in fact, more than his family could consume. But this, even though
he often exchanged part of his catches with neighbours, was not
sufficient to keep the wolf from the door, and drastic measures had to
be taken. The parish was large, and, as many of the people were obliged
to come 'from ten to fifteen miles' to church, it seemed possible that
some profit might be made by serving refreshments to the parishioners.
Mrs. Carter superintended this department, and it seems that the meals
between the services soon became popular. But the story of 'a
parson-publican' was soon conveyed to the Archdeacon of the diocese, who
at the next visitation endeavoured to find out the truth of the matter.
Mr. Carter explained the circumstances, and showed that, far from being
a source of disorder, his wife's public-house was an influence for good.
'I take down my violin,' he continued, 'and play them a few tunes, which
gives me an opportunity of seeing that they get no more liquor than
necessary for refreshment; and if the young people propose a dance, I
seldom answer in the negative; nevertheless, when I announce time for
return, they are ever ready to obey my commands.' The Archdeacon appears
to have been a broad-minded man, for he did not reprimand Mr. Carter at
all; and as there seems to have been no mention of an increased stipend,
the parson-publican must have continued this strange anomaly.

It is difficult to say whether the public-house was conducted in the
crypt beneath the church or not. I am inclined to think that Mrs.
Carter's inn was the present 'Blacksmith's Arms,' but there is distinct
evidence for stating that cock-fighting used to take place secretly in
the crypt. The writings of the Venerable Bede give a special interest to
Lastingham, for he tells us how King Oidilward requested Bishop Cedd to
build a monastery there. The Saxon buildings that appeared at that time
have gone, so that the present church cannot be associated with the
seventh century. No doubt the destruction was the work of the Danes, who
plundered the whole of this part of Yorkshire. The church that exists
to-day is of Transitional Norman date, and the beautiful little crypt,
which has an apse, nave and aisles, is coeval with the superstructure.

The situation of Lastingham in a deep and picturesque valley surrounded
by moors and overhung by woods is extremely rich.

Further to the west there are a series of beautiful dales, watered by
becks whose sources are among the Cleveland Hills. On our way to
Ryedale, the loveliest of these, we pass through Kirby Moorside, a
little town which has gained a place in history as the scene of the
death of the notorious George Villiers, second Duke of Buckingham, on
April 17, 1687. The house in which he died is on the south side of the
King's Head, and in one of the parish registers there is the entry under
the date of April 19th, 'Gorges viluas, Lord dooke of Bookingam, etc.'
Further down the street stands an inn with a curious porch, supported by
turned wooden pillars, bearing the inscription:


  'Anno: Dom 1632 October xi
   William Wood'


Kirkdale, with its world-renowned cave, to which we have already
referred, lies about two miles to the west. The quaint little Saxon
church there is one of the few bearing evidences of its own date,
ascertained by the discovery in 1771 of a Saxon sundial, which had
survived under a layer of plaster, and was also protected by the porch.
A translation of the inscription reads: 'Orm, the son of Gamal, bought
St. Gregory's Minster when it was all broken and fallen, and he caused
it to be made anew from the ground, for Christ and St. Gregory, in the
days of King Edward and in the days of Earl Tosti, and Hawarth wrought
me and Brand the prior (priest or priests).' By this we are plainly told
that a church was built there in the reign of Edward the Confessor.

A pleasant road leads through Nawton to the beautiful little town of
Helmsley. A bend of the broad, swift-flowing Rye forms one boundary of
the place, and is fed by a gushing brook that finds its way from
Rievaulx Moor, and forms a pretty feature of the main street. The
cottages in many cases have preserved their thatched roofs, and have
seldom more than one story; but they invariably appear well preserved
and carefully painted, although these stone-built houses, with leaded
casements, give little scope for ornament. But the Helmsley folk have
realized the importance of white paint, and the window-frames, and even
the strips of lead that hold the glass together, are picked out in this
cheerful fashion. In the broad market-square the houses are large, but
their gray respectability is broken by creepers and some pleasant spots
of colour. The corner nearest to the church is particularly noticeable
on account of a most picturesque gabled house, with a timber-framed
upper floor--a style of construction exceedingly rare in these parts of
Yorkshire. The old stone cross, raised above its worn steps, stands in
the open space close to the modern market hall, and humbly allows the
central position to be occupied by a Gothic cross recently erected to
the memory of the late Lord Feversham, of Duncombe Park.

A narrow turning by the market-house shows the torn and dishevelled
fragment of the keep of Helmsley Castle towering above the thatched
roofs in the foreground. The ruin is surrounded by tall elms, and from
this point of view, when backed by a cloudy sunset, makes a wonderful
picture. Like Scarborough, this stronghold was held for the King during
the Civil War. After the Battle of Marston Moor and the fall of York,
Fairfax came to Helmsley and invested the castle. He received a wound in
the shoulder during the siege; but the garrison having surrendered on
honourable terms, the Parliament ordered that the castle should be
dismantled, and the thoroughness with which the instructions were
carried out remind one of Knaresborough, for one side of the keep was
blown to pieces by a terrific explosion and nearly everything else was
destroyed.

All the beauty and charm of this lovely district is accentuated in
Ryedale, and when we have accomplished the three long uphill miles to
Rievaulx, and come out upon the broad grassy terrace above the abbey,
we seem to have entered a Land of Beulah. We see a peaceful valley
overlooked on all sides by lofty hills, whose steep sides are clothed
with luxuriant woods; we see the Rye flowing past broad green meadows;
and beneath the tree-covered precipice below our feet appear the
solemn, roofless remains of one of the first Cistercian monasteries
established in this country. There is nothing to disturb the peace that
broods here, for the village consists of a mere handful of old and
picturesque cottages, and we might stay on the terrace for hours, and,
beyond the distant shouts of a few children at play and the crowing of
some cocks, hear nothing but the hum of insects and the singing of
birds. We take a steep path through the wood which leads us down to the
abbey ruins.

The magnificent Early English choir and the Norman transepts stand
astonishingly complete in their splendid decay, and the lower portions
of the nave, which, until 1922, lay buried beneath masses of
grass-grown debris, are now exposed to view. The richly-draped
hill-sides appear as a succession of beautiful pictures framed by the
columns and arches on each side of the choir. As they stand exposed to
the weather, the perfectly proportioned mouldings, the clustered
pillars in a wonderfully good state of preservation, and the almost
uninjured celestory are more impressive than in an elaborately-restored
cathedral.





End of Project Gutenberg's Yorkshire--Coast & Moorland Scenes, by Gordon Home

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YORKSHIRE--COAST & MOORLAND SCENES ***

***** This file should be named 10795.txt or 10795.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/7/9/10795/

Produced by Ted Garvin, Ginny Brewer and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


