The Project Gutenberg EBook of Natalie, by Ferna Vale

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Natalie
       A Gem Among the Sea-Weeds

Author: Ferna Vale

Release Date: January 28, 2004 [EBook #10848]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NATALIE ***




Produced by V-M Osterman, Juliet Sutherland, Veronique Durand and PG
Distributed Proofreaders





NATALIE;

or,

A GEM AMONG THE SEA-WEEDS

By

FERNA VALE.

1859.



To thee, my darling Hattie, I dedicate the Sea-Flower
would that this casket contained for such as thou,
a purer gem.




PREFACE.


In writing the following pages the author has spent pleasant hours,
which perhaps might have been less profitably employed: if anything of
interest be found among them, it is well,--and, should any be led to
take up their Cross in meekness and humility, searching out the path
that leads the wanderer home, it is indeed well.






NATALIE.




CHAPTER I.


THE SEA-FLOWER.


  "What was it that I loved so well about my childhood's home?
   It was the wide and wave-lashed shore, the black rocks crowned with foam!
   It was the sea-gull's flapping wing, all trackless in its flight,
   Its screaming note, that welcomed on the fierce and stormy night!
   The wild heath had its flowers and moss, the forest had its trees,
   Which, bending to the evening wind, made music in the breeze;
   But earth,--ha! ha! I laugh e'en now,--earth had no charms for me,
   Nor scene half bright enough to win my young heart from the sea.
   No! 't was the ocean, vast and deep, the fathomless, the free,--
   The mighty rushing waters, that were ever dear to me!"

        ELIZA COOK.


  "But the goodly pearl which the merchant bought,
     And for which his all he gave,
   Was a purer pearl than will e'er be brought
     From under the FOAMING wave."

        H. F. GOULD.


"Massa Grobener! Massa Grobener! Please, sar, look here! De good Lord
hab left his mitest ob angels here on de beach; and please, sar, step
low or de wee bit will take to its wings and fly away. De good Lord be
praised! but old Bingo hab found many a bright sea-weed in his day, but
dis am de sweetest sea-flower ob de whole."

And as he spoke, the little one stretched out its tiny arms toward the
poor old black man and gave a faint moan. Captain Grosvenor, who had now
come up with the negro, was no less surprised than had been old Vingo,
at discovering, among the fresh, bright sea-weed, an infant some eight
months old. The babe was carefully lashed into a large wooden trough or
bowl, and a canvas firmly stretched over the top, permitting only the
head and arms to remain exposed, and judging from the dripping condition
of the worthy little sea-craft, it could not have been many moments
since it had come to anchor on the smooth, hard beach; probably the now
receding waves had borne the precious burden to this most welcome
harbor--"whereby hangs a tale."

"De good Lord be praised, massa! but dis am de most curous ob all
sea-ve'cles that eber trabers de great waters! I sure it must be a
speint from de great scripture ark massa read about in de good book; or
may be it am one ob those old-time chariots, fiery chariots, we sings
about; only it so moist around here, it put de fire all out and leabe de
chariot. Or I tink it may be one ob dose machines Bingo used to see in
old slabe-massa's church, hung up ober de minister's head, to make de
good psalms or de prayers go de right way, and I don't remember which;
old Bingo always retained a bery bad memory, eber since before he was a
child; but I tink dey used to call it a sound board, though it was full
ob cracks."

Ah! poor fellow, had you seen that heart-rending look of despair,
mingled with sweet resignation, upon the face of that mother! had you
seen the glistening tear in the eye of that noble father, as, but a few
hours before, they consigned their idolized child to the mercies of the
deep; had you heard that prayer to God, if it might be his will, to
spare their darling from an ocean-grave, your great heart would have
been, if possible, kindled to a greater love for that helpless
little one!

Captain Grosvenor, after having carefully taken the child from the
grotesque looking craft, which had proved so trustworthy a sailor, and
wiped the drops of spray from its little face, wrapped it in a large
bandana, and gave it to the faithful Vingo, while he took his glass and
scanned the distant horizon; for well did he know, though even at
noon-day, that one more unfortunate bark had gone down near that dread
"Nantucket shoal," upon which so many noble hearts have found a watery
grave. "I see nothing," said the Captain, "nothing, not even a passing
sail; which is quite uncommon at this season, when so many vessels are
constantly passing and repassing our island; not even the light-boat do
I see, which is probably owing to a fog coming in from the sea, as yet
imperceptible to us here. Poor fellows! I fear they have gone down
without a soul to help them! It seems hard when there are so many stout
hearts and ready arms here, willing to risk their lives in the attempt
to save. Those shoals, Vingo, are the only unkind thing there is about
our cherished island; but the will of God be done. Truly his ways are
unsearchable."

"Den you tinks, massa, dis little sea-flower was left here trough
mistake, by de Lord?"

"It most assuredly was left here by the Lord, Vingo, but not by
mistake. The fact is, my boy, there has been a wreck off to the east
south-east of the island; probably some vessel has mistaken her
bearings, or, being unacquainted with the coast, has run on to the
shoals and gone to pieces; and this infant was made fast to the first
floatable object that could be found, and with a mother's dying prayer
for a rudder, and the hand of Him who guides us all at the helm, she has
come to us here; and with eyes of heaven's own blue, she silently asks
for that protection which shall not be withheld from her so long as it
shall be within my power to give. And now, Vingo, boy, you may turn the
horse's head for the town."

"Yes, massa."

And though some fifty years had passed over the old negro's head, he
sprang with the agility of boyhood's days; although, as the poor fellow
often remarked, "he had a wonderful constitution for enduring rest," the
thought of his good missus's surprise, when she should learn of their
morning's adventure, gave him new life, and he fairly danced about the
beach for joy. Seated in the spring-cart, Captain Grosvenor took the
babe in his arms, that had now fallen into a quiet sleep, while Vingo,
perching himself first on one foot and then the other, to keep his
balance, gathered up the reins, and all started for home.

"I am tinking, massa, dat my missus be quite ober-much-come at de sight
of dis little sea-flower."

"Yes, boy; yes, sea-flower indeed. I have travelled the wide world from
stem to stern, but never have I met with such an emblem of innocence
before." And though the hardy sea-captain had spent the greater part of
his life among the whales, he stooped down and pressed his lips to the
brow of the unconscious sleeper.

"Luff off there a little, Vingo; keep to the right; these bare commons
are not the easiest grounds to ride over, though with a light
spring-cart like this one can navigate with some degree of comfort. The
broad ocean is the place, after all. Give me the old ship Tantalizer,
and I am at home. Take the glass, Vingo, and see if you can make out
whether the steamboat is in sight or not."

"Cannot eben make de staff, massa. Ah! now I sees him; de flag is up,
old Massachusetts am in sight."

"She will be in early to-day. Travels decently fast, considering she is
all out of joint. I hope we shall get a new steamer some day; then we
may keep posted with what is going on in the outer world."

"Yes, massa, people tink we a piece ob de continent den."

An hour's ride brought our worthy captain to his own door, where stood
Mrs. Grosvenor, with her son Harry, their only child, of seven years,
awaiting him.

"You have made a long stay at the shore this morning, my husband; but if
these little excursions will deter you from making a longer voyage, I
will not complain."

"Yes, wife, yes; but for a peace offering I have brought to you a gem
from among the sea-weeds."

"My dear husband, where can you have found this child?" and tears were
in the eyes of the lady as she received the little unknown from
his arms.

"Is it for you? to be yours, mother? Mother, may it stay with us here?"
asked Harry; and in his delight he stumbled over old Neptune, who was
stretched at full length upon the floor, and the two went rolling over
and over, first one up and then the other, till finally the boy came off
victorious, seated astride the animal's back, who marched up to Mrs.
Grosvenor's side, where they both remained, eyeing the little stranger
in silence.

"The child's dress denotes no common birth," remarked the Captain, as
his lady disrobed it of its rich lace dress, saturated with the salt
seawater. "And the gold bands; are there no marks?--nothing, by which we
may gain the least clue of its history?"

"I see nothing; and it is well; for my heart already yearns towards the
little creature, and in my selfish human nature, I can't but hope that
we may be able to keep her for our own." And as she spoke she pressed
the clasp of the band, and, behold! the miniature likeness of a lady was
brought to view. The foster mother gazed upon those features, as if it
were the face of an angel.

"I cannot have the heart to wish to retain _her_ child! To deprive that
mother of anything that can give her pain to lose. Would I could ask her
to forgive my cruel thoughts; forgive the desire to retain this her gem.
But I know she has gone to her home in the skies; she was too pure for
earth. Yes, this must be the mother, the child is so like her."

"The same features, the same expression; and," said the Captain, "I will
use every means of finding out if there is one left of that ill-fated
crew to tell the tale. It will probably be reported in a few days, if
there are any missing vessels, either from our coasts or foreign ports.
In the meantime I will take care to have this discovery registered at
head-quarters, and then if we can discover no trace of her parentage we
may have her for our own."

"Have her for our own! Nep, do you hear that? We are to have a new
sister!" shouted the boy; and Nep, as if comprehending his young
master's words, laid his great honest face on the feet of the child, and
caressed her.

"Please, missus, don't make little Sea-flower too fresh; she be pining
for de sea;" remarked Vingo, as Mrs. Grosvenor proceeded to bathe the
child in cool fresh water; and having brought out the baby-clothes worn
by Harry, she was soon, by the aid of a little new milk, made
comfortable, and, creeping down after old Nep, sat with her hands
buried in his shaggy coat, crowing with delight. The lights at Captain
Grosvenor's burned long into the night of that eventful day, of the
discovery of the Sea-flower, while he related to his wife how they had
found the little one among the sea-weeds, and in forming plans for her
future adoption, should nothing be learned of her parentage, and no
friends come to claim the child.

Soon after the commencement of our story, a fearful storm swept the New
England coast. 'Twould seem as if the rage of the storm-king knew no
bounds; and many hearts there were made desolate in that
long-to-be-remembered September gale. Fragments of wrecks came ashore on
different parts of the island, together with casks, chests, rigging,
stoven boats, etc., which were picked up in various places, and by
various characters. Some would watch eagerly for these trophies of
destruction, and with grasping hand seize upon them, viewing the storm
as sent for their own particular benefit; increasing their worldly
goods, regardless of others' woes. While some there were, who turned
away with a heart sick at the scene of devastation, yet submissively
bowing to His will, "who holds the waters in his hand." Wreck upon wreck
was reported. The total loss of vessels from all parts of the world was
very great, which only served to increase the mystery in regard to the
unknown, which went down 'neath a calm noon-day sky. Days and months
passed on, and still no tidings; till finally they came to look upon the
loved one as their own.

The child grew in strength and beauty, and was a source of great
amusement to them all. Old Vingo would delight to make one of his
"squantums," as he called it, to the shore; and with master Harry, who
was now taking his first lessons in driving, (a point once attained,
boyhood thinks to gain no higher) and Sea-flower in his arms; with Nep,
who is determined to be "head horse," bounding off in the distance, is
happiness enough for the negro, and his white teeth glisten in the
bright sunshine like so many African pearls, as he jabbers away to
Sea-flower, as if she were comprehending the whole. But 'twas enough for
Vingo, that she in reply to his half hour's remarks, would put out her
hand toward the blue waters, and with eyes dilated with wonderment,
would say, "Tee! Indo, Tee!"

There on the beach they would have a fine race with the surf, Vingo
following with the child the receding wave, and then, as it came in with
a roar from the sea, he would run as if pursued by a foe, sometimes the
spray dashing up all around them, much to the joy of the Sea-flower, her
merry laugh according strangely with the music of the waters. Harry
amused himself for a while, throwing the bits of drift-wood into the
water, that he might see old Newfoundland dash in and combat with the
waves, to secure the prize, which he never failed to do; but wearying of
this, he came and took his seat by the side of his sister, and commenced
whittling diligently on an old piece of plank.

"Vingo, do you think my father will ever go to sea again?"

"I don't know, young massa; but why you tink ob dat?"

"O, I have often thought I would like to go with my father away over the
great ocean. I long to see more of the world; and I often think of the
time when I shall be a man, and have a ship of my own. I never hear of
a ship arrived at the bar, but it sends a thrill of delight over me, and
I watch the sailors as they come on shore after a three years' voyage,
and think how happy they must be, though they look as if they had met
with the rubbers. O, I know I shall be a sailor boy! there is something
noble about the very name."

"Missus be berry sorry to hear you talk so," said Vingo.

"I know my mother would be very sorry to have me go to sea, for I
remember how sad she looked for many days after father went away, though
I was but a little boy. And I remember my father took me in his arms,
and told me I must be a good boy, and take care of mother until he came
back. But now you would be here, Vingo, to see that my mother knew
no want."

"Yes, de good Lord be praised for sending good massa Grobener to take me
away from old slabe massa. I gets so filled wid liberty sometimes, dat I
mistakes myself for white man."

"Well, you are as good as a white man, any day; but tell me, Vingo, if
you have ever been much on the water?"

"Not a great deal; I used to take old massa wid his children out for a
sail sometimes, and den I hab a slight recollection ob being brought
from a great way off; but dat must hab been before I come to be berry
great. De pleasantest sail I eber take was when I leabe old Berginny in
de good Tantalizer; and I swings my hat at old slabe massa on de bank,
and asks him if he don't wish he as free as dis individual. Dat was but
a few years ago; den you wear little dress like Sea-flower, and now you
talk 'bout going to sea! Well, dat am de way wid you sea-fish here."

As the three sat on the beach, enjoying the morning breeze, Harry
observed a gentleman not far off, who appeared to be taking sketches of
the scenery around, and occasionally would give a glance towards where
our little party were sitting, somewhat to the disquietude of Nep, who
came and stood sentinel, as much as to say, "I will protect you;" but
finding the stranger disposed to do them no harm, he composed himself
for a nap. The whittling process being now finished, Harry produced what
he termed a "two-master," the which, Vingo declared it would be no sin
to worship, as it was not in the likeness of anything.

"She is not a very polished looking craft, to be sure, but I know she
is a sailer, for all that. At any rate, she shall be of some service;"
and he seized old Nep by the ear, and making fast his dogship to the
little ark, he carefully seated the Sea-flower at the helm, and with
Vingo's rainbow bandana flying from the mast-head, they were soon under
full headway. Either Nep being proud of his charge, or the little one
mistaking the thoughtful face, lit up with the glow of enthusiasm, of
the stranger, for a beacon light; they came up with him, who called to
Harry to join them.

"What is your name, my son?"

"Harry Grosvenor, sir," answered the boy, drawing himself up to his full
height.

"And what have you here?" added he. "I suppose you came along as
supercargo; pray tell me with what are you freighted?"

"The Sea-flower is my only freight, sir."

"And God grant that you may always find as valuable! but tell me, is
this angelic child your sister?"

"Yes, sir, my sister, and we all love her very much; we could not be
without her, for we might forget to thank our Father for his kindness
to us, if we had no Sea-flower to remind us of Heaven."

"So young, and can appreciate so rare a gift," mused the gentleman;
"childhood, indeed, is the first to discover purity;" and the eye of the
stranger grew moist, and the melancholy smile which sat upon his
countenance gave place to the shadows of grief. "What is the child's
name?" asked he.

"We call her Sea-flower, sir."

"'Tis a peculiar, sweet name; but has she no other?"

"We have always called her by that name. Mother says she came to us from
God, and he loves the little flowers; he smiles upon each one, as it
holds up its little head, all shining with pearly tears wept by the
stars. But do you not love my sister? I did not think she could make
you sad."

"Yes, yes, my son; take good care of her, be a true brother to her,
ever. Many long years have passed since my own little Natalie played in
my arms, but they are gone;" and the kind gentleman gathered his
sketching instruments to depart.

That night, as Mrs. Grosvenor talked with her children, as was her wont,
of the good Father who loves us all, Harry related the interview with
the stranger gentleman; and in the prayer which followed he was not
forgotten. The Sea-flower folded her tiny hands meekly, while from the
windows of her soul went up the love she could not speak. As that
faithful mother sat meditating upon the story of Harry in regard to the
stranger, which she had related to her husband, Captain Grosvenor
remarked,--"It is just one year to-day when our dear child came to us,
being also my birthday; but instead of adding a year to my life, it
seems to me old Father time has made a mistake, and made a deduction of
a year. Just one year to-day, and she is the Sea-flower still. Yes, she
will ever be the Sea-flower to us; yet I suppose she must have a name
more in keeping with the ideas of the world. What was the name of the
lost one the sad gentleman mused of?"

"He spoke of the long time ago, before his own Natalie had gone."

"Poor man! Each life must have its portion of bitterness. Natalie,--I
like the sound; it reminds me of my home on the waters. With your
consent, my wife, the Christian name of the child shall be Natalie, for
she came to us from the sea."




CHAPTER II.


THE ISLAND HOME.


  "Long may this ocean-gem be bright,
     And long may it be fair,
   In Freedom's pure and blessed light,
     And Virtue's hallowed air!
   While still across its ocean bound,
   Shall e'er be borne the truthful sound,
   Our island home! our island home!
     We love our island home!"

        MRS. J. H. HANAFORD.


  "And yet that isle remaineth,
     A refuge for the free,
   As when true-hearted Macy
     Beheld it from the sea.
   God bless the sea-beat island!
     And grant for evermore,
   That Charity and Freedom dwell,
     As now, upon the shore!"

        J. G. WHITTIER.


Gentle reader, pause a little, and let us for a few moments turn our
thoughts toward that Island of the sea, upon which it was the fate of
our heroine, through the guidance of a divine providence, to find a home
in the bosoms of those whose hearts' beatings were of love for our
unknown. Yea, love ever encircleth purity.

Properly, this chapter, descriptive of the Island of Nantucket, should
have been our first; but had that been the case, alas, for the simple
tale of Natalie! How many would have passed it by with but one thought,
and that thought invariably,--Nantucket! pooh! a fish story, strikingly
embellished with ignorance. And you may indeed discover in the
feebleness of my unpretending pen, much that is food for critics; yet
give not a thought of ridicule to Nantucket's favored ones, for it is
not for me to enlist under her banner of superiority of intellect. To
the many questions which I know you have it in your heart to ask, as
touching the civilization, etc., of these islanders, I do not reply, as
I might be tempted under other circumstances to do, that it would be
advisable to procure a passport before landing on those shores, lest one
might stand in danger of being harpooned by the natives; but rather let
me, in as correct a light as I may, set forth to those who have
heretofore known but little of those who inhabit that triangular bit of
land in the wide ocean, which, when we were six year olds, we passed
over on our maps with the thought, I wonder if they have Sundays there.

Situated nearly one hundred miles, in a south-easterly course from the
city of Boston, and about thirty miles from the nearest point of main
land, Nantucket lifts her proud head from out the broad Atlantic, whose
waters, even when lashed to madness, have been kind to her. And now, on
this oppressive July morning, let us throw aside our cares, and come out
from our daily round of duties, where we have been scaling with our eyes
the tall brick barriers which shut out God's beautiful blue sky and
sunshine. Yes, let us off, anywhere, to get one glimpse of Nature. On
board the good steamer "Island Home," a two hours' sail carries us over
that distance which separates Cape Cod from Nantucket. If you have not
passed most of your days among the Connecticut hills, you pay little
attention to that "green-eyed monster," who considers it a part of his
duty to prepare the uninitiated for the good time coming. Arrived at the
bar, which stretches itself across the entrance to the harbor, our
first impressions take to themselves the forms of sundry venerable
windmills, church spires and towers, representing various orders of
architecture; but that which strikes us most is the scarcity of
shipping, not more than a dozen vessels lying at the wharves. In former
times Nantucket numbered as many whaleships belonging to her port, as
did any town on our seaboard. Indeed, she was built up from the produce
of the ocean, and carried the palm for years as being first among the
American whale fisheries; but her number has dwindled away, till not
one-fourth of those homeward-bound ships are destined for the port of
Nantucket.

The town, we find, is situated on the northern shore of the island, at
the harbor's head. The houses are compact, and most of them built of
wood, with little regard to beauty; though some few residences there
are, of modern style, which do credit to their designers; but the
greater number speak only of antiquity, with their shingled sides; and
you will rarely see a house that has not a "walk" upon its roof, with
which they could by no means dispense, as in case of ship-wreck near
the island, the roofs of the whole town will be alive with men, women,
and children, spyglass in hand. Besides the town there are but one or
two small villages, "Polpis," and the far-famed "Siaconset," or
"Sconset," as it is usually termed,--numbering some four dozen houses.
This village is seven and one-half miles from the town, affording a
delightful place of recreation for families from town, who, as the
summer holidays come round, harness up old Dobbin, and prepare for a six
weeks' "siesta." If, by reason of the great financial pressure, you find
you have not sufficient pocket-money to take you for a short tour to
Europe, come to "Sconset;" it is a glorious place! take a stroll along
that grand old beach, and watch the moon rise from out the ocean; then
go to your comfortable seven-by-nine lodgings, which seems like a
palace, draw the comfortable rug about you, and fall asleep, with old
Ocean for a lullaby, to dream (if your waking hours are fortunately of
that bent) of some old deserted castle, "Salem witchcraft," or a lone
"Grace Pool," attendant within the attic's most remote recesses.

The face of the island is level, so much so that the flat, bare commons
resemble somewhat our western prairies; and with the exception of the
cliffs at the north, and Sancoty Head, there are but few slight
elevations. Owing to the peculiar shape of the island, its two arms
stretching far out on either side, it does not appear to be as large as
it really is,--being about sixteen miles long, and four wide, affording
sufficient elbow room, however, for its eight thousand inhabitants. The
soil is sandy, but is cultivated to some extent; and though they can
boast of no extensive forests, yet you may occasionally meet with an old
friend in the way of a noble elm, or the pensive weeping willow. The
culture of fruit trees, also, is receiving much attention of later
years, and as widely as refinement must be separated from the islanders,
to be in keeping with your views, their love for the sweet spring
flowers knows no bounds.

In your walks of curiosity about town, you meet with a great many of the
denomination termed Friends, or Quakers, and as you pass them you cannot
refrain from giving them the inside walk, for their very garb is of
humility; and as you look into the placid face of some matron, you feel
like uncovering yourself, for you can see the innocence looking out of
her eyes. You are curious to know whither so many are wending their way,
and meeting a sailor-boy, he tells you it is "fifth day," and if you
follow in the wake of the "slick bonnets," they will pilot you to their
nearest light-house; but precious little light you will get unless the
spirit move some of them to pick up the wick. You move on with the rest
till you come to their house of worship, which appears as humble as
those who enter its doors. As you contrast the plainness on all sides
with the richly decorated edifice in which you have been accustomed to
worship, you try to smile a smile of contempt at the scene, but cannot,
for you feel that the spirit of Christ is in their midst; and though not
a word is spoken during the hour and a half, yet you feel that the
silent worship which went up to Heaven, was heard by Him who answers
prayer. As a signal for dispersing, the elders who occupy the "rising
seats," arise and shake hands, and you go your way with those silent
ones, feeling that their worship was acceptable to God. The Quakers of
Nantucket are rapidly diminishing in number. Formerly two-thirds,
perhaps, of the population, were of the Society of Friends, but now not
one-third are of that denomination. As their children come up, they are
not true to the faith, as were their fathers, and they put off the plain
garb for the fashions of the day. A Quaker in Nantucket will in time
come to be a great curiosity. Their places will, we fear, be filled by
none more upright. Heaven bless them!

Nantucket of the present is not Nantucket of the past. Her quaint,
old-timeness has given place to customs and manners more in accordance
with things common-place. Yet her originality has not entirely forsaken
her; she has a character even now, peculiar to herself. The wild waves
come tumbling in, their glad shouts ringing through the midnight
stillness with the same zest as of yore; and the same starry skies,
which looked down on the fair maiden of a century ago, still bend over
her children's children, as they tread along life's rugged way.
Occasionally you may meet with one who has long since passed the
meridian of life, one, perhaps, who has never been off of the island of
his birth; and he will tell you of the Nantucket of the past, before her
peaceful shores had been invaded by the stranger; when they might lay
them down to sleep, without thought of bolt or bar, save old ocean's
faithful bands. You will learn of Nantucket from the beginning down to
the present time. Then the island was big with prosperity. Her sons were
not obliged to leave their homes for a five years' voyage, in search of
the monster from which they gained their chief maintenance, for there
were then good fishing grounds near the shore, and often the whale might
be seen from their little island, spouting off in the distance; and
their ships came proudly bearing down to the bar, laden heavily with the
good sperm oil, and all hearts were made lighter and each purse heavier,
with every new arrival of good fortune; as if they had been one great
family, each one smiling on another's prosperity. "But now,"--and the
face of the narrator is less joyous as he turns from _then_ to
_now_,--"things are not what they were. Our island is becoming like what
they tell me the world at large is." And the old man will re-light his
pipe, and with a sad smile he will give you the names of his ancestors,
from his great "Grand-'ther" down to more modern times, when his fifth
cousin Obed was a large ship-owner. Ah! treat such of other days with
kindness, for the style of that day will never come again; their great
hearts of brotherly love are not of this generation, yet they have left
an impress upon those well-loved shores that can never be entirely
erased. Those foot-prints of long ago, combined with the peculiarities
which will ever dwell with these children of the sea, are attractions
which insure to the stranger on his first visit, visions of many a happy
hour in the future; and he will long for the season to return which
shall liberate so many of the city doomed artificials to a few weeks'
intercourse with nature.

Awakened at early dawn by the sailor's merry "yo, ho," coming up from
the waters with the sun, you turn your eyes seaward, and what a glorious
sight is before you! As far as the eye can reach, water, blue, rolling
water, tinged with rising sunlight in its morning purity; the night-bird
folds her wings, which she has laved in the white sea-foam, softening
the sigh of the breakers to the ear of those who slumbered; the white
sails bow their heads, while the old tars wonder what makes them so
happy. With these pleasant sunrise impressions you go forth into the day
with more lenient views towards the "land of whales," sniffing the salt
air with a real gusto.

Glancing up the street, you descry an object in the distance which much
resembles a travelling dry-goods merchant, with the many fancy streamers
flying in the breeze; but as it draws nearer, you look around in
astonishment for "Barnum," fully persuaded if that worthy is not on the
ground, he has mistaken his calling for once. The object in question is
no less than a common two-wheeled horse-cart, such as are used to do our
heavy carting, except this is on springs, and of a lighter build; in the
vehicle are some half dozen ladies, standing, their only support being
short ropes attached to the sides, which, however, are seldom used,
except by those unaccustomed to this kind of exercise, and in this
position they ride with the greatest ease, seldom losing their balance,
even when going at full speed.

Thoroughly initiated, and having seen most of the lions of the place,
you find yourself becoming more and more attached, forget that you have
ever thought of the island as anything but attractive. Your one week has
become the length of four, and the letters to anxious friends at home
have been characteristic of briefness, unwilling to steal a moment's
time from the enjoyment which will furnish a topic for the unemployed
hours of longer days to come. Of the many excursions which have made
short the hours of your sojourn here, I will not enter into detail;
suffice it to say, you have been disappointed in Nantucket and its
inhabitants. You have made many firm friends, the memory of whom will
stir the tear of unselfish love, as you number them over, one by one, in
the future. They will never be forgotten. You have found Nantucket is
not merely an isolated place, where oil is manufactured; where the
people only work to eat, and eat to work. [Though as some have
suggested, a carriage drive connecting Nantucket with the Continent
would be a great modern improvement]. As one has quaintly expressed, in
a little poem entitled "An Old Story:"

 "Before Columbus ever thought
  Of Western World, with glory fraught;
  Before the Northmen had been known
  To wander from their native zone;
  Before war raised a single mound,
  The antiquarians to confound;
  Indeed, so very long ago,
  The time one can't exactly know,--
  A giant Sachem, good as great,
  Reigned in and over our Bay State.
  So huge was he, his realm so small,
  He could not exercise at all,
  Except by taking to the sea.
  [For which he had a ticket free,
  Granted by Neptune, with the seal,
  A salient clam, and couchant eel].
  His pipe was many a mile in length,
  His lungs proportionable in strength;
  And his rich moccasins,--with the pair,
  The seven-league boots would not compare.
  Whene'er siestas he would take,
  Cape Cod must help his couch to make;
  And, being lowly, it was meet
  He should prefer it for his feet.
  Well, one day, after quite a doze,
  A month or two in length, suppose,
  He waked, and, as he'd often done,
  Strolled forth to see the mid-day sun;
  But while unconsciously he slept,
  The sand within his moccasins crept;
  At every step some pain he'd feel,
  'Twas now the toe, now near the heel;
  At length his Sachemship grew cross,
  The pebbles to the sea he'd toss,
  And with a moccasin in each hand,
  He threw on either side the sand;
  Then in an instant there appear
  Two little isles, the Sachem near!
  One as the Vineyard now is known,
  The other we may call our own.
  At ease, he freely breathed awhile,
  Which sent the fogs to bless our isle;
  And turning East, with quickened motion,
  The chill, bleak winds came o'er the ocean.

  Ill-judging Sachem! would that you
  Had never shaken _here_ that shoe.
  Or, having done so, would again,
  And join Nantucket to the main!"

Having had a peep within the nest, you sigh for the return of the bird,
and we will on.




CHAPTER III.


THE VOICE OF CHILDHOOD.


  "Ah! Well may sages bow to thee,
   Dear, loving, guileless Infancy!
     And sigh beside their lofty lore
   For one untaught delight of thine;
     And feel they'd give their learning's store,
   To know again thy truth divine."

        MRS. OSGOOD.


  "And now behold him kneeling there,
   By the child's side, in humble prayer;
   While the same sun-beam shines upon
   The guilty and the guiltless one;
   And hymns of joy proclaim through heaven,
   The triumph of a soul forgiven."

        MOORE'S "LALLA ROOKH."


"Mother, why does every one pass poor old Quady by without giving him
even a smile? Is not that the reason why he looks so sorrowful? He
looked so sad when I met him this afternoon, that I could not help
holding out the daisies which I had gathered for you, towards him; and
when he did not take them, but stood looking at me without speaking a
word, I asked him if he did not want the flowers to carry to his home,
and put them into his hand; and when I had come up with the
school-girls, who had run away when they saw him coming, I looked after
him, and he was still standing by the road-side, with the flowers in his
hand, watching us as we went up the street. Perhaps he was resting a
little, for it is a long way to the low home over the commons."

"Quady, my dear, no doubt feels that he is alone in the world, for he is
the only one that is left of a large tribe of Indians; all of his kind
are gone, and are buried, no one but himself knows where. He does not
look upon the pale faces as brothers, though they treat him kindly. He
feels that wrong has been shown his ancestors at their hands. I am glad,
my child, that you were kind to the Indian."

"Yes, mother, I love everybody; but I think I love those best who look
as if no one cared for them. I suppose everybody loves poor Quady, only
they forget to let him know it."

"You like dat old Ingin, Sea-flower? why, he almost as black as Bingo
hesef."

"Do you think I do not love you, Vingo, because you are black? You are
always good to me, and what would I do without you to take me to the
shore, whenever I like to go?"

"O, little missy, I tink you can sympetize wid old black Bingo; but den,
ebry body not like you; you's one ob de Lord's chilen hesef."

"We are all the Lord's children, Vingo," said Mrs. Grosvenor; "and we
should walk in the paths of righteousness, that we may be worthy of his
name. You may go, now."

"What does Vingo mean, mother? he talks so strangely sometimes about my
being left here by the Lord, and goes on muttering something to himself,
which I cannot understand, and laughs as if he was very happy."

"It is his way of expressing himself, my dear; the negroes are a
peculiar race."

"Yes, I think they are; I like their ways, they are always so kind. Are
not their dispositions better than those of some white people? I never
heard of a black man being cruel to any one, but I have seen the prints
of a whip-lash on Vingo's neck, where he said his old massa used to
whip him; and I asked him many times over, if he was sure it was a white
man who whipped him, and he said yes, he was sure, for he remembers he
used to wish white folks were black, so they could not tell which were
the negroes."

"There are some very hard-hearted people in the world. Vingo was brought
up in slavery; when you are a little older you will understand
it better."

"Dear mother, you know what is best for me; but often, when I am
interested in what is said, and ask questions, people tell me I will
understand it when I am a little older; and when I sit down by myself,
and they think I have forgotten all about it, I find myself wishing I
was "a little older," for it disappoints me so much to leave a story not
finished."

Mrs. Grosvenor looked at the child in silence.

"I have not displeased you, dear mother, have I? I did not feel that I was
saying anything wrong."

"No, darling; I did not think you would understand me, that was the
reason why I did not explain to you. I am always ready to talk with you,
if you can comprehend what I am saying."

"Never mind, mother, I am six years old; it won't be a great while
before I shall be 'a little older,' and then I can realize how very good
you are to me, my dear mother, and how patient you are."

Mrs. Grosvenor clasped the child in her arms. "What makes little pet
look so sober to-night?" asked Captain Grosvenor, as taking her on his
knee, he pushed the dark brown curls from off her forehead, and looked
into her mild, blue eyes. "What makes Sea-flower so quiet? Has anything
happened to either of your seven kittens? or has some flower which has
lived already a week longer than nature designed, at last withered, and
gone the way of all frailties?"

"O, father, I should be very wicked if I were not happy, when I have so
much to make me so; but sometimes, when I hear the shore roaring so loud
as it does this evening, and look up at the stars, as they twinkle in
their homes far away in the sky, there is something which comes over me
of sadness, making me a great deal happier; and there is one particular
star which I always notice, for it seems as if it was looking down at me
so gently, that I forget myself, and put out my hand to touch it, as if
it was not so far away; and I fancy sometimes that the star can read my
thoughts, for it seems to smile when I am happiest."

"You are a little fanciful creature; you must learn to leave off
dreaming when you are awake."

"What shall you dream about when father goes away to sea again?" asked
Harry.

"I think mother will not let him go; we cannot spare him; but if you
should go, father, I shall love to dream of you very often; I will think
of you every day, sailing on the water with a heart so light. O, it must
be so pleasant to live, to sleep on the water! And you will want to see
dear mother and Harry, when you are so far away; you will not forget
us;" and she hid her cheek in the hardy captain's bosom.

"No, no, darling, I shan't forget you; but we wont talk any more about
it now; I have not gone yet."

What was it made that stout man's voice tremulous, as he called for his
evening paper? Many a time had that stern voice been heard above the
hurricane's roar, giving the word of command,--why did it tremble now?
Was it that voice of childhood which sank into his heart?

       *       *       *       *       *

"Missus, de sun hab done gone, now, de chllens hab all gone from school
long ago, and Bingo's two eyes hab clean gone stretched, looking up de
road for de Sea-flower," remarked that worthy, putting his ebony head in
at the drawing-room door, where sat Mrs. Grosvenor, so busily engaged
making those garments for her husband, which she feared would be needed,
alas! so soon that she had not perceived the hours were gliding on
apace, and that it was long past the time when Sea-flower usually came
tripping in from school to receive her evening kiss, and to tell over
the events of the day.

"Has Harry come home yet? she may have gone up to the High School to
meet him."

"Yes, missus, massa Harry here a long time."

"Then you had better go and see what keeps her; you will probably meet
her on the way, and if it is not too late you may take the horse and
give her a ride."

"Yes, missus;" and the jet pony, so many shades lighter than his driver,
was soon lost in the distance.

The last faint shadows of the sun had died away, the moon had risen in
all her queenly beauty, and Vingo had not returned; neither had anything
been seen of the Sea-flower since she had left home early in the
afternoon; and now Mrs. Grosvenor really began to feel anxious, as she
stood looking out into the night; for, although the child was accustomed
to stroll about the fields in search of wild flowers, whenever she
liked, she had never before stayed away so long.

"Husband, had you not better go and see what has become of her? I cannot
think what keeps them."

"It is a mystery; but give yourself no uneasiness; I'll be bound the
child has made a safe harbor somewhere. She usually has a
look-out aloft."

"Ah! there they come, under a full press of sail!" cried Harry, who
loved well to imitate the nautical phrases of his father. "Does she not
make a grand figure-head!"

"Figure-head!" exclaimed Vingo; "I am tinking, young massa, if dis 'ere
head ob mine had not been made so solid like, 'spressly for figuring,
dat it been a powerful time afore you cotch sight ob dis bit ob
fly-away again. De good Lord be praised! but if I don't tink little
missy so filled wid what de angels libs on dat she make use ob de shadow
ob dar wings to take herself away ober dose yar commons! It make me
smile to tink how dat old Ingin look at Sea-flower, as if de sun was
puttin' out his eyes."

"Why, my child, you surely have not been out to Quady's hut! it is a
long way."

"Ha! a fast sailor, always has a fair breeze; dropped anchor in the best
harbor in these parts! But what's this? colors half-mast?" exclaimed the
captain, as he caught sight of a little pouch, woven together of bright
colored basket stuff, slung over her shoulder; a little drab paw,
darting from out its deepest recesses in pursuit of a tantalizing curl,
soon explains how matters stand, and a voice of the greatest feline
sweetness is heard in reply to divers catlike salutations, proceeding
from the adjoining apartment.

"This is my wallet, which Quady has made for me to carry my kittens in;
and pussy has enjoyed it so much! 'Tis the way Quady's people used to
carry their babies through these very streets, only there were prettier
walks here then. O, he has told me so many pretty stories!"

"How came you to have your kitten with you? and why did you go away so
far, and stay so late, my dear? I have been looking for you a
long time."

"O, mother, I will tell you all about it. As I was bidding my kittens
good-bye, after having a little talk with them, as I usually do before
going to school, I missed one of the smallest, which I call Charity,
because she always looks up at the larger ones, when they play with her
too roughly, in such a forgiving way. I looked all around, and not
finding her, thought she must have strayed away by herself, and I ran
off to school. Our lesson for to-day was Faith, Hope, and Charity; as I
read the last word I looked down, and there was my own Charity peeping
at me from out my pocket. I explained to my teacher how it happened, for
I thought she would be displeased; but having an errand into the next
room just then, she did not think of kitten, who lay quietly sleeping
again; and when I had said all my lessons, my teacher excused me, saying
it was because I had been a good girl. And so we strolled over the
commons together, Charity and I, and I dressed her in wild flowers, and
she did look so innocent! On we went, I running after kitten, and then
kitten after me, when, before I thought how far we had come, I espied
Quady's low home a little way off, and he was sitting at the door. He
did not see me until I stood before him, and then he went into his house
and brought out a large pipe and gave to me; I thought it so strange
that poor Quady should think a little girl could smoke a pipe, but I
took it to please him, and then he showed me so many curious things;
there was a large bow, and arrows with sharp bits of iron in their
heads, and he was going to shoot a little sparrow which sat upon the
fence, but I caught his arm, and begged him not to kill the poor thing.
I told him God made the sparrow to be happy, and he asked me if I meant
the Great Spirit, if my God was his God? When I told him it was, he put
up his bow and came and sat down by me, and taking a little paper from
his bosom, unrolled it, and there were the daisies which I had given him
so long ago! He asked if the Great Spirit made them, too, and if he had
sent me to give them to him; and when I told him the great Spirit made
all the flowers, made everything, and loved everybody who loved him,
and that he would let his children all come home and live with him
by-and-by, the tears rolled down his cheeks, and he said,--'O! me see my
brothers, then! me not be all alone! Me love Great Spirit; Great Spirit
so good to send little white-face to tell me how to get home.' Then I
could not help crying myself, mother, for I thought I should like to
meet Quady's brothers there."

"Ah! bress de Lord, but it am good as a small bible to hear dat chile
talk;" was heard in a suppressed voice, as it went stable-ward.

Day after day passed, and that little one was often seen, attended by
old Nep, or in the arms of the faithful Vingo, on her way to the low
home over the commons, much to the horror of sensitive mothers, who
shook their heads and said, "she is a strange child." Never was
Sea-flower happier than when she might be allowed to go and see the
Indian; and it was indeed a strange sight to see that red man, the only
representative of a departed tribe, gazing upon the little one, as she
talked to him of Jesus and his word.

The autumn of the year had come. It was one of those soul-stirring days
in October, which cannot fail to arouse the most thoughtless mind to a
sense of the wonderful works of creation. The Sea-flower had gone to the
"low home over the commons." Hand in hand, that red man and the tender
child, they went their way, to where he pointed out the graves of his
people; there were no stones, not a mound to mark the spot. Why was
there need of any? He alone knew the place; none others had cared to
know, until now, when the number of his days had well-nigh been told,
this little child, of a summer's day, had breathed upon those ice-bound
springs, till they had broken their bands, and were gliding on in the
bright sun-light, smoothly on,--on, forever. There did the Indian lay
him down, where he would have them bury him; and there, for the first
and last time, did he breathe a prayer over the graves of the departed,
to that Great Spirit, whom he had been taught was the one great
Father of all.

"Mother, poor Quady is not so strong as he used to be; when he pounds
the corn, to make nice cakes for me, his hands tremble, and I notice he
takes all the broth which you send to him, for he says he has no
appetite for anything else."

It was a holiday. A great display of military had arrived from the
continent.

"Sea-flower, you will see the beautiful horses, and the epaulets, the
white plumes, and the shining swords, but they need not think to turn
your brain with all their splendor."

"Brother Harry, I should like to see all those splendid things, but I
had much rather go and see Quady to-day; it is several days since I have
been there, and we have such good times! I love to talk with him
so well."

"You strange little creature, you can go to see the Indian any time."

"Yes, but some how I feel as if I would like to go to-day. I know he
will like to see me;" and the child was soon on her way to the "low
home," with Nep, who carried the pail of broth. As she drew near, she
saw that Quady was not sitting at his door, as he usually did, to watch
for her, but instead, the door was closed, and everything around was
still; nothing was heard, save the breakers as they dashed upon the
shore. Opening the door, which was never fast, she saw before her, the
form of poor Quady, stretched upon the rude bed, and as he tossed to and
fro, in an uneasy slumber, he muttered the words,--"pale-face--gone."

"Pale-face has come! Quady, Pale-face has come to you! Look up, and take
some of the nice broth which I have brought."

Slowly he opened his eyes, and seeing the little one was by his side, he
raised his hands aloft and said, "Me thank Great Spirit; me afraid Great
Spirit take me home without seeing little Pale-face once more. Me see my
brothers soon; a little while, and Pale-face come to see us. Great
Spirit bless little Pale-face," he feebly said; "she make poor
Quady happy."

With that dying blessing his spirit took its flight. He had passed away,
the last one of his kind, he who had lived a life of solitude, apart
from the world, looking upon the white man as having taken from him his
home, his lands, and the forests which would have been his if the white
man had not, long years ago, laid them low; yes, he had breathed a
blessing, with his last breath, upon the pale-face. He who had not a
brother left to bury him, had thanked God that the Pale-face had come to
close his eyes; yes, it was the voice of childhood which had made his
last moments happy, had pointed out the road which leads the
wanderer home.

It was a scene to melt the hardest heart; that little child, scarcely as
high as the rude couch, reaching up to close the eyes of him whom she
should see no more. As she sat by his side, and looked around the room
where she had spent so many happy hours, a sense of loneliness crept
over her. There was the pipe which he had smoked, laid away on the
little chimney-piece, and by the bed-side was the pail of broth with
which she had thought to please him so much; and at the remembrance she
burst into tears, and her tears fell upon the hand of him who lay
sleeping. Neptune, hearing the sad tones of his mistress, came and
looked into her face; and when she took no notice of him, he crouched at
her feet, and howled piteously. And thus they found them, for the little
one could not think of leaving her dear Quady there alone. They buried
him, as he had wished, by the side of his brothers; and when the
Sea-flower gazed into that narrow house, so dark and still, she looked
up and said, "Mother, I shall love to look at the stars oftener now, for
he has gone to live among those bright and shining ones." Sadly did the
child miss her visits to the "low home," and when in years to come her
thoughts wandered over the past, her love for the poor lone Indian had
not diminished. The stars shone brighter and brighter, even as her light
was "shining unto the perfect day."

"What little missy look up in de sky so much for?" asked Vingo, as he
walked by the shore, with Sea-flower in his arms, as was his custom of a
bright moonlit evening.

"O, Vingo, it is so beautiful! I was watching those fleecy clouds, until
they seemed to be little waves in which the stars were sailing upward,
up, and as they looked back to us, their smile seemed to grow purer; and
I think I can see Quady among them. Don't you see him, Vingo?"

"Does you mean dose little black specks in de moon, missy?"

"No, Quady is one of the bright ones now; and you will be made white,
too, when you go there. Don't you want to go and be one of those bright
ones, Vingo?"

"Does all de white folks go dar?"

"Yes, if they love God when they are here; if they are good he will
take them home to be with him."

"Den I don't tink I wants to go dar."

"O, Vingo! that is very wicked! Why don't you want to go?"

"'Cause, missy, dey say old slabe massa am one ob de best men in de
whole ob Berginny, and I's 'fraid he catch Bingo and tie him up again."

At that moment a shadow was seen in the distance, and Harry came
bounding over the ground on the wings of the wind.

"Ah! I thought I should find you here, Sea-flower, making the
acquaintance of some of your sisters, as they hold up their heads in the
moonlight. Vingo, what do you think? Father has received orders to sail
in a week!"

"O, go way, massa Harry; what you mean by dat?" said Vingo, letting fall
his lower jaw, while the whites of his eyes looked as if they had some
time or other been in contact with a ghost.

"I mean that the Tantalizer will be ready for sea in a week, and Father
will go master of her on a Cape Horn voyage. O, if father would only let
me go with him, how delighted I should be! But he says I am too young,
that I am not strong enough; yet I know of boys two or three years
younger than I am, who have been around Cape Horn, and are now making a
second voyage. I have often heard old Captain Wendall tell of the first
voyage father made, when he was but ten years old, and how nimbly he ran
up to the mast-head, and was always the first to discover the whale as
she spouted, and would sing out, 'there she blows!' equal to an old tar.
I must prevail on father to let me go with him."

"Dear, dear Harry, do not talk so! Only think how mother will feel to
have father go! He has been at home so long, ever since I was born, and
how would she feel to have you both go away, and no one but Vingo and
myself to comfort her."

"No one but you to comfort her? You are worth a dozen like me, darling!"
and the little manly fellow threw his arms around her neck, and felt
that he had the very best sister in the world.

"Ah! young massa, I tinks you hab de right sort ob spirit; you's born to
be no land-lubber; but it my 'pinion you had better stay wid good, kind
missus and de Sea-flower a while longer; you not find a better berth,
I'm tinkin'."

"No, that I shall not; let me go where I will, I shall not find a
mother like her; and as for Sea-flower, I don't believe there was ever
another in the whole ocean like her."

"How funny you talk, Harry; you make me think of little Moses in the
bulrushes."

"Ah! there goes a gull, flying over my right shoulder, headed seaward;
the sailor's omen of good luck; perhaps father may change his mind,
after all."

"Harry, I want you to promise me you will say nothing about going to sea
before mother; will you promise?"

"I never could refuse you anything, little pussy, but you do not say
anything about yourself; would you not like to get rid of such a
graceless fellow?"

The child's sympathies had been so wrapped up in her mother's grief,
that it had not occurred to her mind how much she should miss her dear
father; and as she thought of Harry, who had always played so gently
with her, and came every night, after her mother had heard her prayers,
and told such beautiful stories, about the good little fairies, until
she fell asleep, and dreamed they had all come to be her sisters; and
was awakened in the morning by the tramping of so many little feet, (in
near proximity to those brown curls, which seemed to have been awake
long before their mistress), and saw fourteen blue eyes looking at her,
besides two roguish black ones, behind the curtain, which she did not
see, and would wonder if it might not have been the kittens, after all,
that had whispered in her ear. As she thought of all his kindness to
her, she was silent; and as the negro drew the mantle more closely about
her, he wondered if the little drop which fell upon his hand was of dew.

Preparations for the sailing of the Tantalizer were rapidly going on.
She was a stout-built ship of three hundred tons burthen, the pride of
her owners; and why should she not have been? for many a rich cargo had
she brought to them, thousands and thousands of dollars had she added to
their possessions; many a hurricane had she outrode, and as she sat so
proudly on the water, she looked as if she might outlive many more.
Captain Grosvenor had sailed master of her upon six successive voyages,
making a "telling" voyage each time, until, his fortune becoming
sufficiently ample, he had thought to spend the rest of his days on
shore; but, after a respite of seven years, he had become so restless,
and so longed to try his fortune upon the water again, that, receiving a
flattering offer from those in whose employ he had formerly sailed, he
consented, as he said, "for the last time," to make a voyage in his
favorite Tantalizer. Mrs. Grosvenor had earnestly hoped that her husband
would follow the sea no more, knowing that their means were sufficient
to supply all their wants; and since God in his providence had consigned
this little one to their care, she had congratulated herself that there
was one more tie to bind her husband to his home; and, indeed, the child
was as dear to him as if she had been his own flesh and blood; and as
those last seven years upon shore stood up before him, now that he was
about to leave all that was dear to him, as having been spent more in
keeping with God's laws than in any previous part of his life, he felt
that he was a better man. Naturally of a noble, generous disposition, he
had gained the respect of all who knew him. Pleasant and gentlemanly in
his manners, he was no less firm in his duties on shipboard, and his
stern word of command was received by his men with the same hearty
"aye, aye," as when he cracked a joke with them over the club-room fire.
Harry had kept his promise in regard to his wish to go with his father;
and when he looked into his mother's face, and saw how mournful was her
smile, he felt that it would indeed be cruel to think of leaving her.
But when he heard the sailors saying, as he clambered up the rigging,
that it was a pity such a sprightly little fellow could not go along
with them, his desire to ship for the voyage knew no bounds, and seeking
his father, in the cabin, he had a long interview with him, gaining the
promise that when he should return he would secure for him a good lay,
and that he might then commence the nautical career, which the captain
plainly saw his inclinations had marked out.

The day had arrived when the ship would sail. Every thing had been made
ready for a long voyage, should the captain not meet with his usual good
fortune, which was considered unnecessary by her owners, so sanguine
were they of her success; such implicit faith did they place in the
abilities of her captain, that in securing his services, they looked
upon the voyage as told. Ah! who can tell if that proud ship may ever
return? Was there not one who looked upon her thus? Within that happy
home, now so desolate, sat the wife of him who had just taken his leave
of her, and the bitterness of that hour who can tell? She only who has
tasted the same cup of sorrow; she who has given to the mercies of the
deep him whom she holds most dear on earth. Such an one can indeed
realize what were the feelings of that wife, as she sat at the window,
her eye fixed upon the ship which was bearing away him whom she might
never see more. The white sail is smaller and smaller, until it appears
but a speck, and is finally lost in the distance. And then what a sense
of desolation! Oh, might we all seek for strength in time of trouble, of
Him who will not turn a deaf ear to the cries of his children! Who hath
said, "As thy day, so shall thy strength be." Would that all might seek
for comfort in the hour of trial, as did that stricken one,--in prayer!
The Sea-flower had, with Harry, accompanied her father in the ship, as
she was towed out by the steamer over the bar. As they were about to
cast off, when the steamer should return, the father sought to bid his
children farewell. Turning to his boy, he bade him be all that a son and
brother should be. With one long embrace his eye rested upon the
Sea-flower; his voice failed him.

"Father," said the child, "you will soon come to us again; then you will
never leave us;" pointing to a little cross which she had privately
embroidered and set up in his state-room, she said, "you will be happy,
father, so happy, on the water! But sometimes, when the stars look down
upon you, or the great waves break over your ship, you will want to see
us; and when you look at the pretty name which you gave me," (pointing
out the word Natalie, which was wrought upon the foot of the cross),
"you may know that I am thinking of you. Our hearts shall be with you."

With a father's blessing upon his children, he suffered them to be taken
away; and as the loud huzza went up from the deck of the steamer, he saw
his little one gazing back upon him, from amidst the waving banners,
with a look which sank into his heart; her gentle words were still
sounding in his ear, and it would seem as if that voice of childhood
was of riper years. Her words were never forgotten. Over the spirit of
the child there came that which she had never known before; ah! gentle
one, it is but the first drop of bitterness which must be mingled with
the sweets in every life. May the All-Father keep thy feet from hidden
thorns, strewing thy pathway only with the sweet flowers of innocence!
He had gone; and the heart of the Sea-flower echoed,--"he has gone;" the
very breeze which wafted him from home sighed "gone." Is there a heart
which never knew the tone?




CHAPTER IV.


WESTWARD HO!


  "I hear the tread of pioneers,
     Of nations yet to be;
   The first low wash of waves, where soon
     Shall roll a human sea."

        J.G. WHITTIER.


  "Far on the prairies of the West,
     A lovely floweret grows;
   With glowing pen, each traveller oft
     Describes the Prairie Rose.

  "For ages there alone it grew,
     The prairie's gem and pride;
   But now the Rose of Sharon fair
     Is blooming at its side."

        MRS. J.H. HANAFORD.


"Och, sure, mem, and it's meself that's afther a thinking that we shall
be raching good ould Ireland, from the ither side of this great Ameriky,
if we kape on."

"Have patience, Biddy, we shall be there to-morrow at this time; there
is nothing like keeping up good courage."

"Cabbage! mem, and it's meself has not seen a hapurth of a cabbage since
we stopped the last time, to get a bit to sustain hunger, sure; I think
mem, they must have rolled off, when the kitchen mirror and gridiron
dhraped down," said Biddy, desirous to atone in some way for the
disappearance of sundry heads of cabbage, which she had found means of
disposing of, even in its unprepared state, while buried among washtubs,
cheese-presses, and churns.

"Bad luck to the likes of it, indade!" and she caught at a small
dining-table just in time to set it upon its legs again.

"I don't wonder Biddy complains, mother; it's enough to weary the
patience of Job, riding so slowly over these dismal prairies; it would
really do my eyes good to get sight of a hill, or any thing to break
this continual sameness. What can father be thinking of, to take us to
such a lonely, out of the way place? Never mind, Biddy, we shall have
the pleasure of seeing where the sun goes to."

Thus spake the occupants of a long, covered wagon, moving westward,
drawn by four stout oxen, with as many horses and cows following in
the rear.

"Drive on there, Patrick," called out Mr. Santon, who was riding his own
horse by their side; "drive on, we must get to the settlement by
another night."

"Yes, sir, I am afther urging on the bastes for the last piece or two;
but the crathurs have come so far, they don't know, sure, if they be
jist laying home, or afther a raching there."

Mr. Santon had formerly been a merchant in the city of Boston; he had
been doing a heavy business, and had accumulated a handsome fortune, but
being one of those easy sort of persons, who think everybody as honest
as themselves, he had, in an evil hour, endorsed largely for those who
were worse than swindlers, who had not even as much as thanked him for
his name; and he had lost nearly all in that one act. Many friends he
had, who knowing his worth, had kindly offered their assistance, and
would willingly have set him on his feet again, for they disliked to
lose so valuable a citizen from their midst; but he, declining all
assistance from those, whom he knew gave not grudgingly, thanked them
with a grateful heart, and taking what little was left to him after
paying his debts, had started with his wife and only child, and two
servants whom he had retained, for the far West, intent upon leading a
quiet, unmolested life, in the bosom of his family. Haying supplied
himself with all requisite tools, etc., for tilling the ground, for
which occupation he had always a great desire, they had now, after a
fatiguing journey of fourteen days, arrived at the little log-house, in
the western part of the state of Ohio, which was to be their future
home. This was a great change for Mrs. Santon, who had spent the most of
her days in the city, and had always servants to call upon for her least
wish, never being obliged to lift a finger against her desire. She was
one of the best of women, with a kind word for every one, and greatly
did the poor, upon whom she had bestowed so many gifts of charity,
lament her departure. In the church, the sewing-society, by the bedside
of the suffering, and in the home of poverty, had she a place; her worth
was known to all. Cheerfully did she resign all to go with her husband,
to follow him, wherever it might be; with him would she be happy in
their home, though it might be ever so humble. Their daughter of ten
years was a sprightly, pretty child, with dark hair, and bright, black,
tell-tale eyes, which looked as if they might make sad havoc, when a few
more years should have added to their brilliancy. Resembling her mother
in features, her disposition was like her father; free and easy in her
ways, she was happy so long as every thing bent to her wishes; but her
mother could not but notice with regret that her child had acquired a
hasty, impatient manner, which the indulgence of her father in no way
served to improve; yet she was a warm-hearted little creature, and it
was with great difficulty that Mrs. Santon could bring herself to
censure her. Still the mother must do her duty toward her child, and
many a prayer had been offered, that she might have strength to
act aright.

The long covered wagon stopped at the door of their new home just as the
sun was going down.

There was but one house in sight of their little cabin, and that was, if
anything, still smaller than their own; nothing was to be seen on all
sides but wide prairie land, and as the little Winifred cast her eye
around, she exclaimed:

"O! mother, what shall we do here? I am sure I shall not like to stay;
there is no one here."

"You forget that God is here, my child," said the mother; and she
commenced assisting Biddy in setting up some few articles that would
make them comfortable through the night, while her husband, with Pat,
attended to the out-door affairs.

"Och, and sure, mem," said Biddy, as she put her emerald head in at the
door of the cabin; "faith, and it's not yesilf, mem, that's going to
rest in the same room with the likes of me."

"Yes, Biddy, I see no other way; we shall have to get used to western
life. I think, by partitioning off one corner, here, with blankets, we
shall get along very well; and then it will be right handy for you in
the morning to get the breakfast; you will not have the trouble of
coming down stairs."

"Yes, mem, yese makes everything so asy like! but it's such strange
times for yese, mem!" and Biddy went flying about the room, her face
glowing with excitement, pulling at every uneven log in the house,
fully persuaded there must be some other apartment, if no more than a
closet; and as she caught at a loose board, which only separated them
from the open air, she looked through, delighted that she had discovered
another room, and that her mistress would not now be obliged to share
the same apartment with herself; for as the remembrance of certain
devotional exercises to be gone through, over each bead in her rosary,
came to her, she had her doubts if the "blissed St. Pathrick," (who, for
reasons best known to herself, was her favorite saint), would condescend
to listen to petitions offered from such near proximity to the
unbelieving Protestants; not that she thought her mistress was not a
most excellent woman, but she was a Protestant, and often had she called
upon the blissid St. Patrick, to "bring her dear lady over to the thrue
faith." As she bent down to look into the opening, congratulating
herself upon the discovery, a large cat darted through, full into her
face, and ran with speed out at the door.

"Och, murther! and may the good saints presarve us alive! What will
become of us at all?" and in her fright she went headlong into a pile of
milk-pans, her unwieldy arms making certain involuntary revolutions,
causing the air to resound with a chorus, which might have done credit
to the first callithumpian in the land.

"Ho! what is all this?" cried Mr. Santon, who had stepped in at the
commencement of the prelude; "what are you looking for under those
pans, Biddy?"

"Sure, sir, and it's mesilf that's afther being exterpretated intirely!
The varmints! faith, there was a dozen, sir, came scratching at me;" and
she pointed at the aperture, as if in dread expectation of seeing their
ghosts in pursuit; but lo! instead, there was the full, round face of
Pat, who, having been left to take up his night's lodging with the
creatures, in the apology for a barn, had espied the light, and not
being able to resist the temptation of getting one more glimpse at the
"swate Biddy," he had ventured to look in, and catching a glimpse of her
woebegone face from among the shining tins, he exclaimed:

"Och, honey dear, and has it come to this? that yese obliged to make
yese bed of the likes of that! And if ye'll wait a bit it's mesilf
that'll run and fetch some of the nate, saft sthraw, that ye can fill
the tins, and 'twill do ye betther; indade, and it's none but a hathen
that could endure the likes of that!"

"Ah! Pathrick, is it ye? and was ye pint up in there wid the crathurs?"

"Yes, it's mesilf that will be risting with the bastes, the night," said
Pat, thinking she had alluded to the creatures in the barn; "and I'll be
wishing ye swate dhrames, and a plinty' of thim;" saying which he
disappeared, leaving the trembling Biddy in great anxiety of mind as to
what should be his fate.

As the little Winnie peeped out from behind the screen, when they had
all retired, and saw Biddy counting her beads, with her eye still fixed
upon the spot where she had last seen the smiling Patrick, she laughed
outright, in spite of the crevices in the roof overhead, and she laid
her down and looked up at the stars which came twinkling in upon her,
'till those great black eyes gradually diminished in size, and her
little brain was busily engaged among the familiar scenes of the home
which she had left so far away.

Cautiously did Biddy, with the first dawn of day, advance toward where
she had dreamed her poor "Pathrick" was in close contact with the
veritable bastes, and the family was awakened from their slumbers by her
loud tones, lamenting that "niver a vistage of Pathrick, the cats, or
the ante-room was left," for on looking out, the only object which met
her gaze was the sun, which was just coming up in the east.

"What's the time, Biddy?" asked Mrs. Santon.

"And it's jist about three hours afther sunrise, mem."

"I think you must be mistaken, Biddy; we cannot surely have been
sleeping so long after our usual time for rising."

"Indade, and the sun bes jist coming in sight, and it must have been a
powerful time travelling over, sure. I'm thinking they must be afther
dhrying their takettles a long time, back there in ould Boston."

Time passed on, and our adventurers were becoming more and more
accustomed to western life. Mr. Santon had found his lands to be in a
very good state of cultivation, the former owner having been a Dutchman,
who thoroughly understood what a good farm ought to be. Mrs. Santon had
proved herself to be one of the best of housekeepers, and greatly did
she pride herself on her abilities for filling the station of a farmer's
wife. As they sat down of an evening, to their meal of bacon and Indian
cakes, and contrasted their present circumstances with what had been
their former situation in life, they could not repress a smile at the
change; but they were happy, contented in their humble home, and the
bread which had been earned by the sweat of the brow was sweeter, the
social enjoyments dearer, than when in fashionable life they had been
obliged to live with an eye to the customs of society; even Winnie had
found some attractions in their little western home. The neighbors
comprising those who lived for twenty miles around, the nearest being a
mile distant, were pleasant, light-hearted people, and the civilities
which were shown to the new comers were without end.

A small log-house, unlike the others of the settlement in its exterior,
inasmuch as it was honored with an additional door, served as their
place of worship; and it was with great joy that Winnie looked forward
to Sunday morning, when, mounted upon her pony, she might ride off for
six miles to the church, accompanied by her father and mother, each
riding their respective horses. Arrived at the church, they dismounted
at the great horseblock, leaving their hats and mantles thereon, as was
the custom; and it was a pretty sight to see the ladies walking into
church, their cheeks glowing with exercise, and the fresh, morning air.
As Winnie entered, her long curls composing themselves after a frolic
with the breeze, many a sly glance was aimed at her from the neighboring
pews, in spite of the consciences of their owners reminding them that it
was holy day. It was a source of great comfort to Mrs. Santon, that she
as able to come so far to this place of worship. The little society
numbered not over forty persons, yet those words spoken by our Saviour,
"where two or three are gathered together in my name, there will I be in
the midst of them," came with renewed freshness to her mind, each time
she entered those doors, and she felt that she had never tasted the
bliss of uninterrupted love for Christ, as now.

The shepherd of this little flock was a man fearing God, just, and
upright; his services in the cause of Christ were offered voluntarily,
without money, or price. Coming, as he had, in his old age, to spend
the remainder of his days in the family of a beloved son, he had found
with joy that his declining years might be profitably employed; that he
might earn that reward which is promised to those who make a right use
of the talents which God has given them; that he might merit those
blessed words, "well done, good and faithful servant." His labors among
this people had not proved ineffectual; many had been brought to see the
great mercies of their Redeemer, souls had been converted to Christ, and
as the song of praise went up from beneath that humble roof, the glad
shouts were borne aloft, and angels joined in the chorus.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a beautiful afternoon, everybody was busy about the farm of Mr.
Santon; Winnie was sitting at the door, intent upon her own thoughts,
when she caught sight of their good minister approaching upon his horse,
his silver locks flying in the wind. Biddy, learning they were to have a
visit from the "Protestant praste," turned first pale, then red, and
when the old gentleman dismounted at the door, she let fall the shoulder
of bacon, which she was preparing for the supper, and darted behind the
screen, in her haste hitting her foot against the lowest tin, in a pile
of two dozen, which brought the rest down to inquire into the state
of affairs.

The presence of the old gentleman served to impart a cheerfulness to all
who gazed upon his happy countenance, and his kind tones, as he inquired
for the welfare of the family, penetrated the screen, reaching the ear
of Biddy, who sat wondering what the good father Teely would say, if he
knew she had so far sinned as to remain under the same roof with a
"wicked Protestant praste;" but as she heard him speaking to Pat, who
had come in of an errand, with such a pleasant voice, she ventured a
peep out, and the form of her thoughts just at that moment, might have
been a little, a very little, savoring of heresy. Suffice it to say,
when the old gentleman took his departure, there was a peculiar twinkle
in Biddy's eye, and she had so far overcome her aversion to the
"imposther" as to have had a few private words with him, which had by no
means decreased her usual flow of good spirits. It was evident that
Biddy "had on her high heels," for the rest of that evening. As Winnie
strolled over the farm, enjoying the evening breeze, reflecting upon her
good pastor's words, her attention was suddenly attracted toward the
enclosure where the cows were being milked, by hearing the voice of
Biddy, who, as she "stripped" the patient animal again, for the dozenth
time, was very much engaged with Pat, whose round, smiling face, as he
glanced at her from the opposite side of the creature, shone with
delight; and as the white foam rose higher and higher in Biddy's pail,
so did the warmth of her feelings get the better of her, and those
tell-tale eyes of Winnie's danced with mischief, as she overheard the
following conversation:

"Ah, Pathrick dear, does ye think there is the laste sin in it? And
indade, it's mesilf that's thinking the blissid St. Pathrick would be
afther misthaking him for a good Catholic!"

"And what did he say, honey dear? did he think he could be afther
comforting the likes of us?"

"Thrath, and he did; it was himsilf that said niver a word when I was
spaking to him about it, but was afther showering a blissing upon us,
the dear sowl!"

"But what will the praste say? Biddy, sure he'll be very angry,
intirely."

"Faith, and it's no longer ago than the day afther yesterday, that the
misthress was saying if we confissed our sins with a right spirit, we
should be afther being forgiven; and now, Pathrick, I'm thinking we 'll
be afther getting married, and then there will be a plinty of time for
confissing."

"Och, honey, and that's the thruth for ye," said the assenting Pat, and
together they walked towards the cabin.

Winnie, putting that and that together, made up her mind that Patrick
and Biddy had become tired of a life of single blessedness, and were
seriously contemplating matrimony, which was, indeed the case; and
Biddy, having made known her desires to her mistress, who saw no just
cause why they should not be bound together in the holy bands of
wedlock, the next Wednesday was set apart when Patrick and Biddy would
be made husband and wife.

The day arrived, and Biddy, arrayed in her best snuff-color, with
ribbons and laces to match, stood up with him of her choice, to
pronounce those vows which should make them one, even though the
ceremony should be performed by a Protestant.

"Will you take this woman to be your wedded wife?" spake the reverend
gentleman, in a clear, distinct tone.

"Ah! kape on, kape on!" shouted the enraptured Pat; "don't be throublin
yesilf with questions; dear knows it's mesilf that's in it;" and his
smiling face was mirrored in numerous brass buttons, which were hanging
around his buff vest.

As soon as the old gentleman could get his voice again, for the
boisterous joy of Pat, be turned to the trembling Biddy.

"Do you take this man to be your lawful husband, and leaving all others,
will you cleave unto him alone?"

"Indade, your Riverence!" exclaimed Biddy, "I'll be afther claving him
all the days of me life! It's not mesilf, sure, that was always born and
reared in the great city of Cork, that'll be doing things by halves!"
and in her happiness she caught Pat around the neck, giving him a smack,
which might have been attributed to the opening of the bottle of whiskey
with which Mr. Santon had graced the occasion, had it not been for those
great eyes of Winnie, which would discover the accident, in spite of
their mistress's endeavors to direct their attention elsewhere.

And now Patrick and Biddy were husband and wife. Never was there a more
devoted couple; the days glided pleasantly on, Biddy keeping time in her
endeavors to please her mistress with the joys of her heart; everything
went on cheerfully, not a note of discontent was heard, except that the
little Winnie would sometimes break into sighing for the pleasures of
her early home. Nothing occurred to disturb the quietude of this home in
the West, until early in the ensuing Fall, when Mrs. Santon was taken
with a violent attack of Western fever, which threatening to undermine
her health, Mr. Santon was fearful lest they should be obliged to return
East; but the fever leaving her, she was again able to attend to her
duties, with only an occasional "shake," and the discussion as to their
return was for the present discontinued.




CHAPTER V.


THE OUTWARD BOUND.


  "Go in thy glory o'er the ancient sea,
   Take with thee gentle winds thy sails to swell,
   Sunshine and joy upon thy streamers be;
     Fare thee well, bark; farewell!"

        MRS. HEMANS.


 "Farewell; God knows when we shall meet again.
  I have a faint, cold fear thrilling through my veins,
  That almost freezes up the heat of life."

        SHAKESPEARE'S "ROMEO AND JULIET."


As the dews of heaven fall gently, lulling the flowers to rest, so did
the low, clear voice of the Sea-flower soothe the weary spirits of Mrs.
Grosvenor, as she read from the evening paper the following paragraph:

"Spoken by bark Constitution, of New York, in latitude 39 deg. 20',
longitude 45 deg., ship Tantalizer, of Nant., Capt. I. W. Grosvenor, eighty
days from home; had taken seventy barrels of sperm oil, and was made
fast to a forty-barrel right whale: would sail for South Seas in a few
days; all well."

"Hurrah for father!" exclaimed Harry; "he will be at home in less than
two years, at that rate, and then he promised me that I should see what
old ocean is made of!"

"My son, you will learn full soon what a life at sea is; your bright
visions may indeed some of them be realized, the many dangers to which
you will be exposed, will not serve to mar your joys, for to such a
heart as yours they will pass unheeded; but for all that, my son, you
will meet with many hardships, of which you little know. I would wish
you never to follow the sea, my boy, but if you are still determined
upon it, when your father returns I shall have to give my consent,
though with reluctance. You will then be old enough to choose your own
pursuits for life, and whatever they may be, remember, Harry, to lead an
honest, upright life, never losing sight of your early instructions, and
the prayers of your mother."

As Mrs. Grosvenor ceased speaking she looked upon her son, and could
hardly realize that her little rosy-cheeked Harry, who had loved to lay
his head upon her bosom, and listen while she told him of his father,
who had gone away over the blue water, to get such pretty things for his
boy, had grown to be a tall lad of fifteen years; and well might she
have been proud of her son, for the nobleness of his soul was apparent
in every feature. As Vingo expressed himself, "Young massa Harry am got
up ob what neber would get used to de atmosphere ob old Berginny."

"Mother," said Harry, "I shall never forget your teachings. I shall
always hold them sacred in my heart, and wherever I go, in whatever
circumstances I am placed, I will be true to you, my mother;" and he
pressed a fervent kiss upon the brow of her who was worthy the name.

As Mrs. Grosvenor returned her son's embrace, she felt that perhaps she
had said too much; that she had been selfish in wishing to have him
always near her; and she observed that he wore an expression of pain, of
deep emotion, which he in vain attempted to conceal.

The Sea-flower had rested her head upon her hand, and while her mother
had been engaged with Harry, a silent spectator might have wondered to
what unseen object those deep oases of love were imparting their
purity. The words of Harry had fallen upon her ear,--"I shall see what
old Ocean is made of;" shall we follow in the train of her musings? they
will lead us not where the fallen tread. On the banks of the still
waters of peace, 'neath the willows, whose tears are of innocence, frisk
the tender lambs, who taste only of the sweets of the green pasture:--"I
shall see what old ocean is made of." Far away in coral dells, where the
nymphs of ocean tune their harps in praise to Nature's God, the
Sea-flower loves to ramble, as if she had been a child in time long
past, and the mysteries of ocean were that childhood's home. Ah, loved
one, thou dost not pause to find what 'tis which makes thy heart to beat
in unison with the murmuring of the waters! perchance those restless
billows are but the echoings of thy soul's desire to breathe that upper
air, and breathing, gasp for more, 'Tis not for us to tell thee that
bright ones came down, and bore the spirit of her who gave thee life, to
that better land, from hence; nor of the dying prayer, "Lord, keep my
child," which was caught up by each listening billow, and the
supplication, e'er since renewed by the voices of the deep.

Why Mrs. Grosvenor had spoken thus, upon this evening to her son, she
could not tell; she felt there was some irresistible power which bade
her speak that charge,--"never lose sight of your early instructions,
and the prayers of your mother." As she retired early for the night,
feeling slightly indisposed, she met the gaze of Harry, which was fixed
upon her, attributing its uncommon earnestness to a determination on his
part to cherish her words. And he never did forget them But, ah! fond
mother, sleep on, take thy rest, and gain strength for the morrow's
rising, for thou knowest not of the cup of sorrow which is being
prepared for thee.

As Harry sat watching the bright flames as they went crackling up the
chimney, his sister came and rested her head upon his shoulder, where
they remained, until Sea-flower, reminding him of the lateness of the
hour, was about to retire, when her brother threw his arm about her,
begging her to remain a little, for, said he, "I shall not always have
my dear sister to comfort me."

"To comfort you! Harry, do you, who are always so light-hearted and
joyous, need comforting?"

"Ah, pussy, but you can make the happiest heart happier. I was thinking
of mother; it is a comfort to me that she has you, Sea-flower, to cheer
her lonely hours."

"I think mother is less sad than she has been, for now she is looking
forward to the time when father shall come home; and I think she
flatters herself that she can dissuade you from going to sea, and then
we shall be an unbroken, happy family once more."

Those words! why had they power to make that boy turn pale? Had he not
been screened from the bright glow of the fire-light, the Sea-flower
must have noticed his agitation, as she looked up for the good-night
kiss; he clasped her in his arms for a moment, and then the door closed
upon her gentle form.

The old clock in the church tower had struck eleven, and Harry heard the
cry of the watch, "all's well." He still stood where he had parted with
his sister; as her last footfall upon the stairs died away, and the
house was hushed for the night, the plans which he had matured long days
ago, for this night's execution, laid fast hold of him. Can it be
possible that the boy is about to forget those last words of his
mother? No, they are still sounding in his ear; and his promise, "I will
not forget the prayers of my mother." But does he consider, in the step
which he is about to take, of the arrow which will pierce that mother's
heart? He walks the room with a quick tread; he does reflect, and pities
his mother from the bottom of his heart, praying that the blow may fall
gently; but he has shipped for a voyage in the Nautilus, and this night,
at high tide, she will sail.

Noiselessly he ascends to his room, and taking his clothes from the
drawer, where they had been placed with care, makes them into a bundle,
not forgetting the little bible, which was given him by his mother only
the day before, as a birthday gift. Pausing in the upper hall, he
listens, if he may get one last faint sound from those he holds so dear;
but save the uneasy slumbers of Vingo, nothing is heard. All is now
ready for his departure; stepping into the parlors, where hang the
portraits of the family, he takes a farewell of each. The Sea-flower and
his mother! his eyes fill with tears, and his heart is swelling into his
throat; he is upon the point of retracing his steps, when his eye rests
upon the features of his father. The daring boldness of the expression,
which the artist had but too well portrayed, fires him with fresh
courage; every nerve thrills with new life, and kissing the inanimate
canvas, as if it were indeed his dear mother and sister, he tore himself
away from home. Walking rapidly down the deserted street, without
venturing a look back, he passes many an endeared object; the old white
church, where he has been accustomed to worship, Sunday after Sunday,
for many years, holds high its head in the bright moonlight, and the
hands of the old town clock upon the tower, seem to beckon him to
return. He falters; it would seem as if the very doors of the church
would open and receive him. Throwing down the bundle, he kneels upon the
door-stone, and breathes a prayer to heaven, to bless those who will
enter therein when he shall be gone. Pressing his lips to the cold stone
where _they_ have trod, he rises, when lo! standing by his side, with
the package of clothes in his mouth, is the old house dog, Nep; and as
the watch in the tower cries, "past eleven o'clock, and all is well," he
looks wistfully into his master's face, as if he would ask, is all well?
What is to be done? in less than half an hour the ship will be towed
out into the stream; there is no time to be lost, but the dog will not
think of leaving his master, for his experience of years tells him it is
a new thing for the boy to be wandering from home at this unseasonable
hour. In vain did Harry attempt to drive the faithful creature from him,
for never having been an unwelcome companion before, the dog did not
understand his master's threatening gestures; yet he could understand
that something was amiss, and for that reason kept close upon his
master's heels, to shield him from all danger.

Arriving at the wharf, the boy once more attempted to drive the dog from
him, when looking around, he espied a bit of rope, with which he made
him fast to a post, and then clambered up the ship's side. Poor Nep,
keeping his eye upon his master, laid him quietly down, until the lines
were cast off, and the ship began to recede from the shore. O, Harry,
could you leave the companion of your infancy thus, made fast to a yard
rope, to shiver in the night air? It was his only alternative, for in
taking Neptune with him he well knew would be robbing the household of
one more endearment. No sooner had the ship started from her moorings,
and Nep saw that his master was being borne away, than he gave a piteous
howl, and with one bound parted the line which held him, and plunging
into the tide, made vigorous attempts to reach the ship.

"Breakers on the larboard bow!" sung out the captain, who stood laughing
to see the labors of the poor animal, who was becoming exhausted; "let's
see who'll have the first harpoon!" and he hurled a billet at the dog's
head as he was going down for the second time. Harry, seeing the action,
cried out, "Save him! who will save my poor Nep?" and fell fainting upon
the deck. Fortunately the hard-hearted man had missed his mark for once,
and by the light of the moon, the poor fellow was seen, just under the
bows, struggling feebly, as if about to give up, when an old tar, who
had heard Harry's cry for help, sprang with the rapidity of thought, and
seizing a rope, made it into a slip-noose, throwing it over the dog's
head, nearly strangling him as he drew him out of the water. Together
they lay motionless upon the deck, Harry and Nep, when the captain
coming along would have stumbled over them, had he not caught at a
halliard near by.

"What in the name of things unheard of, is all this?" exclaimed he,
with an oath; "this indeed is a curious beginning for the little
land-lubber! I've the greatest mind to set him ashore, to come to his
senses at his leisure, and if I'm not greatly mistaken, he's but a young
runaway at best; but we might as well keep him now, he'll do for testing
the strength of our cats, and as for that other critter, Mr. Sampson,
you may hand him over to the steward, and tell him I shall want a nice
over-all when we get out where the ice makes an inch a minute."

Mr. Sampson, who had shipped as boat-steerer, the same that had rescued
old Nep from drowning, lifted Harry in his arms, and carrying him below,
laid him in his own hammock, where he also brought the dog, who was
apparently lifeless, and laid him by his side. It was a long time before
Harry was restored to consciousness, and when he had gained strength
sufficient to raise himself upon one arm, he looked around in the
darkness, perfectly bewildered; but as the remembrance of his situation
slowly came to him, he called aloud, in agony of spirit, "Nep! poor
drowned Neptune!" tossing upon his hammock, his arm came in contact
with the creature's shaggy coat. Could it be Nep? rescued from the
inhuman treatment of the captain? but he did not move! was he alive?
Harry sprang from his bed, and making his way in the darkness he knew
not whither, finally found himself in the captain's state-room, which
was unoccupied, and seizing a candle, reached his hammock just as Mr.
Sampson returned.

"Man alive! where did you get that light?" asked Sampson, apparently
much terrified.

"O, sir, I took the first one I could find, for I must see if my poor
Neptune is dead!" and he bent over him, smoothing his head, calling
loudly, "Neptune! poor Neptune!" Sampson, recognizing the silver
candlestick as belonging in the captain's state-room, hastened to return
it, knowing well what the consequences would be, if that dignitary
discovered that any one had dared to enter his room without orders; and
giving Harry a few friendly hints, as to what his liberties would be,
under their commander, he drew out a mysterious looking bottle from his
jacket-sleeve, and diluting a small quantity of its contents, gave it to
Harry to drink, which in his weak condition did not come amiss. Turning
to the dog, the kind old tar commenced rubbing him vigorously, bathing
his cold limbs with the spirit, glancing occasionally at the gangway, to
see who might darken the descent. The dog at last gave signs of life,
and to Harry's great joy, he looked up and recognized his master,
Sampson assuring him, in his rough way, that the old fellow would soon
be as good as new.

It was the last watch in the morning, and Harry, hearing loud voices on
deck, ventured out. It was a clear, cold morning, the moon had gone
down, and Venus was just rising in the east; on every side was the blue
rolling water. They had left Nantucket miles behind. Sampson, who was on
duty, seeing the boy looking out, as if he had come to the conclusion
that the island had been submerged, shook out a reef in the line which
he was making fast, that he might catch the boy's ear, and pointing to a
dim light far down in the distant horizon, he remarked, "Look well, it's
old Sankoty; I'm thinking you'll have seen different days when you make
her again."

"Halloo, there, aft!" called out the captain; "has that kitten got to
mewing? Bear a hand there, and square your mizzen topsail," added he, a
tone of mockery.

The order had hardly left his lips, when Harry, with a hearty "aye, aye,
sir!" sprang into the cross-trees, and in a twinkling had reached the
masthead, calling out in a voice which brought to the mind of each old
tar that he had once a mother,--"square away it is, sir."

The captain could scarce believe his eyes; seeing by the smile upon the
face of every man on deck, that he had been decidedly sold, he hailed
him again.

"Mast-head, ahoy!"

"Aye, aye, sir."

"Take your bearings from the fog bank to your leeward, and tell me how
she heads."

The boy hesitated; he "saw which way the wind blew," and bethinking
himself of a small pocket compass which he had about him, sung out,
"East-south-east by east, sir, two points off." The man at the wheel
responded, "East-south-east by east, two points off."

It would not do; the captain saw that he had mistaken his man, and
called all hands to pipe down. As Mr. Sampson passed him, he doffed his
tarpaulin, remarking, "I think, sir, the youngster will do very well for
trying the strength of our cats."

It was evident to Harry, before he had sailed many days under Captain
Jostler, that he had one of the most tyrannical of masters. He had been
a perfect stranger to him when he shipped for the voyage, being a native
of Canada, and from the frozen condition of his heart no one would have
doubted it; had he been a Nantucket man, master Harry would have found
it more difficult in getting away so privately; as it was, no inquiries
were made of him. How different was Harry's situation from what it would
have been had his father procured for him a berth; as it was, he was
doomed to no common hardships, for the captain, having taken a dislike
to him from the first, seemed to take pleasure in making him as
uncomfortable as possible; and had it not been that he was a favorite
with the crew, he would have suffered many times from exposure. Many a
cold, stormy night had he been ordered to take his turn in the watch,
upon deck, in spite of the petitions of the men to fill his place; and
he would walk the deck for hours, to keep from becoming benumbed with
the cold; but, as his mother had predicted, the hardships and dangers to
which he was exposed did not serve to dampen his spirits, and for that
very reason, did the captain shower upon him many abuses; for in spite
of his cruel treatment toward him, he never had had the pleasure of
seeing him look anything but cheerful. At such times, when the wind was
howling fiercely, and the salt spray came dashing over the deck,
freezing upon the cheek of the youthful mariner, but never penetrating
that heart, which was warmed by the remembrance of other days, the boy
would think of home, of his mother, and as he uttered the name of the
Sea-flower aloud, those deep-toned voices of the sea would appear as if
the wild reechoings of the tone; and the low moanings of the wind
through the shrouds were of pity for that lone one on the deck of the
"outward bound." Could the boy have had old Nep for a companion in his
midnight watchings, he would have served to while away the time, but
that pleasure was not allowed him, for Captain Jostler had threatened to
throw the dog overboard, if he came in contact with him in any of his
walks; consequently Harry had doomed him to a life in the hold, seldom
venturing to visit him, except to carry the food which he had saved from
his own short allowance; and he often wondered how the poor fellow could
keep alive on such short rations, not knowing of the purloined bits
which were bestowed upon him from Sampson's commodious jacket-sleeve.

"There she blows! there she blows!" hailed the look-out from the
mast-head, as a school of whales hove in sight, about three miles
astern, one afternoon, when they had been four months on the whaling
grounds. It was the first discovery that had been made, they having been
thus far unsuccessful. All hands were immediately called up; every man
was at his post, making ready for the coming scene of action; not as a
man-of-war, in the charging of cannon, the priming of musketry, and the
brandishing of swords, a battle between man and man, but the boats were
lowered, the harpoons were got out, and everything was made ready for an
encounter with the monster of the ocean. Now was the time when the
captain would exhibit his skill as a whaler; all depends on his
management as to their success; he must be cool, and collected, working
systematically; for not only does it require great skill and caution in
the capturing of the whale, but there are many dangers attendant upon
the encounter.

"There she blows!" No sooner did Captain Jostler hear the report, than
it seemed as if he would go beside himself; every man was ready to do
his duty, and had they possessed the right kind of commander, might have
done well; but where there is no head, nothing is accomplished.
Everything was confusion; the captain, springing into the first boat,
bade his men follow, leaving, beside Harry, but two worthless fellows,
who hardly knew a skysail from a jib-sheet, in charge of the ship. Harry
kept his eye upon the boats for hours; he perceived they were evidently
having a hard time of it. Running aft to get a glass, as they distanced
him, he discovered a fog had sprang up, and was shutting in heavily on
all sides; he returned to mark the boats; they were nowhere to be seen;
he had lost them entirely; nothing was to be seen on all sides but thick
fog banks! What was to be done? where they were, how far from the boats,
and in what direction, they knew not. The boy was aware that they were
all ignorant of the management of the ship, and what was worse, should
the least breeze spring up, they would be borne,--they knew not whither.
A couple of hours passed, and the fog did not lift. Night was coming on,
and from the increased darkness, together with a low, rumbling noise of
the sea, it was evident a storm was brewing. Harry anxiously walked the
quarter deck; it would be certain destruction if they remained in that
position till night should overtake them. The boy called to the men,
asking what was to be done; but they in terror could do nothing but
lament their situation, calling out against the captain for leaving them
in such a state. Harry hesitated; what was done must be done speedily.
To take in sail was his first thought; then, with the assistance of the
clumsy seamen, he rolled out a small cannon-piece, and for one long hour
did he keep up an incessant fire. The coming storm was now plainly
discernible; the distant rolling of thunder was heard, the sea was
agitated, and occasionally a flaw would shake the rattlings. They were
in momentary expectation that the storm would burst upon them. Harry had
left his firing, and ascending the hurricane deck, stood with folded
arms, as if bracing himself to meet the foe. It is coming in all its
fury! kind heaven! the fog lifts! it rolls itself away as it were a
great scroll. The ink-black heavens are fearfully majestic, seen in the
lightning's lurid glare. A speck! yes, 't is the boats! do they see
them? Once more the boy flies to the cannon, not pausing to see if they
are nearing the ship; his heart beats wildly; 'tis their only chance for
life! the hurricane has burst upon them! the enraged deep responds
loudly to the deafening roar! Once again the feeble voice of the cannon
is doing its best to be heard, when lo! the flash mingling with the
forked lightnings which play in the rigging, reveals the men, as they
come tumbling over the ship's side! They are saved! saved by that noble
boy, who does not know of their approach, so intent is he upon his
exertions, until Sampson clasps him in his arms, and a "God bless you!"
is upon the lips of every man, save the captain, who, having received a
slight wound from a harpoon, and irritated by their bad luck, utters a
curse which vies in blackness with that dreadful night.

"Down your helm!" shouted the captain; "hard down your helm!" The order
was hardly given, when they were thrown on their beam ends; down, down
they went, as if never to rise again, completely engulfed in the dark
abyss! The boy, where is he? down in the hold, his arm made fast to the
collar of old Neptune, that they may go down together; he kneels, his
mother's gift, the bible, in his hand, calmly awaiting his time. Nature
seems terrified, yet that boy knows no fear. Crash succeeds crash; ah,
who can describe the scene! He alone who has stood upon the frail plank,
which only separates him from death. Again a terrific crash,--their
masts have gone by the board! It would seem that the enraged billows
were bent upon their destruction. Still their stout bark is unwilling to
give up, and trembling from stem to stern, she clings to life, nobly
resisting the gigantic attacks of the storm-king, who, having fought
with terrific fierceness through the livelong night, puts on a less
demon-like expression as his strength is well nigh spent, and the gray
dawn sees no traces of the despoiler, who perhaps has slain thousands,
save the swelling surges, which angrily gaze as if disappointed of
their prey.

At the first dawn of day, Harry went on deck to learn their situation.
What a change had been wrought in a few hours. Their masts had been
carried away, the decks had been swept clean; and he learned that
several poor fellows had lost their hold, and were not seen more.

"Well, I'll be d----d if that son of a cannibal hasn't sneaked away into
some hole, and kept his footing," exclaimed the captain, as he saw the
boy appear above deck; "I was in hopes he had found safe quarters in
Davy Jones's locker! But there's no getting rid of such scalawags!"

"Captain Jostler," cried Mr. Sampson, raising his hat, "it's none of my
business, and you may knock me down the next minute, if you please, but
God knows there's not a man aboard but owes his life to that boy. I have
no mutinous designs, sir, but at such a moment as this I will speak,
sir, come what will, and thank God the boy had sense enough to go below,
when he knew he could be of no use here."

The captain looked daggers; he was about to seize Sampson by the throat,
when a voice from the assembled crew was heard:

"Three cheers and long life to the boy, captain or no captain!
_Hurrah!_ HURRAH!! HURRAH!!!" shouted the grateful tars, making the
welkin ring.

If Jostler had had the heart of a brave, noble sea-captain, he would
have fought right and left till the last, ere his men should dare to
show such insubordination, setting his authority at defiance; but he was
a coward, and they were whole-hearted seamen, who would not see the
innocent trampled upon, consequently the villain had to swallow his
wrath; but he was determined to have his revenge, and Sampson noticed
that he cast an evil eye upon the boy.

Upon examination it was found they had sustained no injuries, besides
the loss of the masts, except that a small leakage had been made near
the bows, and that was soon repaired by the carpenter, who proceeded to
rig jury-masts, and it was not long before they were put in a condition
capable of running into the islands for repairs.

About sunrise signals of distress were heard, and by the glass, a
dismasted ship was made out, a long way astern, apparently in a sinking
condition. The captain appeared to take little notice of her, and as the
mate ventured to inquire if they should "'bout ship," he answered,
"Thunder! no, we are safe; let them run their own chance."

Harry, hearing his reply, was shocked. Could the man turn a deaf ear to
those repeated sounds of distress, when it was in his power to save
them? Ah, boy, it is even so! but he is not a man. Harry could endure
the thought no longer, as fainter and fainter grew the reports, as they
bore away from them; he begged Sampson to implore the captain to return,
Sampson telling him "it was of no use, that it would not do to cross
him again."

"Then I will go myself to him; he cannot have the heart to leave them to
perish!"

"Rash boy, your life will be the penalty! you must not do it."

"I will do my duty, though I should die for it! there is the least
possibility of his hearing me, and what is one life compared with, it
may be, a hundred."

"Stay, mad boy!" cried Sampson; but he had gone.

Reaching the quarter-deck, upon his knees he implored the captain to
return. "Think, if it were your father, brother, or a son, in that
hopeless condition, would you not render them all the assistance in
your power?"

"I have three brothers and a father upon the ocean," vociferated the
demon; "for aught I know it may be one of them! but were they all aboard
that hulk yonder, I would not return! But who are you, sirrah, that
dares to usurp my power? Now, upstart, you shall know your place!" and
he seized him by the collar, bore him aft, lashed him to a spar, called
for the cat, and lifting it high in air,--it falls, but the cursed
invention of man's cruelty falls wide of its mark! Ere its descent had
scarred that fair brow, a rush was heard from the main gangway, and old
Neptune, with a fierce growl, has fastened his teeth in the monster's
flesh! Quick as thought his master called him off, and every man stood
trembling, as they observed the captain feeling for his pistols; but his
strength failed him, the dog had met his teeth in the wound received by
the mismanagement of the harpoon, tearing the flesh nearly from off his
limb. It really was a pitiable sight to behold. Faint from the loss of
blood, he was carried below, where his wound was dressed by one of the
men, having no regular surgeon aboard, consequently its fatality was not
realized. The groans and writhings of the sufferer were heart-rending;
all day long did he rave, imploring Sampson, who attended him, to "take
the fiend away! that he was being devoured alive!" and thus did he toss
upon his bed till toward evening, when a change for the worse came over
him. Sampson saw that the seal of death was stamped upon his features,
and at set of sun, with an imprecation upon his dying lips, he had
breathed his last. O, how fearful to enter that spirit land thus
unprepared! to come before our Judge with a soul stained in the deepest
sins, trembling with its burden of guilt. Lord, grant that we be not
thus found when thou shalt call! Give us strength to overcome the world,
the flesh, and the devil, so that at the last, we shall taste those joys
which exist "where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at
rest." They buried him in the deep sea. Perhaps his body lay side by
side with those who, through his unfeeling heart, had found a watery
grave; but we trust that, unlike him, they had gone to meet the reward
of having lived an holy life,--gone to the "sailor's home," in
the skies.

The stars shone out, one by one, in the firmament, when the king of day
had descended. Calmly the night looked down, and undisturbed were
Harry's thoughts, as seated upon the taffrail, old Neptune by his side,
he once again breathed the air of liberty. Not that he rejoiced that he
was thus freed from him who had kept him in perfect slavery, for he
alone had dropped a tear over the uncoffined burial of his persecutor;
but his heart was filled with gratitude, as he looked into the peerless
night,--gratitude to Him who has given us a soul, that we may admire the
works of his hands. As Harry sat musing, turning from the heavenly orbs
to their semblance on the bosom of the placid waters, he observed, as it
were, a fallen star, mirrored therein, but rousing his dreamy senses, he
found it was a small, shining object, floating near them. He drew it
from the water; it was a block of wood, in the form of an octagon,
highly polished, inlaid with bits of pearl, forming grotesque figures,
and thickly studded with some bright mineral, representing stars, which
gave it a very handsome appearance.

"Well, if the youngster isn't picking up moonshine," remarked Sampson,
examining the curiosity. "Some poor fellow designed that for his
sweetheart, likely; but I suppose it will make but little difference
with her, if she hears he's among the missing, she can just as well set
her colors for another. These bright-winged butterflies go upon the
principle that 'there's as good fish in the sea as ever was caught.'"

"O, ho, Sampson," cried the jolly faced mate, who had now taken the
captain's berth, "you are inclined to give the fair ones no quarters. I
shouldn't wonder if they had given you the slip, in some of your
cruisings."

"Well, sir, nothing of that kind, exactly; I never had much notion for
shipping under one captain for life."

"A little frightened, eh?"

"Well, between you and I, I was a little skeery, for fear I should find
my mate at the helm."

"Yes, but you don't mean to say woman is a craft sailing without a
compass, do you? that is, minus a heart?"

"Aye, aye, but it's hard to get in their wake. I never met but one
whole-souled woman in my life, and she has gone--where such as she do
go. Ah, that was a hard time! I was the only one saved of two hundred!"

"How was that, Sampson? come, spin us that yarn."

"Land ho! land ho!" hailed the lookout, and every eye welcomed Manilla,
as they ran in for repairs, after cruising about for months without
taking a drop of oil. Harry was delighted with the prospect before him,
and laying the little curiosity, which would remind him of a sad event
in his voyage, away with his bible, he entered upon the duties before
him with his whole heart, realizing the visions of his earlier days, and
gaining a thorough knowledge of--the life of a sailor boy.




CHAPTER VI.


SOME DAYS ARE BORN OF SORROW.


  "The path of sorrow, and that path alone,
   Leads to the land where sorrows are unknown."

        ANONYMOUS.


  "Through sorrow's night, and danger's path,
     Amid the deepening gloom,
   Ye children of a heavenly king
     Are marching to the tomb."

        H. KIRKE WHITE.


It is a destiny, that every life be, to a greater or less degree,
fraught with that heart-purifying element, which we term sorrow. And who
would have it otherwise? Who would glide passively along the bright
river of smiles, without one taste of that chiefest of disciplines,
sorrow? How grateful should we be to Him who has permitted us to drink
of the same cup with his only Son! for he was a "man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief." Who is so blind that will not see the kind
designs of our Father, in the disposition of those works of his hands
which he pronounced good. Truly His eye is all-seeing; the overflow of
his tender mercies toward the children of men are unbounded. What cell
of goodness is there within the human heart, of which the breath of
sorrow cannot raise the valve? In a word, what countless numbers of
souls have been stayed in their mad career, have been saved from eternal
destruction, through the chastening rod of the Lord.

It was the morning after the sailing of the Nautilus; the Sea-flower had
arisen with the sun, and calling for old Nep, as was her wont, to
accompany her on her morning's walk, she tripped lightly along, humming
a farewell to the last altheas, as they nodded their shrivelled heads,
in view of their departure; but their words of adieu were made brief, by
a voice as of one in distress; and coming near, it proved to be the
musical Vingo, trilling the wild melodies of his old Virginia days.

"Good morning, Vingo; you must have been up a long time to have been
away down to the shore; you must take it easier, and get more sleep.
Even old Nep dislikes to leave his warm kennel this cool morning, for he
did not come at my call, and so I would not disturb him."

"Ah, missy, de old fellow am getting along in years as well as de rest
ob us; and if it wasn't for de gray hairs, dat will keep at de top ob de
heap, in spite ob ebery ting, I should feel dat old age am coming wid
long strides, when I see dat de wee bud ob de Sea-flower am almost in
bloom. But see here, missy," said he, holding up a fresh cod which he
had taken, "I'm tinking dat make massa Harry's eyes sparkle."

It was the hour for family prayers.

"Had you not better go to Harry's room, dear, and see if he is ill this
morning? he is unusually late," said Mrs. Grosvenor.

"I tink de fragrance ob de salt water about dat cod fetch him soon,"
remarked Vingo, endeavoring to smooth his face into a proper state
of sobriety.

Gently the Sea-flower tapped at her brother's door, but receiving no
answer, she ventured in; the room was in the same order in which she had
left it the day before, for she took great pleasure in arranging the
flowers upon his dressing table, and no one could impart such a
coziness, arranging everything to his mind, as could Sea-flower. The bed
had not been disturbed, and the book from which she had read to him, was
lying thereon, opened at those beautiful verses of "The Iris of the
Deep," which he loved so well to hear her read. What could it mean?
Calmly her breath came and went; but for that she appeared like a
beautiful piece of statuary, her eyes turned upward, as if seeking for
strength to meet the vague sense of desolation which was creeping into
her heart. Upon the table were two notes, one addressed to her mother,
the other to herself, in his hand-writing. With nerveless hand she broke
the seal; no emotion was visible, save the delicate glow upon her cheek,
which came and went, and the playing of the muscles about her compressed
lips, as she read the following:

"My Sister--When you read this, I shall be far away, sailing over those
glorious billows which you and I love so well! You will miss me, for I
know you love your erring brother, with all his faults; and even you,
who can realize what were my heart's desires, will hardly forgive the
step which brings such deep grief upon our mother; yet you will think of
me with kindness, for I know it cannot be otherwise. There is no spot
within your heart of love which is not occupied. Could I have left home
with a mother's blessing, I should be happier; but she will pray for her
boy; the gentle breeze which fills our sail will bear her "God bless
you" to the ear of him who will think of the dear ones at home, until he
shall once more fill his place in that dearest of family circles, and
thank God, my mother has such an one as you to lean upon. Farewell, dear
Sea-flower, until we meet again. BROTHER HARRY."

He had gone! Could it be possible? How could she speak those cruel words
to her mother? Yet it must be. With steady step she entered the
drawing-room; the mother looked upon her child. That which she would
speak failed to give utterance. Instinctively soul sympathized
with soul.

"Mother, we will breathe our morning supplication to Him who ordereth
all things;" and the Sea-flower, at that family altar, prayed that
strength might be given them, that they might be prepared for whatever
was to be their portion, and her prayer was heard. Arising, Mrs.
Grosvenor sank into a chair; with an agitated voice she spoke,--

"My child, some dreadful thing has occurred! My son,--tell me, has he
gone? for the same mysterious power which bade me impress upon his mind
last night, the value of the instructions, which, I pray God, I have not
been unfaithful in setting before him, tells me I shall not see my boy
again for many long days! Speak, my child, is it not so?"

"You have spoken too truly, mother; may you be able to bear up under
this affliction;" and she put the note into her mother's hand.

"My eyes fail me, my child! If it is not asking of you too much, tell me
what were his last words; they will fall more gently on my heart;" and
the tones of the Sea-flower were of comfort as she read:--

"My dear Mother--In the ship Nautilus, which will sail from this port on
the 20th of October, I have shipped for a Cape Horn voyage. You will
hardly believe what you read; nevertheless, it is true. I was very much
disappointed that I could not go with father, and thought I would wait
patiently until his return; but gaining permission from my present
captain to accompany him, I could not resist the temptation. I know I
shall do very wrong in going away without your consent, but forgive me,
if you can, mother; 't is the only act in which I have ever given you
sorrow, or by which I ever shall. You shall hear from me as often as I
can get an opportunity of sending home, and it will not be a great while
before I shall be with you again. I shall not forget my prayers night
and morning; and I know you will not cease to pray for your son, though
he should fall to the lowest depths of degradation. Tell father, when
you write him, that I have disobeyed his word; but ask him if he cannot
forgive me. It is possible that I may meet with him upon the ocean, and
may we both be spared to make you happy, my dear mother. Farewell, from
your affectionate son."

"I do forgive you, my son, in this cruel step which you have taken;
indeed, but how could he do thus? Oh, how could he!" and Mrs. Grosvenor,
overcome with her emotion, sank back in her chair.

"De good Lord be praised, missy! but I not tink it eber come to dis. To
be sure, massa Wendall often tell me, eber since _dat day_, dat I
getting too full ob laugh, dat one extreme follow anoder; but I never
tink young massa take hesef clean off!" and, wiping the whites of his
eyes, he went out to hunt up old Nep to share his grief; but he soon
returned, and locking the door after him, proceeded to fasten every
window in the house.

Sea-flower, who was bathing her mother's temples, observing what the
negro was about, was at a loss to account for his movements; but knowing
he disliked to be questioned upon points touching his judgment, she
humored him by letting him have his own way, till finally, he peered
into his mistress's face, and in a voice scarcely above a whisper, said,
"Dar, missy, de rest ob us am safe! he no cotch any more dis time!"

"What is it? Vingo, what has happened?"

"Ah, little missy, if I wasn't clean gone tuck! 'pears like I never
shall get ober it."

"What is the matter, Vingo?"

"Well, missy Sea-flower, I tinks it am de ebil one dat has taken dem
away, after all; for dat dog neber go 'way peaceably wid anyting short
ob de debil; he got too much de spirit ob his massa to be afeard ob
anyting dat belong on dis earth!"

"Is Neptune gone, too, Vingo?"

"Yes, missy, dar not eben a shadow left ob him; and, [the negro had a
remarkable imagination], 'pears like I see de print ob a cloben tread in
de soft ground, by his door; and among de hay de old fellow hab lef some
ob his plunder trough mistake."

Sea-flower hastened to the dog's kennel, and there indeed was a small
parcel, folded neatly in white paper, but no trace of the dog was to be
seen; opening the package, there was a small locket, containing the
likeness of her mother and herself, which had been left upon the parlor
table, but how it came in the dog's kennel was a mystery.

"Oh, our faithful Neptune! how much we shall miss him! It must be that
he has gone with his master; but perhaps it is all for the best."

"I tinks eberyting should be ob de best for you, missy; 'pears like if
my poor old Phillis could get used to de tribilations, like you do, it
help to make de road easier; but I specks she neber learn how."

"O, Vingo, it makes my heart bleed to think that your people have no
opportunities for learning that they may cast their burdens on the Lord.
I cannot imagine anything more dreadful than the ignorance in which the
slaves are kept."

"Yes, missy, I neber remembers much about it till I leabes old Berginny;
some how or oder, I finds out dat old massa's people hab a God, but I
neber 'spect he know anyting 'bout poor black man."

Days and months passed on, as the lonely days of sorrow do come, and go,
and come again; but as the lengthened shades of the summer solstice had
again become less, another cloud had arisen in the firmament of mingled
joys and sorrows, threatening to encompass even the bright rays of hope
within its gloom.

Mrs. Grosvenor had written her husband of the conduct of their truant
son, as Harry had wished, and had in reply received his full forgiveness
for the boy. Captain Grosvenor had written that he much regretted not
having taken Harry along with him, "for," said he, "a second thought
would have convinced me that the boy had too much of the spirit of his
father to remain contentedly on shore; he has but followed in my
footsteps, for I never shall forget the night I stole away from my
father's house, when I was but ten years old, and went to sea. Yes, tell
my boy that I forgive him, yet it annoys me very much that you and our
dear Natalie are left alone, my wife; but at the rate we have been
doing, it will not be long before we shall be homeward bound."

Nearly a twelvemonth had passed since this letter had been received; not
a word had been heard of the Tantalizer for a long time; several ships
had returned which had left since she had sailed, but they had brought
no tidings of her. Over a year had passed since she was last reported,
and her owners began to look doubtful in regard to her fate; and there
were rumors that the Tantalizer was counted among the missing vessels,
yet no one dared to breathe the thought to the still hoping family,
while there was the least possibility that she might be heard from
again; and who would wish to be the first to pronounce that gentle wife
a widow? Darker and still deeper grew the overshadowing cloud, and the
hopes of the trusting ones less. Mrs. Grosvenor would sit for whole days
brooding over her sorrows, clinging to the last ray of hope, with
almost the insanity of hope; but the last spark finally went out, never
again to be rekindled. The untiring wheels of time still went their
rounds, and everything moved on, as if there were no hearts beating in
discordant measure to the joyous song of nature. Sympathizing friends
pitied the afflicted, and the world read,--"A noble ship lost at sea!
all on board supposed to have perished! Ship and cargo valued at thirty
thousand dollars; no insurance!" and they exclaim,--"ah, the sailor's
life is indeed hard!" But they dwell upon the latter clause of the
paragraph with as much real pity, the words fall upon their ear,
conveying as much of real sadness to their minds, as that many families
have been called to mourn the loss of one of their members. The
Sea-flower could hardly become reconciled to the thought that she would
never see her father more, yet for her mother's sake she suppressed her
grief, endeavoring to soothe her weary spirits by those refreshing
promises of Him who dries the mourner's tear,--binding up the wounds of
the broken-hearted.

"Dear mother, we are called upon to bear a heavy trial; this is indeed
a bitter, bitter draught, yet we must not forget 'tis our Father holds
the cup. You have taught me to smile upon his chastening rod, but in
this dark hour of trial truly the flesh is weak; yet we will rest upon
the strength of His arm, He will not forsake us; and, mother, His ways
indeed are higher than our ways. How tenderly has he dealt with us,
inasmuch as he has so ordered that our dear Harry should be spared to
us; for as I look upon the past, I can see nothing but the kindly
interference of his will, that my brother did not share the same grave
with his father."

"My darling, your precious words shed light over my weary pathway. I
fear that I have sinned in thus murmuring at God's will, for I would not
see his loving kindness in sparing to me my boy. But it is so very
hard,--so dreadful,--that in that hour when his spirit winged its way to
that better land, we might not pause from our worldly pursuits, turning
our eyes heavenward; craving strength to bear our cross; but your words
of love, my child, remind me of that Being who is the fountain-head of
loveliness, and I thank God for his gift of you."

"If I am a comfort to you, mother, it is through your influence, for
you have taught me to walk in the paths of virtue."

"True, I have pointed out to you the ways of righteousness, but when you
looked upon that bright river of life, I observed that its waters were
no less tranquil, and mirrored upon its bosom was one more shining star;
and it has been increasing in magnitude, till now its radiance illumes
even the bright river itself."

So did the Sea-flower gather together the broken threads of this family,
weaving them closer with that golden thread of tender remembrance of him
who had gone to await them for a little in that happier home above; this
family, of which she had never the slightest suspicion but that they
were of her own flesh and blood; and as she sat with her hand clasped
within that of her mother's, reading from that blessed book, "Come unto
me all ye that are weary," Mrs. Grosvenor could not but notice the
striking resemblance which she bore to those lovely features of the
miniature, which was found within the golden band. The child was growing
to resemble her unknown mother, and were there any who had ever known
the parents, to see their child, they could not but have discovered her
descent. As the thought came to Mrs. Grosvenor's mind, she shuddered;
and she asked herself if it could ever be that her darling should be
torn from her? if another cloud would arise, hiding one more cherished
one from her sight? But why should she tremble at the thought? she well
knew there could be nothing, not even the discovery of relatives, which
could lessen her daughter's love for her mother. Not a word had ever
been said to the child in regard to her mysterious parentage. Captain
Grosvenor had thought it best not to reveal the fact until she should
have become of a suitable age to fully realize her situation. Those who
had known the circumstances of her discovery, had gradually come to look
upon her as the child of those who treasured her as if she had been
their own; and the playmates of her childhood days had never mistrusted
there was a mystery hanging about her "romantic" name,--Sea-flower.
Harry, indeed, had never forgotten his delight at having a new sister;
and as they had grown up together, he had often looked into her dreamy
eyes, and thought, "How unlike she is to any one else; she is too good
to be my sister;" and as the reality came to him, he had banished the
remembrance, ere it had taken to itself a form. The original Vingo had
never lost sight of "that commentful" day, as he termed it; not a day
passed but he made some allusion to "dat wee gem among de sea-weeds,"
and the Sea-flower would open wide her eyes, as from his wild laugh she
caught his broken sentences, and would wonder why the negro's words
should meet with such a response within her own bosom. The child's
dress, together with the ornaments which had been found upon her, had
been laid carefully away, reserved until she should have become familiar
with her history. But Mrs. Grosvenor, since the loss of her husband, had
weighed the question in her mind, whether she should still keep the
secret from her, for the child's mind was much beyond her years, and she
questioned whether it would be for the best to permit her to grow to
maturer years thus undeceived; but she reflected that such had been the
design of her husband, and, therefore, for the present, the subject was
dismissed from her mind.

It was the close of the third year in which Harry had been from home.
Mrs. Grosvenor had received four letters from him in that time. His
last had stated they were doing well, that he was under one of the
kindest of captains, and all that was wanting to make him perfectly
happy, was to see his dear mother, and the rest of the family once more.
Poor boy, he little thought that there was one of its members whom he
would never see again, until he had passed over that sea from which no
navigator ever returns! Harry had never written his mother of the brutal
treatment which he had received from his first captain, but he had said
that Neptune had been the means of saving his life, and that the old
fellow was getting to be quite a sailor, inasmuch as he could take a
turn on the quarter-deck with as much dignity as the captain himself. It
had been some time since Harry's last letter had been received, and now
Mrs. Grosvenor was anxiously looking for news from him, with a state of
mind prepared for receiving almost anything, so fraught with sad events
had been the last few years, when one day Vingo was seen far down the
street, coaxing his time-wearied limbs into a run, and bursting into the
room, he stood panting in the middle of the floor, grinning with
delight, and holding at arm's length a letter, which Mrs. Grosvenor
recognized as coming from her son. The Sea-flower read the letter aloud,
and when Vingo learned that massa Harry was homeward bound, he could
contain himself no longer; it seemed as if he would go beside himself at
the thought of having his young massa home once more, for everything had
appeared so different since he went away; there had been so many
changes, that the fellow had really had his fears that it might be his
turn next to be taken off, and he had often had visions of his old slave
massa in nearer proximity than was at all consistent with his ideas
of liberty.

"De good Lord be praised!" exclaimed the negro, as Sea-flower ceased
reading; "dis am too good news for old black man live me! but I knew de
bright sunshine not be contented to stay away from missy Sea-flower
long. I tinks missy get along better widout him, dan he can widout her;
but dar am some poor souls dat neber sees de shine, making dem feel as
full ob sing as a camp-meeting!" and the negro gave a deep sigh at the
remembrance of his poor old Phillis, who was, for aught he knew, still
wearing the accursed yoke of slavery.

"Poor things! poor things!" sighed the Sea-flower; "I would willingly
share with them my joys, were it in my power. Theirs would be a lighter
burden to those who have learned of that glorious home, where the
resplendent shining of its bright ones is forever! But they, alas, have
no bright future to look forward to, giving them renewed strength to
bear their cross; or if they ever hear of that All-Father who hears the
cry of the most wretched of his children, their masters would have them
believe that he is but the white man's God! Oh, Vingo, how could you
have had the heart to believe that God would disown his children?"

"Dunno, missy; but 'pears like de slabe jus' no more chilen dan de oder
animals; and I tinks old massa done teach de hounds about de big bible,
sooner dan he niggers."

"What became of your wife, Vingo, when father took you away? Could you
not prevail on your master to let her come with you?"

"O, missy, old Bingo hoe in de cotton field great many long years since
he sot eyes on poor, torn-down Phillis, or the young uns."

"The little ones! and had you some children, Vingo?"

"Ah! if I known how to praise de good Lord in dem days, I specks I
shouted for joy, when I see de wee creters burstin' wid de laugh; and
Phillis, she clean tuck ober, to see them fist each oder wid dar little
feet, 'pearing like dey hab inherit all de peruigilinations ob dar
daddy; and den de little creters change dar minds, and burst into de
smiles again. O, dem was happy days! and I and Phillis tink we just de
pleasantest creters in de whole ob Berginny; and we takes de young uns
out wid us to de cotton field, and after dey gets use to de hot sun in
dar eyes, dey crawl round on de ground, snatchin' up de bits ob cotton,
like dey hab been use to it all dar days; and we not mind it much if old
oberseer did gib us a lash ober de head, 'casionally, when we stops to
cotch a bref, long as we habs de young uns to lift us up a bit. But dem
days not stay long, for one day dar come a fierce looking man, from way
down in Kentuck, and as he went ober de plantation, I oberhears him
saying to massa, dat he must hab just de smartest, good-looking niggars
dat could be scared up, for dar was one ob de richest men in Kentuck dat
was willing to pay any price for dem; but dey must be made ob de right
material, for he worked his niggars, and cut dem up so, dat he hab to
get in a fresh supply ebery now and den. Dat was death-blow to me, for I
knew my Phillis was considered de smartest, best looking gal on de
plantation; for many a time I hear massa say, dat gal worth a dozen
common ones, and he spoke de truth for once, for I knows dar neber was
anoder like her. Well, I tells Phillis dat night what I hears, and I
tells her to jus slack off a little, and put on her worst look when de
man come round next day, and perhaps dey oberlook her; but 'pears like
we didn't get much comfort from dat, and all night long we keeps awake,
for we couldn't help tinking dat might be de last time we eber see each
oder again; for we neber hear ob de good place den, where we might meet
when slabe massa get trough wid us. De next morning, afore de broke ob
day, massa and de trader comes round to our cabin, and seeing Phillis at
de door, putting de young uns to rights, and clarin' up a little, 'fore
we goes out to de field, de fierce man cracked his whip, and jumping
ober de young uns, caught Phillis by de arm, and whirling her round and
round, called out, 'I say, mister, dis ere's de likelist critter I've
sot eyes on dis many a day! I must hab dis one at any price!, Old
Killall be good-natured a month, when he sees dis handsome critter; but
if he don't use her up in less dan dat time, he'll do what he neber done
afore! I tell you, sar, it's surprisin' to see how much work he'll get
out ob his niggars; goes ahead ob anyting you eber heard ob; dat's de
way he's made such a power ob money. He says he's tried it faithfully,
year in and year out, and he's thoroughly convinced dat de way to make
anyting by dis niggar business, is to get de work; if dey wont work
widout de whip, why, put it on! get dar steam up some way or oder, and
when one lot gibs out, get a fresh stock! I'll tell you what, sir,
Killall understands it; he'll sell dar hides for shoe leather radder dan
let his niggars stand idle!' When I hear dat, missy, my bery blood boil,
and 'pears like I couldn't keep my hands off from de villain; but I know
dat if I make any resistance, it fare all de worse wid Phillis, and I
get sent to de whippin'-place, into de bargain; so I only grind my
teeth, and look on, like I didn't know any better; but, missy, didn't I
wish I white man den, jus' for de sake ob sabin' my wife and young uns?
for I lib wid Phillis so long I couldn't help feeling 'tached to her.
Ole massa, he not 'pear to like de idea ob parting wid Phillis jus den,
for he know right well dat he not get anoder like her bery soon, and so
he tells de trader dat de niggar 'pear bery well, but as for de real
work, he got a dozen dat go ahead ob her, and if de gemman want de real
workin' niggar, dey step round de oder side de plantation; but de
trader, he keep his eye on Phillis, like he understand de business too
well to be put off dat way, and he say to massa, tell you what 'tis,
mister, dat gal may not hab de genuine work 'bout her now, but if she
get tinder old Killall's lash, dar be no trouble bout dat, and den when
she good for notin' else, after de work all out ob her, she might keep a
little ob her looks, 'nough to make her go for a hundred or so. But
massa, he not like to gib her up, and dey talk a long time togeder, and
I hears de trader say,--'de gal should square off all de old affair, wid
five hundred to boot;' till by and by massa gibs in, and de bargain was
closed, bery much to de satisfaction ob both parties. But dey not stop
to ask how we like de idea ob being separated for life! dey not tink
dat perhaps de mother find it hard to leabe her chil'en. De trader 'pear
bery much pleased wid his bargain, and he slipped a cord round Phillis's
arm, and tell her to go wid him. O, missy, dat was de awfullest minute
in my life! Poor Phillis look at de chil'en, den at me, and wid one
long, piercing shriek, dat I hear many times since, she clung round my
neck, begging me to go wid her, to sabe her from de dreadful place where
dey would take her! But afore I could say one word, the trader, wid a
dreadful curse, seize her by de throat, and in his hurry to get her
away, stumbled ober one ob de young uns wid his great heaby boots, dat
was made 'spressly to kick de fractious niggars, as he called it, and de
chile neber breathe again! he had step clean on to its neck, strangling
it in an instant! At de sight ob her chile, all bleedin', and still,
poor Phillis become all quiet, and her eyes were shut, just like good
missus, when she find massa Harry take hesef away. Ole massa he 'pear
rather sober like, when he find one ob his niggars killed, for he sot a
heap on de young uns dat was comin' up, 'cause dey be big enough soon to
be ob some 'count; but de trader hand ober fifty dollar bill, to make
de accident good, and took de opportunity to get away, 'fore Phillis
come to again; but dey not say any ting to me 'bout my loss, and 'pears
like dey could not cober de great break in my heart, wid all de fifty
dollar bills in Berginny. Dat was de last time I eber sees my Phillis. I
specks by dis time dey hab got de work all out ob her, and I hopes dey
hab, missy; for though she neber hear ob dat place where all are made
bright, I know she good enough to find de way; but I hopes she not be
too full ob shine, coz I fraid I not know her from de white folks."

"I hope you will meet her there, indeed, Vingo: for after such a
separation here, how great will be your joy. I feel assured that the
poor down-trodden negro will not be in that day forgotten; the dreadful
curse which hangs over your race will then be explained, and I fear
there will be many called to an account for the wrongs which they have
done their fellow-men. But what became of your child, Vingo? Did you not
feel grateful that one of your dear ones was spared to you?"

"Ah, missy, I tinks dar no place for gratitude in de slabe's heart; and
sometimes I specks I neber hab a heart, till missy Sea-flower spare me
a part ob hers. Well, after Phillis and de young un tuck away, 'pears
like I neber look up any more; and if it not for de little Phillis dat
was left, I tink I clean gib up. I takes her wid me to de cotton field,
and she lay and look at me all day long, so strange like, as if she want
to know why we dar all alone; and at night I feed her wid de corn-cake,
like her poor mammy used to do, and at eb'ry mouthful she look up in my
face, den at de door, to see if its mammy not comin'. After a while I
gets a little used to de ache, which I hab since Phillis tuck away, and
all de time I not at work in de field, I takes care ob de young un, to
keep from hearing dat awful shriek, when one mornin' I wakes up, and de
little Phillis nowhar' to be seen, and I's neber seen her since, missy."

"They could not surely have robbed you of your only comfort! O, how
dreadful!"

"Yes, missy; I inquires all round if dey see anyting ob my Phillis, but
I gets only a laugh from one, and a curse from anoder; for eben de slabe
get so used to de hard treatment ob dar massa, dat dey sometimes show de
same spirit towards dar fellows, specially if dey happens to be clean
tuck down wid the 'blue imps,' as dey calls it. At last I asks a poor,
broken-down ting, dat hab all her young uns sold away from her only a
day or two afore, if she know anyting 'bout my young un, and she tells
me dar hab been a sale ob a dozen young uns, on de plantation, and she
sees massa, long afore day-broke, pack dem into a wagon, and dey carried
off. I knows den it no use to look for her any longer, and de more I
grows to look down, 'pears like de more dey laughs at me, and dey calls
me 'dat moon-hit niggar.' I gets so stupid after a while, dat massa
threatens to sell me way down whar dey works de niggars up; and I gets
so, I don't care how much dey whips me, or anyting else, for I tinks I
neber be mysef again, when one day massa takes me wid him down to de
boats, to fotch de cotton, and I hears de captain ask, what ail dat
fellow to look so blue, and massa tells him, I got a notion dat I hab a
right to keep my wife and young uns, like I hab de feelin's ob white
folks. Den de captain talk wid massa 'bout buyin' me, and I got to be
such a torn-down critter, massa glad to let me go for most anyting, for
de sake ob gettin' rid ob me. When de bargain struck, my new masa
Grobener claps me on de shoulder, and says, 'now, my man, come wid me,
and see if we can't gib a better 'plexion to matters.' Dem was de first
kind words I eber hears from de white man, and after dat I springs right
up, like de wilted roses missy brought to life de oder day; and when de
Sea-flower come to us, I tink she sent to smooth ober de rough places,
dat hab been gathering trough de long years ob my life in slabery."

"Yours is a sad history, Vingo, and I am happy if I have helped to make
your pathway pleasanter; but do not look upon your life in slavery as
having been unprofitably spent, for the very darkness through which you
have come, serves to make brighter that glorious light which is now shed
o'er your way. Your sad tale has impressed me with renewed gratitude to
our Father for his mercies towards me; and while I thank him for the
many blessings which I have received from his hand, my heart shall also
praise him that with these joys have been mingled,--the purifying light
of his chastening love."




CHAPTER VII.


NATALIE.


  "If ever angels walked this weary earth
   In human likeness, thou wert one of them."

        ANONYMOUS.


  "'Mid pleasures and palaces, where'er we may roam,
   Be it ever so humble, there's no place like home;
   A charm from the skies seems to hallow us there
   Which, seek through the world, is ne'er met with elsewhere."

        MOORE.


"Sampson, Mr. Sampson! just step this way, and bring your eye to bear a
little to the nothe-nothe-east, and tell me what you make."

"Make, boy, make!" exclaimed Sampson, thrusting a huge piece of pigtail
into his already overcharged, capacious mouth, "I suppose you would have
me believe that you'd made the light of some sweet-heart's eyes,
outshining even old Sankoty itself."

"Three years ago, do you remember it, Sampson, when I was a mere
stripling, you took me aside, and pointed out a dim light, away down to
the water's edge, and told me I would have seen different days before I
made it again? Do you think I can ever forget it? I could tell its light
from among a thousand! As I caught its last rays then, it seemed to me
the pensive, forgiving smile of my mother, for, as you know, I came away
from home without my mother's consent; but I long ago received her
forgiveness, and everything will be forgotten in the happiness which we
shall enjoy at meeting once more. And my father, he is at home by this
time! How surprised they will all be to see me grown almost to be a man!
I hope the Sea-flower is the same little fairy still. She will not
always be a bud, however; yet the opening flower has greater charms."

"Bless my stars! boy, are you losing your senses?" asked the astonished
Sampson, as Harry walked the deck in raptures, talking as fast as his
tongue could fly, as it appeared to the old tar, in riddles.

"What's got into your head, boy? I have always taken you to be the most
sensible person aboard, but shiver my topsails, if the fellow don't
talk as if he expected to find old Vineyard Sound turned into a flower
garden, with a fairy made fast to every other blossom!"

As Sampson delivered himself of this ludicrous remark, Harry burst into
a loud fit of laughter, and handing the tar his glass, he sang out
"Sankoty light, ahoy!" which brought all hands on deck in an instant,
rubbing open their eyes, (for it was but the second watch in the
morning,) to catch sight of the first object visible of their homes.

"Three cheers for old Nantucket, and young Grosvenor!" shouted the
captain; and the ready huzza which went up, amid the waving of sundry
flannel shirts, old boots, and forsaken tarpaulins, which had been
caught up by the unshorn tars, as the sound of their near proximity to
home aroused them from the dreamy visions thereof to the vivid
realities, were borne over the waters which separated them from thence,
deceiving the red-combed heralds of the day into the belief of an early
dawn, judging from the signs of recognition which met their approach, as
the first tinge of red lit up the eastern sky.

Nobly the good ship Nautilus bore down to the bar, setting heavily on
the water, and the good twenty-five hundred with which she was laden,
was no less weighty than the handfuls of silver which danced o'er the
minds of the glad sailor boys, as they neared their native shore. None
were more light-hearted at the prospect before them than Harry
Grosvenor; not that he had become weary of the sailor's life, for he
loved the ocean with the same free, wild love as when three years
before, it had beckoned his boyish heart to brave its perils; but his
joy, as the endeared objects of his home, one by one, welcomed him in
his fancy, was unbounded, and he could not realize that he should so
soon greet the dear ones who had been the subjects of his most precious
thoughts, through the many days which had separated them.

"Well, my boy," said Sampson, as he grasped Harry by the hand, "we've
sailed under a clear sky for the most of the time, and we've held
together about as good as the strongest, but there's no use in shedding
fresh water tears over it, for I'm thinking this'll not be your last
voyage, and as for me, there's nothing to hinder my hanging around this
little sand-heap a bit longer; and who knows but we may try it again
some day. Who knows? ah, who knows that John Sampson is not lying at
this moment at the bottom of the sea? Who is there that cares to know?"

"This, I know, is not your home, Mr. Sampson; but have you not one
friend? is there no spot in the wide world which is dear to you? is
there not one who will welcome you home?"

"All places are the same to me, and I can truly say, there is not a
person on the whole earth that would 'bout ship' to get a look at me. To
be sure, I was brought up somehow, till I was able to take myself up,
but by whom, or where, is farther back than the story goes; all I know
is, I found myself, at six years old, on the top of a London dust heap,
taking a survey of the great metropolis. Whether I was left there by the
refuse gatherers, to come under the head of starved dogs, or whether I
was accidentally dropped by my lawful owner, it don't make much
difference. Well, I shook the dust out of my eyes, and made for the
water, and I've lived on the water for the most part ever since. But
there's one comfort about it, I've never been troubled with poor
relations," added he, jocosely.

"Mr. Sampson, yours is a strange history, and what is stranger still,
that you have not, in all your yarns in the forecastle, spun us this
one. But have you never, in all your wanderings, met with those whom,
you can call your friends?"

"A rough old tar like me, I must say, would not be the most inviting
craft to interchange signals with, but, thank God, I have found one, in
my long life of wanderings who was worthy the name of friend! but she,
kind, beautiful lady, is gone;" and the rough tar drew his sleeve across
his eyes, and turning toward the island, muttered,--"twelve, yes,
fifteen years ago this very month, and I the only one saved! I worked
hard, but it was of no use; it was to be. I'd gladly have gone down to
have saved her."

"Well, Sampson, I think it is you who are losing your senses now," said
Harry, as he listened to his inaudible words; "but you shall not say you
have not a friend so long as my craft sails the ocean, for I never shall
forget your kindness to me and my faithful old Nep, while exposed to the
harsh treatment of our former captain; and depend upon it, you will have
made other true friends, when the dear ones at home shall have heard of
your generous conduct. I have one of the best of mothers, Mr. Sampson,
and a sister who would make you a better man to look into her
heaven-speaking eyes! A likeness of her was among my valuables when I
left home, but it has been by some means mislaid."

"A better man, eh? well, there's room enough for that! I shall have to
lie under a close reef, and by the help of my glass, I may get sight of
her some day."

The crew of the Nautilus, after having made themselves as tidy as a six
months' beard, and a suit of three years' usage would admit, prepared to
go ashore. As Harry stepped upon the wharf, he looked among the ships
lying at the dock, for the Tantalizer, but not seeing her, he concluded
she must have put to sea again, and taking his package upon his
shoulder, he whistled for Neptune, and turned his footsteps homeward.
How familiar was every object as he tripped along the street! everything
appeared the same as when he left, and as he passed the old church, it
seemed as if it was but yesterday when he had kneeled upon the
door-stone in prayer for those who were sleeping, unconscious of the
sorrow which awaited them. His heart beat wildly as he drew near his
home,--so great was his joy that he had not observed that Nep had not
accompanied him from the ship. It was evident that he would take the
family by surprise, for not even old Vingo was to be seen about the
premises. Noiselessly he opened the door,--his mother was sitting with
her face from him, engaged with her sewing, and at her feet sat the
Sea-flower, so absorbed, reading his last letter, that she was not aware
of his presence till he threw his arms about his mother's neck, and
sobbed like a child. As he turned to his sister he faltered; what a
change had been wrought in her in three years! The child, whose mature
mind had not been in accordance with her years, had come to be a fair
maiden of sixteen summers! The bud had indeed expanded, till now its
unfolding leaves were as new-born rays of love, reminding Earth of
Heaven. The Sea-flower saw that her brother hesitated in giving her his
usual salutation, and throwing herself into his arms, she said,--"I am
the little Sea-flower still, dear Harry; I shall always be the same
simple child; but how you have grown, dear brother! I can hardly believe
you are the little rogue who used to hide my pet kitten, because you
loved to see the tears come into my eyes, and you would look at me
without speaking a word, till I would laugh outright, and break the
charm, as you said; and then the tears would come in your own eyes, for
fear you had been selfish. But I felt that my tears were not in vain,
for I usually found some little stranger among the bright-eyed ones,
that looked up to me for protection."

"I knew I should find you the same dear sister as ever! I knew you would
always be the same;" and as the vague remembrance that she was of other
parentage flashed across his mind, he modestly pressed her hand to his
lips, and gazed into her beautiful face in silence.

Harry observed that his mother had lost her cheerful, happy expression,
which had given her the youthful look not of her years, and he feared
that his conduct had been a source of deeper grief to her than he had
supposed; but now that she again looked upon her son, her pale, pensive
face was lit up with the smile of contentment, and a heart of thanks was
hers that so many blessings were yet her portion.

A noise which strongly reminded Harry of the rattling of the rigging in
a gale of wind, was now heard in the hall, and Vingo presented himself
at the door; he looked at Harry, then at his mistress, while the pupil
of his eye gave place to its lighter counterpart, and raising both
hands, he exclaimed,--"De good Lord be praised! 'pears like I couldn't
be any fuller ob laugh if I find old Phillis hersef!" and grasping his
master's extended hand, he laughed until it seemed as if the corners of
his mouth would meet.

"I's right glad to see you, young massa, 'deed I is; but where is de old
fellow Neptune?"

"Yes, yes, where is the faithful creature?" asked Sea-flower; "at our joy
in seeing you, we have quite forgotten him."

Just then the dog's well remembered bark was heard at the door, and on
opening it, the animal marched in, and laying a little parcel which he
had brought in his mouth, upon the floor, he jumped upon the Sea-flower,
nearly overpowering her, in his delight frisking from one to the other
as if he were mad. Harry was now, for the first time, aware that the dog
had not come with him, and examining the parcel which he had brought,
to his no little astonishment he found it was the identical curiously
wrought block, which he had found after that dreadful night of the
storm. Among the many gifts which he had brought home to his mother and
sister, he had forgotten this simple one, and now he remembered that he
had not seen it for a long time. Why the dog should have noticed so
trifling a thing, was indeed singular. Harry related the circumstances
by which he had come in possession of the curiosity, and from the
presents of silks, crapes, fruits, etc., which he had brought to the
Sea-flower, she turned to the mysterious little curiosity with a greater
interest, examining the grotesque figures with a fascination, when
accidentally pressing a pearl setting, the box (for such it was
discovered to be,) flew open, and revealed to her bewildered gaze--what?
good God! is it possible? Neatly lined is the box, and lying therein--a
cross! the same which the Sea-flower had wrought with her own hands, and
given her father when she saw him last! Carved at the head of the cross
are these words,--"You will soon come to me again; then you will never
leave us;" the child's last words to her father. O, how did they fall
upon her heart now! It seemed as if he were speaking to her from the
skies, and unconsciously she looked upward, as if she might indeed catch
the tones of her father's voice, bidding her come away. "We will come,"
she softly whispered, "we shall soon be with you there;" and turning to
her mother, she added,--"it is not far, that better land; we may hear
their glad shouts, if we will listen."

Over that cross, emblematic of the Lamb who was slain that we might
live, was shed tears from a widow's heart; but those tears were not of
mourning for the departed, for through her who was made but a little
lower than the angels, those tears had been turned into joy. The child
who had ever walked in that narrow way, as if it were the only path in
which the children of earth might tread, had taught her bereaved mother,
that those precious words from the book of life, which she had ever
recognized, but had not strength to cling thereto in the hour of trial,
were truly Christ's words of tenderness; she could now smile upon the
chastening rod. Those dying words, as it were of him who had gone, were
as balm to the heart of Mrs. Grosvenor and the Sea-flower, for what
could be more dreadful than that they should never learn of his last
moments? But to Harry, who had been just upon the point of asking for
his father, it was as the dark funeral pall to his soul, and he
staggered to a chair.

"Where is my father?" he asked, in a hollow voice.

"In Heaven!" was the response of the Sea-flower.

There was silence in that house. Sorrow, which had reigned for a time
around that hearthstone, still lingered, striving to supersede the joy
which must go hand in hand with purity; but its icy touch was to be of
gentler mien, its cold, cold breath mingling with that of more genial
spheres, helping to swell the--"Father, thy will be done." This was a
dreadful announcement to Harry, a stroke which he was not prepared to
receive; and now did the past come to his remembrance with sickening
frenzy. That terrific night!--he had, at the peril of his life, implored
that heartless being to listen to the stranger's cry of distress, to
stretch out to him the hand of brotherly love; and that cry for help was
now sounding in his ear with renewed freshness, for it was from his own
loved father!

"Oh, what an undutiful son I have been!" cried Harry; "had I known then
what I know now! and yet, the fiend would not have turned a hand, had it
been his own father! Thank God, I have his forgiveness for disobeying
his last commands! 't is the one great lesson of my life, and should I
live a hundred years, I will never deviate from what I think would have
been my parent's wishes."

"Natalie!"--the Sea-flower gazed upon that name, the name of her
father's choice,--a simple word, but Oh, what volumes did it speak!
there seemed to be a very sacredness hanging about the tone. As time
sped onward, leaving far behind the past, but not burying it, the sweet,
child-like Sea-flower was gradually putting on the gentle, mystic form
of Natalie; and though the name had become familiar to other ears, to
her its impress was as when she reverently looked upon that cross of
Christ, at the foot of which was traced that which she could not but
associate therewith. The depth of her dreamy eyes spoke not only of him
who had left them, but they told of the soul's instinct in regard to
that which was as yet unrevealed.

"Well, massa, I tinks de sun make up he mind to take a look out at us
once more," remarked Vingo, as seated astride a wood-horse, he was
making vigorous exertions to take the nautical expression from his young
master's boots.

"Then you have had rather a dark time of it at home here, have you,
Vingo? have been rather lonely?"

"Yes, 'deed it has, massa Harry; I 'fraid sometimes dat I lose my
self-complexion entirely, and I tinks you not find so much ob me left,
if it not for missy's bright light, dat shine along de way. Dare not
anoder like her, massa; but I dunno as dat's strange, for de stars not
come down to bathe in de ocean ebery day."

"You are getting sentimental, Vingo," and an expression of thought stole
over Harry's features, and he remained silent, for he could not bring
himself to disclose even to Vingo, his knowledge of the mystery in
regard to the fair creature who called him brother. He could not bear to
think that she was not his sister; and yet, had his memory not served
him thus, he must have observed how unlike she was to any member of
the family.

"Mother, you have looked very thoughtful for the last few days. I hope
that now we are together once more, there is nothing to disturb your
happiness," remarked Harry, as the two sat together on the little
promenade ground in front of the house, enjoying the beautiful sunset of
a summer's evening.

"There is nothing which makes me unhappy now, for although 'we know not
what a day may bring forth,' yet I have learned to smile under the most
trying dispensations of Providence, knowing that His ways are higher
than our ways; but," and her voice was hushed almost to a whisper,
"there has been something upon my mind of late, of which I would make
you a confidant, my son."

There was a pause,--well did Harry judge of what his mother would speak,
and looking into her face, he said,--"Natalie,--she is not my sister by
birth, yet I shall ever claim her as such; and I know, should she learn
that she was of other parentage to-morrow, she would cling to you,
mother, as her dearest earthly friend."

"And for that reason I know she is of noble birth. But tell me, Harry,
can it be that you, who was but a child, remember the circumstance?"

"Yes, mother, I can well remember the infant with the gold bands, and
the pretty white dress, all wet with salt water; then were my first
ideas of innocency."

"She has proved a rich blessing to us, and I do not feel that I can ever
part with her; but I have been thinking it was selfish, indeed, in
keeping her with us, to deprive her of those advantages which would fit
her for filling the station which I can plainly see belongs to her. Not
but that she might finish her education at home, for our island can rank
among the first in her systems of education, and there are many of our
citizens who are recognized by our most literary friends of the
continent, as among the first in the arts and sciences; but I think it
would be greatly to her advantage to see more of the world, and my
purpose is to accept the urgent request of a dear friend residing in
Boston, that my daughter should spend some time in her family, where she
may receive the same excellent instructions with her own child. Our
means have been for the last year or two somewhat curtailed, yet as long
as we have enough to be comfortable, we will share with her what she
most justly deserves."

"Yes, mother, give my portion to her; I can take care of myself, and
you shall not want for anything so long as I can help you. I do not know
how we can let her go, but it is for the best. She will learn of this
world, and they will learn of another."

As the two had been speaking, they had not observed a light form,
reclining under a flowering currant, which only separated them from the
object of their conversation. It was a little arbor, formed by a
clustering rose, vieing with the flowering currant in fragrance; thither
had the Sea-flower repaired, and as the softest rays of a northern sky,
at sunset, sank into her soul, mingling with more mellow light than is
of southern climes, these words fell upon her ear,--"Natalie, she is not
my sister by birth." She paused to hear no more, for she knew the
conversation was not designed for her, and noiselessly gliding from the
spot, she sought her own room. The crescent moon came forth, and beheld
the fair maiden gazing far out over the silver-edged billows, her head
resting upon her hand, her golden tresses falling gracefully over her
shoulders, while from the deep recesses of her heart there sprung up
that which had ever been, and yet was not, and took to itself a form.

"Good morning, Natalie, did I not know you retired early last night, I
should say you look a little unrefreshed. Where are the roses of
yesterday? they should not fade in a single night"

"Roses will fade, mother, and there are those which await the genial
rays of light before their unfolding," replied Sea-flower; "but I did
not retire until quite late last evening, for everything was so
beautiful and glad, that I loved to look out upon the night; and such
beautiful thoughts came to my mind, that I think I must have fallen
asleep, and dreamed; and yet I was awake, for I was conscious of
watching the water, as it sparkled in the moonlight. As the waves broke
upon the shore, they seemed to be striving, one with another, to see
which should venture the nearest, till at last there came one, which
lifted its head high above the rest, and as it receded, I saw there was
left upon the beach a tiny, shining thing, which resembled many drops of
dew. Just then the light clouds separated, and there looked down a star,
_so_ mild, and presently there came another, equally mild, and the two
finally blended into one, still hovering over the glittering one upon
the beach. At last there seemed to be a stream of light connecting one
with the other; I looked again, and the tiny thing which was left of the
waves, had gone to be with the brighter one beyond the clouds. Presently
I looked again, and there were the three, but they were changed. The
first star which had appeared, seemed now to be a lovely lady, oh, so
gentle! the second was yourself, dear mother, and the shining one which
had gone to them, appeared to be myself! The gentle lady took us each by
the hand, and when I saw her smile upon you so sweetly, I began to weep,
and the lady took me in her arms, and wiped my tears away. I was
awakened from my revery by my sobs, for it all appeared so real, and my
tears made me happier."

Mrs. Grosvenor listened to her child with astonishment. "It was a most
striking dream, indeed, she remarked; but fearing the Sea-flower might
notice her surprise, she drew her arm about her, and introduced the
subject which for some time past had been uppermost in her mind.

"What do you think of spending a little time away from home, my dear?
How should you like to graduate with Boston honors? to learn the
customs of city life?"

"I shall like it much, if it is your wish that I should go, mother; but
I know no life will be pleasanter than the happy days which we have
spent here in our own quiet home."

"Perhaps you will not always think thus; you may find greater joys in
the attractions which are before you, yet, I trust, my child, your
affection for your mother will be no less, whatever your
circumstances may be."

"Oh, mother, how can that be possible? Do not repeat the words! How can
it be that I shall ever love you less?"

"No, my child, it will not be; I wrong you in speaking such thoughts. I
cannot bear to part with you, even for a little time, yet I will not
gratify my desires at your loss; and in giving you to the care of my
most estimable friend, Mrs. Santon, I shall feel that you are under the
influence of one of the best of women."

"I shall love her for your sake, but I know I shall miss the dear ones
at home so much!"

The time came when the Sea-flower should leave her home, to learn what
't is the world is made of, and taking an affectionate farewell of the
family, (the red bandana of Vingo being counted among the Articles of
utility,) she was borne lightly over the billows, leaving her island
home far, far behind.




CHAPTER VIII.


SOFTLY STEALING--AS THE EVENING VESPER BELL.


  "And she was one on whom to fix my heart,
   To sit beside me when my thoughts are sad,
   And by her tender playfulness impart
   Some of her pure joy to me."

        PERCIVAL.


  "Patience and hope, that keep the soul,
     Unruffled and serene,
   Though floods of grief beneath it roll,
     I learn, when calm and pure,
   I see the floating water-lily,
   Gleam amid shadows dark and chilly."

      CAROLINE MAY.


The Sea-flower arrived at her new home in safety,--the home of our
western friends, the Santons. The continued ill-health of Mrs. Santon
had been the chief cause of the return of the family to the east. By a
favorable turn of fortune, Mr. Santon had come into possession of nearly
double the amount of his former wealth, and he was now looked upon as
one of Boston's most prominent citizens. The selling of western lands,
which he had obtained for a mere trifle, had been the chief source of
revenue in building up his fortune. The little Winifred, whom we left
making merry over the Erin simplicity of Biddy and Patrick, had grown to
be a young miss of seventeen. Those black eyes of hers, which had
attracted the gaze of the tall western youths for the last time, had in
no way lost their brilliancy. Mischief still sat triumphant therein, and
not a day passed but some poor uninitiated was brought to test the
merits of that gift. Miss Winnie looked upon this removal to more
enlightened regions, as a change altogether for the best; for how could
such as she, at that age which never comes but once in a lifetime, be
content to feed on air, _a la prairie_. She had tired of looking at the
same half-dozen raw-boned gallants, and had come to the grand final
decision, that her charms should not be wasted thus; and now that she
was surrounded by those urbane solicitors, which do mingle with those of
more enlargement of brain in fashionable life, they, in turn, began to
fear lest those charms might not prove for such as them.

"Mother," asked Winnie, a few days before the arrival of the
Sea-flower, "who is this friend whom you have invited to visit us?--that
is, I mean to ask, what is she like? I have often heard you speak of
your early friend, Mrs. Grosvenor, but you have never seen her daughter,
and who knows but she may be,--well, I wont say; but you know Nantucket
is but an isolated, out-of-the-way place, where fishermen live, and the
society in which she has moved, will probably unfit her for enjoying
ours. But she will be with us in a day or two, so we shall have to make
the best of it."

"It is many years since I have seen Mrs. Grosvenor; we met when we were
both young married ladies, at the house of a friend of mine, in New
York, where she was visiting, and I formed an attachment for her then,
which has never abated. We have kept ourselves informed of each other's
welfare from time to time, and thinking that the daughter might possess
the same amiable disposition as her mother, I thought that her presence
in our family might be pleasant to us all, besides gaining for her,
under your teachers of music and the languages, a finished education.
As for society in Nantucket, I have never learned of what grade it is;
but judging from the appearance of the only person I have ever met from
there, I do not consider them far behind the age."

"Well, I hope I shall like her, I am sure; she has a sweet
name,--Natalie; perhaps we shall like her, after all. But Nantucket
brought to my mind such visions of unrefined oil, that I really began to
tremble, lest we might come in closer contact therewith than would be at
all agreeable"

"Mrs. Santon received the Sea-flower with a mother's tenderness, but
being weary with her journey, Natalie retired early, to dream of those
far, low murmurings of the deep, which she had so missed, in lulling
her to rest."

"I am so disappointed in her, mother! she is such a gentle, delicate
creature! I know I shall love her! And such spiritual eyes! Did you
notice when you asked about her mother, what a sweet expression
she wore?"

"She is a beautiful creature, and if I mistake not, she has a heart to
match; but she does not resemble her mother at all, in features; I think
Captain Grosvenor must have been a fine-looking man;" and Mrs. Santon
wore a complacent look, as she thought of the favorable effect which
their guest might have upon the mind of her daughter; for owing to
frequent ill-health, Mrs. Santon had not been able to be with her child
as much as she would have desired, and she feared lest those early
traits in her character of impatience, and a proneness to censure
others, might grow upon her, under the influence of her father, who was
blind to her every fault"

"Ah, ha, miss puss," said Mr. Santon, who had received a most favorable
impression of the Sea-flower, "you will have to look out for that
fairy-like creature, or even your bewitching charms will be cast in the
shade!" and as he spoke he proudly surveyed his idolized daughter, who
was indeed to be classed among the first in the brunette style
of beauty.

"Oh, never fear for me, father," replied Winnie, taking a satisfied
survey of her full-length figure, reflected in a pier-glass; "if Boston
forgets Winnie Santon's black eyes, she will be perfectly resigned in
gazing into the soul-speaking orbs, which shall usurp her power."

Other days than those which had been spent in sweet seclusion on
Nantucket's peaceful shores, now dawned upon the Sea-flower. Although
not a day passed in which she did not sigh for one dear familiar tone
from those she loved so well, for her mother's fond embrace, and the
free, glad laugh of brother Harry, yet she was happy, excelling in those
pursuits which seemed to recognize her touch; and her soft voice, as it
were of Italian origin, grew to be "the sunshine of the house." As Biddy
often declared, "it was a great saving of canary seed, to have Miss
Natalie about the house."

Time glided on apace with the Sea-flower, as each day brought some new
task, calling into activity some talent which had been lying in a
dormant state, awaiting its time for expanding. Her teacher of music, an
Italian by birth, and of great fame in his profession, was in raptures
with the progress of his two pupils, and in the extraordinary talent
displayed by the Sea-flower, was he perfectly amazed; for not only was
her voice of that soft, mellow style, peculiar to the Italian people,
but she performed those pieces which had but just been introduced to an
American ear, with all that impassioned tenderness peculiar to
that nation.

"I believe you be one of my people!" exclaimed the Signor, after
listening in breathless attention to a new piece which he had brought
for her; her echoing tones died away, and rose again with gentler
pathos, softly, and with sweeter tone, to fall again.

Unconsciously her eyes were fixed upon the Signor as he spoke, and her
thoughts were carried back, far away; she knew not whither they would
take her, but rousing from her reverie, she merely replied,--"I love the
peculiar air of your nation, it presents such a striking contrast to our
cold, less pathetic style; but do not exclude what Winnie terms 'the
productions of the genii's more sensible moments' from my list of
favorites, for, as there are hours which are divided into sixty distinct
parts, so there are divisions within the human heart, which must live
each upon its own native air."

"Natalie, darling, what were you talking with the Signor about? From the
few words which I caught, of the human heart, etc., I did not know but
the presence of a third person might be agreeably dispensed with;" and
it was overtaxing the fringed lids of the mischievous Winnie's eyes, in
adding to their duties the office of sentinel.

"Ah, you rogue; have your critic's ears been listening to my feeble
endeavors to repay the Signor for his untiring labors?"

"One can hear your music without listening, for I was deep in thought of
the time when I shall come out from under the tyrannical power of
instructors, and can do as I like; for my part, I am tired to death of
this continual,--'Miss Winifred, this piece must be executed with milder
intonations;' or, 'Miss Winifred, that chapter of Spanish must be told
with greater fluency.' I have come to dread the very name of Professor,
and I never can look out of the window but I see some pale-faced
gentleman of the profession approaching, with his badge under his arm;
but those edifying ideas all vanished at the first strain of your 'Casta
Diva.' If I could produce such an effect, what would I not give;" and
the beauty drew her arm around the Sea-flower, and spoke in a
lower tone.

"Natalie, you know I shall come out on my eighteenth birthday, and that
will be in a very short time; then I can do as I like; but how can I
let all of these charming performances of the celebrated Madam Forresti,
whose name is in every mouth, pass without hearing her? I must say, I
was completely nonplussed, when young Montague asked me, this morning,
what I thought of her! and when I told him I had not heard her as yet,
he was perfectly astonished, and said I must hear her this very night!"

"But you did not accept of his invitation, Winnie?"

"How could I resist such a temptation? I have been longing to hear Madam
Forresti, and with Mr. Montague for an escort, I do not see the least
impropriety in attending. I need not trouble mother about it, for she is
so nervous to-day she will not leave her room; and I do not think she
can object to my going."

"Oh, Winnie! how could you do so? I know your mother would not wish you
to appear in public with Mr. Montague! Not but that he may be worthy of
attention, but he is the same as a stranger to us, for your father has
known him but a little while, and I noticed that your mother appeared
uneasy when he called last, for he has made us frequent visits, on so
short an acquaintance."

"You do not surely suppose that my father would introduce any one into
his family, who is not a fit associate for his daughter?" retorted
Winnie, her face flushing with excitement.

"No, I do not think so; but you would not go without consulting your
mother's wishes?"

"And why not? Mother will never be the wiser for it, and I cannot see
that she can reasonably object; besides, am I always to be a child? I
must some time or other act for myself."

"Dear Winnie, do not talk so! You have one of the best of mothers, and
she will not deprive you of any pleasure, unless it is for your own
good. But do not be displeased with me for speaking my thoughts, for I
love you as a sister, and cannot bear to have you do anything that would
not be right."

Winnie was about to give way to those passions which an indulged child
invariably possesses, and being naturally of a very sensitive nature,
she could not sit easy under those opinions from others, which were in
opposition to her own views, and trembling with rage, she turned to the
Sea-flower,--but the fire of her eye was subdued, her tongue did not
give utterance to the bitter, cruel words, which would have sounded so
strangely upon an ear that had never known such tones! she gave one look
at the gentle, submissive face of the Sea-flower, and burst into tears.
_Such_ tears, from the high-spirited Winnie Santon, was a strange sight.
Her proud, rebellious spirit had for once been conquered, and what was
not such a lesson worth?

"O, Natalie!" she exclaimed, "how I wish I could be like you! I was just
upon the point of saying what I know I should have repented! I am so
glad you have come to be with us!"

Nothing more was said about going to hear Madame Forresti, but when
evening came, Winnie, after leaving a message with Biddy for Mr.
Montague, that she must be excused, sought her mother's room, where she
found Sea-flower, who was reading to the invalid, and the rich tones of
her voice conveyed far more happiness to her heart, than would have been
hers, had she listened to the far-famed songstress, with a conscience
speaking of undutifulness. Natalie was reading from the "Christian's
Hope," and as she read, ever and anon cast her eye toward Winnie, who
appeared unusually thoughtful. The nervous state, however, of Mrs.
Santon would admit of but little excitement, and as Natalie closed her
book, and rose to bid her good-night, she observed that she looked
unusually happy, and taking her dear children by the hand, she thanked
them tenderly for their devoted attention to her, and drawing close to
Winnie she whispered in her ear,--"It is such a comfort to me, dear,
that you prefer your mother's sick room to more attractive society!" Had
she known of the struggle which had been going on in her daughter's
heart, through the influence of the gentle one whom she looked upon as a
well-loved child, her eye could hardly have been brighter than it was,
as her child pressed a kiss upon her forehead, and said, "I shall always
love best to be with you mother."

That night Winnie retired with a determination to strive to overcome her
sinful ways, and as she heard the voice of the Sea-flower at her evening
devotions, (their rooms adjoining,) she spoke aloud, "I will try to be
more like her." With this resolve, she fell asleep; but as the rising
sun peeped in at her window, there were to be found no traces of her
evening resolutions! If any thing, mischief looked out upon the new day
with renewed earnestness, and Winnie Santon was the same gay, reckless
creature as ever.

"Ah, ha, miss puss, so your bow is new strung again, is it?" said Mr.
Santon to his daughter, as the door closed upon one of the mustached
upper ten, who frequently found their way to the elegant mansion of
Mr. Santon.

"'New strung' with an old string, father; if these exquisites are
foolish enough to burn their fingers a second time, they must suffer the
consequences."

Mr. Santon laughed, and merely said,--"Oh, you cruel beauty!" returning
to his paper again; but, seated in the bay-window was one, who could not
thus lightly look upon the conduct of the coquettish Winnie, for it was
evident she was a sad coquette. Often had Natalie observed her, as she
received each admirer with the same bewitching smile, impressing him
with the belief that he of all others was the favored one, and he would
depart, to return again as early as the rules of propriety would admit,
considering the fair one was not yet out.

"Natalie," asked Winnie, as she seated herself at her embroidery, "why
did you not deign to give Mr. Redfield one of your winning smiles? You
are so reserved, and take so little notice of the gentlemen, that I
shall begin to think your charms are doomed to fade beneath the
convent veil."

"I was not aware that I did not receive Mr. Redfield with cordiality."

"Yes, but the absence of that fascinating air, which you know would
bring the most unyielding to your feet, is what I am lamenting. Had Mr.
Redfield been my only admirer, I should have been jealous of the glances
which he cast at you; but I don't know as there would be any occasion
for that, for you, whose heart is made for love, seem to be in no danger
at present of losing it."

"I certainly respect the gentlemen who visit us, but as for having a
preference for one more than another, I have not; and, Winnie dear, just
ask yourself if you ever give one thought to any one of those who
deceive themselves by thinking that they, of all others, are preeminent
in your regards."

"I must acknowledge that I do not give them a thought, after the door
once closes upon them; poor, deluded creatures!"

"But do you think it right to deceive them thus?"

"Natie, darling, if you were not the most romantic creature that ever
was, I should call you Miss Matter-of-fact! But really, I don't know as
there is anything very criminal in helping such people to open their
eyes; they find out, sooner or later, that I am of the opinion,--there
are as good fish in the sea as ever was caught."

The Sea-flower said no more, for she feared her words might be worse
than useless; but such are never idle words, and though Winnie appeared
to give them little heed, yet many times afterward, in the midst of her
gaiety, did she remember the Sea-flower's question,--"is it right to
deceive thus?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Eighteen years old to-day! Mother, just eighteen to-day!" shouted
Winnie, as she came into the breakfast room, her cheeks vieing with the
red of the rose; "how happy I am!" and casting a look of contempt at the
hot rolls and coffee, as if such things were hereafter to be classed
among the necessities of the past, she went bounding away to find her
father. Opening the door of the _boudoir_, she paused; arranged upon the
table were her birthday gifts, and Mr. Santon had spared no pains to
make the collection as rare as possible. In the centre of the table was
a set of diamonds for the hair, and as Winnie clasped them about her
dark tresses, she laughed outright, exclaiming,--"They are so handsome!
papa, I cannot wait for night to come! But what is this?" she asked,
drawing from a case a string of pearls, and holding them up to the
light. In the centre of the collection was one curiously wrought pearl,
so formed as to represent a star, and the sparkling of several diamonds
from within, produced a very brilliant effect. Examining it closely, she
discovered the initials, "N. G.," wrought upon the setting."

"It is for you, Natalie!" she exclaimed to the Sea-flower, who stood
enjoying Winnie's delight. "I thank you, father, for remembering
dear Natalie."

"Is it for me?" asked Natalie, hesitating to receive the gift.

"Yes, take it," said Mr. Santon, putting the treasure into her hand;
"keep it as a memento of our high esteem for you; and," added he, "I,
for one, shall petition, after you have finished your studies, to have
you remain with us another season, that we may then have more of
your society."

Natalie expressed her sincere thanks, but the mention of remaining
another season brought to her remembrance her mother's last letter,
which spoke of her return, and how delighted they would all be to have
her in their little home once more.

The long wished-for time, when Winnie should appear in public, as the
accomplished Miss Santon, at length arrived. Several hundred cards had
been issued for the occasion, and to Winnie's delight but few regrets
had been received; "for," said she, "what is the use of doing things by
the halves?" Mrs. Santon's health had for the last few days been much
improved; so much so, that Winnie had gained from her the promise to
fill her station for a part of the evening. The brilliant lights already
streamed from every window in the mansion, and the finishing touch, (if
such a thing can be said of a lady's toilet,) had been made by Winnie's
attendant, much to the satisfaction of all concerned; for although the
beauty was willing to submit to all the tortures of hair-dressing, etc.,
etc., yet before she was quite converted into a "Parisian belle," she
positively declared she would suffer none of those officials to come
into her presence again for a month. Surveying herself with an air which
would have done credit to a queen, she proceeded to the Sea-flower's
apartments, thinking to banter her a little in her endeavors to make
perfection perfect; but instead of finding her still in dishabille, she
had long ago dismissed her attendant, and was quietly engaged in reading
her bible, before she engaged in those scenes of gaiety which had less
attractions for her.

"Why, you charming creature!" exclaimed Winnie, "I can't help comparing
you to a fairy, preparing for a camp-meeting!" and her wild laugh was
heard reechoing from hall to hall, Natalie smiling at her ludicrous
comparison.

"Why do you look at me with such a bewildered gaze, Winnie? Is my simple
dress not to your fastidious taste?"

"You could not have found anything more becoming, Natie dear; you will
eclipse us all!" and Winnie, taking both her hands in hers, gazed into
her face as if spell-bound.

"I have seen some beautiful picture, somewhere," she exclaimed, "which
is like you! but where, I cannot tell; and yet, when I look at you, the
association is so fresh in my mind! Yes, you will be our evening star."

"Venus is morning star now," said Natalie, glancing at the brilliant
dress of Winnie; "yet for all that, she will favor us with her presence
this evening."

As the two descended to the boudoir, they were met by Mr. Santon, who,
shutting his eyes, exclaimed,--"Bless me! I have looked upon the
glorious morning, in the beauty of its freshness, and the gentle
evening, so pure, but to see them approaching, hand in hand, is too much
for any 'live man!'"

Escorting the fair ones to Mrs. Santon's side, he proudly gazed upon
their dazzling beauty,--beauty in its perfection sitting upon each
countenance, and yet, such a contrast! Winnie was arrayed in a rich
attire of delicate blue, her boddice wrought about with silver threads,
representing the light of the crescent moon, her skirt interwoven with
numerous lesser lights, as it were, stars of various magnitudes,
producing a splendid effect in the flood of gas-light; and the set of
diamonds bound about her dark tresses, which fell in rich profusion
about her finely arched neck, setting off her dark complexion, her
cheeks roseate with health, to great advantage; and as she moved among
her guests; her tall, slender form, so full of dignity, she was the
"observed of all observers." Her winning smile, so dangerous to those
gallants in attendance who had never realized the true sense of
coquetry, was unusually fascinating, and every one who had been honored
by Miss Winnie's notice, pronounced her decidedly the belle of the
season; but as they turned to the gentle creature at her side, their
thoughts gradually assumed a different cast,--unconsciously the mind
wandered to other scenes than are usually of a fashionable evening
entertainment. It were absurd to call her a "belle," for the word seemed
void of expression.

The Sea-flower wore a simple dress of white blonde, with no other
ornament than the band of pearls, which had been the gift of her
well-loved friends. The little star, which was formed by the glittering
of the diamonds through the delicately-wrought pearl, which being the
centre of the collection was worn upon her forehead, sparkling like
tiny drops of dew; and as she glided with unstudied grace among those
who sought to know more of her, she gained the name of "the
gentle star."

It was yet early in the evening. Sauntering along one of the principal
streets were two young men, engaged in conversation. We will listen
awhile, for we may be interested.

"Do you go to Santon's to-night, Delwood?" asked the younger of the two,
who was far less prepossessing in appearance than his companion.

"Umph,--yes," replied the other, in a more reserved tone. "Do you make
one of the number?"

"You don't know Dick Montague if you think he would miss of such an
occasion. Wit and beauty do not hold forth every night. Old Santon has
but one daughter, you know."

Mr. Delwood made no reply to these coarse remarks, for nothing could
have been in greater contrast, than the refined, gentlemanly nature of
Mr. Delwood, to that of young Montague, whom we recognize as the same
gentleman (if such young men who wear two faces, putting aside the
decorum of intelligent society, for the rude jests and unrefined
manners of other associates, can be called gentlemen,) who had attracted
Mrs. Santon's notice by his frequent visits to her daughter. Before
proceeding farther, we will give our patient reader a little insight to
the history of these two personages, whom we consider of sufficient note
in our simple narrative, for inducing us to tear ourselves away, for a
little while, from the attractions at Santon Mansion.

Clarence Delwood belonged to one of the most aristocratic families in
Boston. He was an only son, upon whom had been bestowed all of those
advantages which are to be derived from a princely fortune. At the early
age of twenty-two he had graduated at one of the first institutions in
Paris, where he had been placed by his haughty, overbearing father, who
looked upon things American as low and vulgar. The son had not inherited
that proud, unyielding spirit of his father, yet he was like him,
inasmuch as he possessed the same dignified, reserved manner, the which,
having called forth the startling declaration from manoeuvering mothers,
and languishing daughters, that "Mr. Clarence Delwood would look farther
than Boston for a bride." So they had folded their gossamer wings with
resignation, receiving his polite attentions with pleasure, yet never
being able to penetrate the reserve which hung around him. To say that
our hero was handsome, would be saying but little, for one often meets
with such; but with the almost feminine pensiveness which characterized
his manly features, we meet seldom. Tall and commanding in his
appearance, his dark, glossy hair, and finely curved mustache, gave a
fine effect to his noble countenance, the peculiar light of his eye
speaking volumes.

Such was the character of our friend Delwood, whom we shall shortly
usher into the presence of Miss Winnie Santon, that we may find what
success those penetrating eyes, which grew big with mischief even in a
prairie home, shall have in lifting the veil which concealed in a
measure the true sentiments of a noble heart from the world at large.

We give our readers an insight to the character of Richard Montague at
once, when we say that he was what is commonly termed "a young man about
town." By some means, a mystery, even to himself, he had gained a
foothold among the upper classes of society, and by dint of strict
observance of the manners of others, he had been thus far enabled to
retain his position. What his prospects in regard to pecuniary affairs
were, no one was able to say; suffice it, that there had been rumors of
an old bachelor uncle, who was much increased in this world's goods,
whose trembling hand held the desired treasure over the young man's
head; and as this report had not been corrected by Montague, he not
being over-burdened with many scruples of conscience, it is not
surprising that there should have been those, who looked upon him as a
desirable match for their dowerless daughters; but he, having realized
the desolation which empty pockets can produce, was now living upon the
hope that he might build upon his fortune, which never had foundation,
by introducing himself among the fair ones of uppertendom, as a
candidate for matrimony. For some time he had had an eye to the
well-filled purse of Winnie Santon, and he had looked forward to this
night, when she should make her _debut_, with as great interest as had
Winnie herself. Could he once get initiated into her good graces, he had
no fears for the rest; and he had already visions of what he was
pleased to term, "Old Santon's chest of gold." The attentions with which
Winnie had received him, on former occasions, had served in no way to
lessen his confidence as to his success, and with this end in view, his
steps were bent towards the scene of gaiety. Reasons best known to
himself, forbidding him to pass Mr. Delwood, whom he overtook on
the way.

"Quite an affair to-night! I'm thinking," remarked Montague, as he
observed Delwood's cool indifference, and endeavoring to draw him into
conversation, he added, "there's a young _protege_ of Santon's, staying
with his daughter, who, I hear, hails from down east. Nantucket, I
believe, perhaps we may get a little information on harpooning!"

"Ah?" said Delwood, mechanically.

"Yes, the boys will have some sport I'm thinking; perhaps some of them
may be induced to ship as mate, for a down east voyage! I remember of
sailing by Nantucket many years ago, on my return from Liverpool, (he
did not add that he had worked his passage) and though some twenty miles
distant, we fancied that we got a whiff of the hump-backs. Our captain
was a jolly sort of fellow, and would have us land-lubbers believe that
his experienced eye could see half across the ocean, but he found we
were too smart for him, when he told us he could see a church-steeple
looming up on the island, for of course we knew that such things were
not raised there."

Much to Mr. Delwood's relief, they had now arrived at Mr. Santon's
residence. As the name of Delwood was announced, all eyes were turned
toward him, for his presence was considered a great acquisition to any
circle, and many a fair one envied Winnie Santon, as he claimed her hand
for the first dance. The Sea-flower stood by Mrs. Santon's side, that
she might attend to her least wish, when young Montague, disappointed
that he had not been the first to secure the hand of Winnie, in an
obsequious manner, solicited the pleasure of Miss Grosvenor's company,
to complete the set, but she politely declining the honor, the young
man, by the aid of the brass which constituted no small portion of his
composition, begged leave to remain by her side, that he might make some
few inquiries in regard to her enchanting home, which place he always
had a great desire to visit.

"The islanders I suppose are mostly fishermen, yet," added he, glancing
rudely into her face, "there are some persons of intelligence among
them, are there not?"

Natalie looked at him for a moment, as if in doubt whether ignorance or
some meaner motive had prompted the question, when she remarked, "you
evidently have never learned of the great dangers attendant upon a
stranger's visit to Nantucket."

"Ah, indeed, I shall be under great obligations for the information,"
said he, his eyes wide open with curiosity! "pray, what are
those dangers?"

"The islanders, as you have imagined, being so unlike the inhabitants of
civilized lands, have such a natural propensity for wielding the
harpoon, that should a person differing from their kind appear amongst
them, they might be liable to capture him, mistaking the object for a
new species of land-shark!"

At this piece of information, delivered in such a calm, pleasant manner,
the smiles which had been visible on the faces of those who listened,
grew into a hearty laugh, in which the chagrined Montague joined, as
being the safest way of retreat, and although piqued by the ludicrous
position in which he had been placed, he could not but look with
admiration upon the gentle creature, whose pleasant repartee had been in
self-defence.

Natalie followed with her eye the graceful form of Winnie, as she
threaded her way through the dance, occasionally interchanging a witty
remark with her handsome partner, and as he lead her to a seat, Natalie
observed to Mrs. Santon, "how beautiful dear Winnie is to-night! I do
not know who can help loving her!" So enthusiastic was she in her
praises, that she had not observed the two contemplating her, and ere
she was aware of their approach, the bewitching Winnie had taken her
hand, and presenting Mr. Delwood, she mischievously remarked, "Now, Miss
critic, it is for you to perform _a la perfectione_, and depend upon it,
you shall be dealt with according to your own measure! for you have not
once taken those eyes off from me through the whole course!"

Before Natalie could say a word in her defence, the music had commenced,
and ere she had hardly realized it she had taken Winnie's place by the
side of Mr. Delwood. Other eyes than Natalie's had looked upon Winnie
with admiration, as she had leaned upon the arm of Delwood, but now, as
he led forth "the gentle star," the suppressed murmur of applause must
have been apparent to the fair one herself had she not been engaged with
other thoughts. For several successive figures it so happened that
Natalie was the partner of the reserved Mr. Delwood, who never was known
to appear a second time upon the floor, and it also happened, how, or at
what moment was a mystery, that the two had sought to dispel fatigue, by
the conservatory's soothing influences, whither the eye of Winnie
wandered ever and anon, as with Mr. Montague she vied with her
competitors in the giddy waltz. Miss Winnie's brain was capable of
containing two thoughts at the same time, and no one would have
suspected, absorbed as she appeared to be with the attentions of
Montague, who was playing the agreeable to the best of his knowledge,
that her curiosity was at work, wondering what the subject of the
truants, tete-a-tete might be. "They are discussing the rare exotics,
sent to us from the South," she thought within herself, and indeed,
what other could interest the cold-hearted Delwood? who, it was thought
had never dreamed of love this side of the Atlantic; and as for Natalie,
many a private lecture had she received from Winnie, in regard to her
indifference toward the gentleman! though those discourses had been
invariably of the same termination, "for all that, Natalie, your heart
is made for love."

From the first moment that Clarence Delwood had set his eye upon the
Sea-flower, an interest which he had never known before had been
awakened within him. It may be said that it was a weakness, that he had
always looked upon women as mere butterflies, but owing to early
circumstances, he having been bereft of his mother in infancy, never
having known the blessings of a sister's society, he was not to be
condemned for the impressions which a gaudily attired attendant had left
upon his mind as he grew up into boyhood. But as he listened to the
Sea-flower, as she told him of her home in the sea, of the music of the
glorious billows, companions of her childhood, filling the very soul
with nature's beauty and sublimity, he looked upon her, as if fearful
she might prove an "Undine," and he would not have been taken by
surprise had her spiritual face faded calmly from beneath his gaze, to
join her sister nymphs of ocean.

"And you will soon return to your island home?" he asked, as a thought
of the warmth with which she had expressed herself to a stranger, bade
her pause in her enthusiasm with downcast eye.

"Yes, I shall soon return," she answered joyously, "and yet I shall
remember Boston with feelings of pleasure, for I have spent happy
hours here."

As she said this, their eyes involuntarily met; a silent spectator would
have noted the contrast of the moistened blue, to the deep black of
sterner make, but as it was, that contrast was not discovered, each felt
that the other was reading the thought, which had but then sprung up
within the soul. Natalie withdrew her gaze, while Delwood, stooping to
pluck a moss rose-bud from an urn at her feet, placed it within his
diamond fastener, and the two retraced their steps to join their friends
again. Montague was still at Winnie's side, and though the unusual flush
upon Natalie's cheek was a sad tell-tale of the state of affairs, yet
she observed Winnie as she listened with a ready ear to Montague's
remarks, and an unpleasant feeling rose in her heart; she could not bear
to have her dear friend on such intimate terms with him, whom, as by a
natural instinct she shunned.

All things must have an end; and the cheerful lights, which houseless
ones had watched as the bright beams fell across the pave, one by one
had faded. Formal adieus had been said, kind wishes interchanged, and
the last sound of rumbling wheels had died away. Excess of excitement
bade the blooming Winnie seek repose, and quiet reigned triumphant at
Santon Mansion; yet there was one who seemed to have forgotten that the
morning follows so close upon the evening. The Sea-flower had lingered
among the last to say adieu, and now, in her own apartment, she had sunk
into a chair, the delicate pearls still encircling her sunny tresses,
vieing in purity with her fair complexion; her eyes were fixed on
vacancy, and she was not aware that the morning was peeping in upon her,
till started from her reveries by her own gentle sighs.

And what spell is this that so usurps the calm, usually characteristic
of her nature? We have a vague suspicion as to what it may be, yet she
is all innocent of the source from which these new feelings have sprung;
even the last low words of Delwood, which are still sounding in her ear,
do not lead her to mistrust, and we leave her, as the fringed eyelids at
last droop in repose, to take a peep at our hero, who is only distant a
few squares from the gentle one, who, he feels, as he sits by the
gas-light, made pallid by the dawn of day, is all the world to him.

If Delwood possessed the cold heart, of which the world gave him the
credit, its fetters had at last yielded to the genial sunshine. Sleep
was most remote from him, and pacing his room with a quick tread, he
uttered, in a sarcastic tone--"Love! Clarence Delwood in love! Love at
first sight! I never would have credited it!" his voice softening, he
added--"I feel confident that she of all others, is the only one who
could have wrought this change! No, I cannot look upon this as weakness!
I must see more of her; she is an angel of purity, too good for such as
I. Can she think favorably of me? and what will my father say, if he
learns that his only son will sue for favor in the eyes of--it may be a
maiden of low birth! It matters not! Should he disinherit me, I will
seek her society! I must love her even though she look upon me coldly. I
will see her again this very day!" with these resolves he threw himself
upon his couch, if he might get a little rest, before he again went
forth into the busy day, with feelings how changed!

Natalie was awakened from her late slumbers, by a kiss from Winnie,
whose merry voice made the apartment ring. "So, ho! Miss Natalie," she
exclaimed, "you have been holding late revels with the water nymphs by
moonlight! and now, when the stronger light of the sun bids us mortals
awake, you have made good your retreat, and are enjoying Morpheus's
protecting care! but I can guess from whence the smiles came, as you
slept! never fear, darling, I'll tell nobody of whom you dreamed!"

"Why, Winnie dear," exclaimed Natalie, endeavoring to free herself from
the kisses which that crazy little body was lavishing upon her, "have I
slept so late? and what has turned your head so early this morning? I do
not know what will become of us all before the day is ended, if you go
on thus." Opening her eyes, she looked about her, endeavoring to collect
her senses. Her eye fell upon a bouquet, of the finest, most delicate
flowers, in a vase, upon her toilet table; it had evidently been placed
there since she had retired, as she did not remember of seeing it
before. "You are very kind, Winnie, in being so thoughtful of me," she
said, "but where did you get those beautiful varieties? they are not
from our conservatory."

"O, you innocent rogue! you think to make me believe you know nothing of
them, do you? they certainly came from some one who was thoughtful of
your well-being! but come, make yourself look as charming as possible,
for there is a friend awaiting us in the drawing room, who it is, I'll
not say, for 'haste makes waste,' you know!"

Natalie blushed, for there came at once a rush of thoughts to her mind.
She but then remembered the pleasures of last evening. Winnie giving her
a knowing look, left her to her own reflections. Banishing all other
thoughts from her mind, Natalie kneeled at her morning devotions, her
low voice went up in thanks for the many blessings which were hers, not
forgetting to ask for greater favors for her dear mother and brother,
whom she expected so soon to meet, in two short weeks, at the time which
had been fixed, when she would return to her home.

A simple morning dress of pink delise, edged with white, set off her
light figure to a charm; her snowy collar fastened with a cross, and
taking a lily of the valley from the mysterious bouquet, she placed it
in her hair, and half-hesitating, lest Winnie had been playing off one
of her mischievous tricks, she descended to the drawing-room. Seated
upon an ottoman, was no other than Clarence Delwood, who arose as she
entered, taking her proffered hand with some little embarrassment, which
was soon dispelled by the adroit Winnie, who took a seat at the piano,
and with a rich full voice sang the last opera. "Your friend, Miss
Santon, has an enviable voice," remarked Delwood to Natalie, regarding
the lily buds which he recognized as of the bouquet which he had ordered
his servant to place in the hands of her attendant, giving no name of
the donor. "Yes, I love to listen to her voice, it is so full of
feeling; she has a peculiar style! The Signor tells me her voice is of
great talent."

"I need not ask of your own voice," remarked Delwood, "for your tone
betrays you."

"Yes," cried Winnie, who in spite of the music had an ear alive to the
conversation, "it is moved and seconded that Miss Grosvenor shall give
us a benefit, and if she fails to entertain us with her first attempt,
she will lay herself open to be called upon again."

"She may rest assured that your sentiments, however expressed, will be
truth in regard to the matter! for you are far from being a flatterer,"
said Mr. Santon, as entering the apartment he welcomed Mr. Delwood to
his house. Natalie chose a simple piece--"The Wanderer's Home," and as
the sound of her voice died away, there was not a dry eye in the room.
Winnie was the first to break the spell, and smiling away a tear, she
exclaimed, "I had forgotten to caution you against too great success in
charming your listeners, therefore the _encores_ of your audience will
not permit you to retire without feeding the flame which you
have excited."

"Remember you were not to flatter me," said Natalie, glancing at
Delwood, who was silently contemplating her.

"Flattery or no flattery, you must repeat that to please me," said Mr.
Santon, making manifest exertions to clear his throat, and looking for
his handkerchief, as if suddenly seized with a cold. The piece was
repeated with greater effect, and it was not till Winnie began to rally
him that Delwood was aware of his negligence in escorting the fair
songstress to a seat. "Pardon me, Miss Grosvenor," he said, "but the
first tone of your voice carried me far back, to when I was a child of
five or six years. It was in Italy, where my father spent some time,
after my mother's death, and it so happened that I was permitted to
accompany him to an entertainment given by an Italian lady of note, who,
in the course of the evening, favored the company with a song. I was
engaged with some sweetmeats as she commenced, but as she proceeded,
gradually they fell from my hands, and when she had finished, I had
found my way to her side, and clinging to her dress I burst into tears,
begging her to take me to that beautiful place again! It is years since
I have thought of the circumstance, and I trust you will pardon my
enthusiasm, when I say that your "Wanderer's Home," has produced a
similar effect!"

Natalie expressed her thanks for the compliment, with blushing modesty,
and as Delwood bade them good morning, after having made arrangements
for testing their courage with his iron grays, on the following morning;
so long did his eye linger upon her, who had full command of his every
thought, that he did not observe miss Winnie, who was trembling lest her
fresh supply of mischief should come to an unendurable crisis, before he
should depart.

It was soon rumored that the lion had been tamed, that the beautiful
Miss Grosvenor had found her way to the heart of Clarence Delwood.
Boston beauties sighed, and those who had been unsuccessful in what is
sometimes termed "setting their caps," looked on with interest, but none
who had seen the favored one, could find it in their hearts to wish her
other than a life of joy. And thus time passed on, scarcely a day sped,
but Clarence Delwood was seen ascending the steps of Mr. Santon's
hospitable mansion. As Winnie expressed herself--"the affair was coming
on bravely;" she had now found for whom Natalie was reserving that
heart, which in spite of her caution, would impart to others its only
element. The time was also drawing near, when Natalie was to have made
glad her mother's heart by her presence. Old Vingo had desired his Massa
Harry to write to young Missy, "dat eben de breakers gettin' impatient
to see her once more, and dat he walk alone now, on de beach in de
moonlight, but he neber 'speck to find anoder Sea-flower."

In a few days the Santon family were to part with Natalie. It was in
vain they had urged upon her to remain with them another season, for as
much as she had become attached to them all, she longed to see her home
once more. Even Winnie failed to keep time with her usually joyous
spirits, and there was one to whom this parting was not to be thought
of. Mr. Delwood had as yet received no positive assurance, that his
unmistakable sentiments towards Natalie were reciprocated, and yet he
was confident that she regarded him with no common interest. He had read
it in her soul, but he would hear from her own lips if happiness or
misery was to be his through life, and it was with a nervous step that
he wended his way on this last evening of her stay in Boston, that he
might hear his fate. As he drew near the house, he observed, though
early in the evening, but one dim light gleaming from an upper
apartment, and as he reached the gate it was fast, and a porter stood
within, who, to Delwood's hurried question if all was well, as he threw
him a gold-piece, replied in a sad tone--"kind sir, my orders are to
receive no one, as my mistress is dying, or you should have admittance
at once; but I know that you, of all others, could serve to lighten the
blow to my master, and if you take the responsibility, you shall be
admitted."

"Leave that with me," he replied, "you shall not be censured," and with
assumed calmness of manner, he entered. Noiselessly he opened the outer
door, proceeding to the upper drawing-room, which opened to the room of
the dying one. Mr. Santon sat with his face buried in his hands, sobbing
aloud. Mr. Delwood took him tenderly by the hand, and whispered a few
words in his ear, which seemed to rouse him from the dreadful state of
mind to which he had yielded. "You find here a house of mourning," he
said, "but your presence is most welcome."

"What can I do for you in this trying hour?" asked Delwood; "can I be of
any assistance?"

"There is nothing to be done but to submit to the will of God," he
answered, "and I pray that I may have strength so to do." The door of
the chamber of death was opened, and the physician summoned Mr. Santon
to his dying wife's bedside. Delwood stood in the door; pale, but not
emaciated were the features upon which death had set his seal, her last
moment was near, but she had strength and consciousness supported by the
Sea-flower, to say a few parting words; with one hand in that of her
husband, the other upon the head of her grief-stricken daughter, she
said: "farewell, my dearest husband; it is but a little parting; you
will meet me there at last." Turning to the Sea-flower, with her hand
still upon the head of her daughter, she added, "my child will soon be
motherless; through you, she is what I could wish to see her; and when I
am gone, will you never lose sight of her? make her to be like
yourself!" In a feeble voice she continued, "thank God that we may see
heaven upon earth; the gentle spirit is pointing me to my rest;" a
slight trembling of her weary frame, and she had gone to be with the
"just made perfect;" a smile was upon her features, and they smoothed
her limbs as for a night's repose. The father mingled his tears with
those of his child, who was all that was left to him. The Sea-flower,
leaning upon the arm of him who thought it not unmanly to weep over the
scene he had witnessed, retired, leaving the afflicted ones to weep away
the anguish in their hearts, ere they might look upon the loving
kindness of Him, whose ways are all perfect.




CHAPTER IX.


BEHIND THE CLOUDS THE SUN IS SHINING.


                  "I am armed with innocence,
  Less penetrable than the steel-ribbed coats
  That harness round thy warriors."

        MADDEN'S THEMISTOCLES.


  "That one so formed in mind and charms to grace,
   The brightest scenes of life, should have her seat
   In the shadow of a cloud; and yet 'tis weakness.
   The angels watch the good and innocent,
   And where they gaze it must be glorious."

        MRS. BALE'S "ORMOND GROSVENOR."


My gentle reader will pardon the long stride of time which here
intervenes, disclosing nothing of those in whom we feel an interest.
Nearly a year of moments had sped since that in which Mrs. Santon had
passed away. Winnie had seen her loved mother laid in that narrow,
silent house, which is prepared for the dead, and her tears had watered
the green grass which groweth so silently,--upspringing everywhere, even
in the lonely places of burial, a fit covering for those who
slumber,--emblematical of the life beyond the tomb. The joyous mirth
which abode in Winnie's nature had superseded, in a measure, days of
deep mourning; yet this first taste of earth's sorrow had left an
impress upon her mind never to be erased; and though thoughtless ones
perhaps observed no change in her young, elastic spirits, there was one,
gentle and youthful, who had been to her as a mother in her
bereavement,--the Sea-flower. She could see that the death of a loved
one had wrought a good work upon the heart of her friend, as it may with
us all, if we will lie passive in the hands of the workman.

It was a disappointment to Natalie that her intention of returning home
had been frustrated; yet it was with cheerfulness that she resigned her
hopes, when she saw that duty pointed out another way. Mr. Santon, on
the sudden death of his wife, which occurred on the very evening before
Natalie was to bid them farewell, had himself written a very touching
letter to Mrs. Grosvenor, begging, if it were not asking of her too
much, that she would spare her daughter to them a little while longer,
as it had been the last wish of Mrs. Santon that their daughter might be
with her who had proved such a blessing to them all; and so, in pity for
the dear ones of her friend, of whose death she was pained to learn,
Mrs. Grosvenor had consented to another year's separation from her
child, though it was indeed asking of her a great sacrifice. Old Vingo,
who had wondered if his young missy would take him by the hand, as she
used, when he heard that another long year must pass before he would see
her again, cried like a child; but no one was more disappointed than
Harry, who had counted the days for months, when she would come home;
but his patience was not to be tested thus. He had visited his sister in
Boston, and had received so favorable an impression of city life, or it
may be that he had received a more favorable impression of a certain
pair of black eyes, which were constantly fixed upon him, when he had
accidentally glanced towards a certain young lady, whom, report said,
(Mr. Montague being among the foremost to give credit thereto,) was the
"greatest catch" in town. Whether it was actually the lady's beauty in
question which had dazzled scores of disengaged young men, or whether
they had seen visions of a well-built money-chest, we do not pretend to
say; but this much we can perceive, that a beautiful young heiress, left
to her own discretion in the choosing of a partner for life, stands in a
critical situation, and if these innuendoes refer to Miss Winnie Santon,
we are foremost in wishing our young nautical friend success in the
great game of hearts, for we can see too much of worth in her character,
for her to be thrown away on a worthless dandy, whose money, for the
little time that it keeps him company, is his god. Be all this as it
may, Harry Grosvenor had found several opportunities for visiting his
sister, and upon each visit he was received, not only by the Sea-flower,
but by Winnie herself, with a warm welcome.

But Winnie, as we have discovered, has been a sad coquette. Another
year, however, has been added to her age since we saw her in society
last, and this last year, so different from any other of her sunny life,
has brought with it the knowledge and experience of many. Perhaps the
Sea-flower's influence, which fortunately she has been under, may have
had its effect upon her character, which is now forming itself; and yet
her bewitching smile, which Harry loved to dwell upon, when he had
returned to his island home, as second only to his matchless sister's,
was very like those which she had bestowed upon many an elated gallant.

Natalie had not failed to notice the seeming pleasure with which her
brother had listened to Winnie's brilliant conversation, and she had
asked herself if it were possible that Winnie could be so heartless as
to impress her brother with erroneous views in regard to her sentiments.
She would not believe that she had the heart to do it; and yet, through
habit, and a perfect thoughtlessness of the consequences, she might be
led to do so.

It was evening, and the two sat folded in each other's arms, gazing at
an autumn sunset. Winnie was still in her black habiliments, for it was
not quite a year since Mrs. Santon had died. Harry had left them the day
before, and had bade them both a warm farewell. Winnie had been silent
for some moments, when Natalie remarked,--"What new scheme are you
planning now, Winnie? you are very thoughtful to-night."

Winnie roused herself, and blushingly replied, "I do not wonder that
you note my thoughtful moments, I am such a gay creature; but, dear
Natalie, there are times when even _I_ can be serious, though there are
few who could credit my words."

"I can believe you, Winnie, for I know you have a good heart; but what
can have occurred of sufficient importance to banish those dimples from
your cheek? Come, rogue, make me your confidant, or I shall begin to
think you are at your old tricks, after all."

"If I did not know your forgiving spirit, I should hesitate to place
myself in your power, for fear you might repay me with interest, in
making you, and your particular friend Mr. Delwood, the subjects of my
merriment."

Natalie looked calmly into her eyes; the truth flashed across her mind
at once, and she was about to clasp her in her arms, calling her by the
name of sister, when a well-known voice from behind them repeated the
name, "Sea-flower," and Mr. Delwood was by her side.

"Where did you learn the name by which I am called in my island home?"
asked Natalie.

"Why did you never tell us that you have a name in keeping with your
character?" he asked, taking the seat by her side which Winnie, who had
retired to hide her blushes, had vacated.

"'Tis the name by which my father loved to call me, and I associate it
with his sacred memory," she replied; and a tear, which Delwood looked
upon as also sacred, fell upon the hand which clasped her's as with
reverential fervency.

"Your brother told me of the name," he replied, "and will you permit me
to associate with that name all that is of purity? May I not call you by
that name? Can you give one thought to him whose very happiness for life
is dependent on you?"

There was a pause, Delwood had never until this night, declared to her
his love, in so many measured words, which were but coldness in
comparison with the love for her which filled his soul. A year ago would
have sealed his doom, but that night witnessed another scene. Death had
claimed it for his own. The hand which he held was not withdrawn,
neither did a simper mark her reply. With eyes meekly turned upward, she
answered in a calm, low voice,--"My dear father is in heaven; if he is
looking down, I feel that he will smile upon me, when, with my mother's
consent, she shall give me away to you. I have long ago given myself to
Christ, and if you recognize him as your Saviour, we will together serve
him as dutiful children, praying one for the other that we may
not fall."

"I am not like you," he replied; "I can never be as pure as you are;
neither am I what the world calls a Christian; but by God's help, I
pledge myself to be one of Christ's followers; and of one thing I am
confident, I shall never be if I grope my way alone through the world,
as I must if I lose you, what I shall be if I have you for a guide!"

"It is enough; you depreciate your own merits," she said, glancing
proudly upon him; "go, when I return, and with your own lips ask my
mother, if she can find a place in her noblest of women's hearts, for
him who is all too worthy of her daughter's love."

He folded her to his heart, and the rich harvest moon had sunk far below
the horizon, ere these two kindred spirits had wearied of the
glorious night.

Mr. Santon had not felt the utter desolation, after the first
overpowering sense of grief had passed, after his wife's death, that he
would have felt had he had no one upon whom to have leaned. As it was,
his home was not desolate, for he cherished his daughter as the "apple
of his eye," and he had come to be like himself again. Happy faces met
him as he came in wearied from his duties "on 'change," and he had again
assumed his easy, jocose manners. Natalie was still continuing her
studies, making unprecedented progress, to the rapturous delight of the
Signor; while Winnie enlivened the whole household.

As mistress of the mansion she had new duties to discharge, though they
were not so arduous as to deprive her of entertaining the young
aspirants to her hand, who if they did not throw themselves at her feet,
it was only for the want of an opportunity. And thus was everything
going on harmoniously at Santon Mansion, when, to the no little surprise
of every one, it was rumored that the wealthy Mr. Santon was about to
introduce to his domains a new mistress. No one was more taken by
surprise than were Winnie and Natalie. They could hardly credit their
senses, when Mr. Santon congratulated his daughter on the prospect of
having a new mother.

Poor Winnie! she tried to smile, and she tried to make one of her most
brilliant remarks, as she congratulated her father on his happiness; yet
it was not like herself, and Natalie could see, what Mr. Santon in his
blindness of joy did not discern,--there was no heart in his daughter's
mechanical tones. Winnie had not as yet seen her intended mother-in-law;
she might be all that could be desired of one standing in that peculiar
relation, and she might be otherwise; it was not that which had quelled
the buoyant spirits of the heiress, it was that she shrank from the
thought of any one so soon filling her own dear mother's station, and
she hid her face in Natalie's golden tresses, as her father left the
room, and burst into tears.

"Dear, dear Natalie," she exclaimed, "you will think me so wicked! But I
wanted no other mother than you! Though you are younger than myself, I
have learned to look up to you, as a valuable bequest left me by my
mother, who smiled even in death, when you promised never to forget me.
We are happy now; why need a stranger come among us? Oh, Natalie, I
never can part from you!"

"Hush! hush! dear Winnie, you must not think thus! you may come to love
your new mother, filling the most sanguine wishes of your father's
heart, who would be wretched, if his daughter were not reconciled to her
who will stand in the nearest relation to him."

And thus the Sea-flower endeavored to prepare Winnie's mind for
receiving her new mother, who would so soon take her place at the head
of this once unbroken family, as became a meek and dutiful child; but
she did not tell her of the trembling within her own heart, lest this
new tie should prove a source of sorrows, sowing her youthful heart with
seed which might be productive of bitter among the sweets; neither did
she know of the prayers of the innocent maiden, that hers might be a
thornless path.

The lady in question, whom Mr. Santon had deemed worthy of his hand, and
its consequent honors, was of a family of lower standing than his own as
far as much of this world's goods go to give caste; but if, aside from
depth of purse, she was his inferior, we have yet to learn. The
marriage ceremonies were attended with little display, in deference to
Mr. Santon's wishes, and the day at length arrived, when the bride, who
resided in a neighboring city, was to be received in her new home.

She came, and congratulations were exchanged between mother and
daughter, first impressions were made, and the hour arrived which should
liberate each one to the night's repose. Winnie flew to her room; she
had seen her whom she was to call "mother," and from the few hours which
she had already passed with her, her superior discernment of character
had judged of her aright; she never had cause to vary from the opinion
which she had from the first formed of her; she choked back the tears,
so strange to see within her eyes, and kneeling, she repeated the very
first prayer her mother had ever taught her, an exercise which from the
example set before her for the last two years, she now never failed to
observe. Arising, she endeavored to dispel the mountain of anguish which
was creeping into her soul,--in sleep. Poor Winnie! we can pity you;
'tis but life's lesson taught.

The impression which Natalie had received of the second wife of Mr.
Santon's choice, though she would not bring herself to realize it, were
by no means prepossessing. She had schooled her own, and Winnie's heart
to love her under any circumstances, but when she saw with what
frigidity she received Winnie's warm welcome, thinking not of the
condescension with which she had taken her own hand, her tender heart
was pierced as Winnie looked toward her, as if for strength, and she had
returned her look with a smile which could not fail to prove to her a
ray of sunshine.

Why is it that it is of so frequent occurrence, that a man who has been
blessed with peculiar loveliness of character in a wife, if he be called
upon to part with her, finds, alas! too late, in a second partner, an
extreme opposite? It was thus in Mr. Santon's experience, as he but too
soon was obliged to acknowledge to himself, though he would not that
others should have a suspicion of the fact; yet it was evident to his
nearest friends that he was not the happy man he once was; the few
sprinkles of gray, which had reflected honor upon the raven black of his
hair, had increased ere the honey-moon was hardly ended.

Early the next morning after the arrival of Mrs. Santon, Winnie was
awakened by an attendant, whose sense of propriety were a question, if
placed in a balance with that of her new mistress, which were the
weightier. The woman apologized for disturbing "her leddy-ship," but the
new mistress would like to see Miss Santon in the drawing-room as soon
as possible.

"You can go," was Winnie's reply, "and tell Mrs. Santon that at my
convenience, I will see her!" but recalling the servant, with her next
thought, she added, "merely say to my mother, that I will soon be with
her," and hastily making her toilet, she repaired to the drawing-room.

Mrs. Santon was alone, for it was a full hour before the family's usual
time for arising. Winnie bade her mother "good morning," and was about
to ask if she had rested well in her new home, when she was interrupted
by her, and in an imperative tone she said:--

"This may be earlier than you have been accustomed to 'rising, Miss
Santon, but my habits for early rising are proverbial, and of course my
household will conform to my wishes in regard to matters which you will
at once see are for the best. What I wished to speak with you more
particularly about this morning, is in regard to the keys; you will
please produce them, as I shall have a thorough overhauling at once, and
if I mistake not," said she, glancing at Winnie's neat morning attire,
"the sooner the better, for I think those jewelled hands have not
troubled themselves much about such things. I wonder that you have not
been brought up to something beside killing time!"

"Madam!" vociferated Winnie, her face crimsoned with the insult which
she had received, but she paused, though still trembling with rage, her
eye had rested on a gentle form, standing within the open door--it was
the Sea-flower. With one finger upon her lip, her brow calm as the new
day, she gazed upon Winnie, till gaining her eye, unobserved by Mrs.
Santon she glided away. Instead of the rage Winnie would have poured
forth, she merely said, "I will send you the keys," and left the room.
Despatching a servant with the keys, which she had intended to have put
into her hands at the earliest opportunity, thereby acknowledging her
superior claim at once, she sought Natalie, whom she found seated in the
conservatory, enjoying the Indian summer breeze, which stole softly in
among the fragrant plants, which were the particular objects of her
care. Each knew what was uppermost in the other's mind, but Winnie's
heart was too full to speak.

"I have been thinking, Winnie," said the Sea-flower, "how thankful we
should be, that we have so many friends to love us. I think I have never
realized it until now, and," she spoke in a lower tone, "dear Winnie,
should you ever receive other than the kindly treatment to which you
have always been accustomed, let it serve to increase your gratitude
that you have so many with whom you can trust your affections."

"Yes, Natalie, I will strive to do aright. I will try to do as I think
you would have done, but I fear I shall not have your strength. O, it is
so hard! if I only had a mother to love me, I could endure anything
else!" and her excitable nature getting the better of her, she burst
into tears. Natalie threw her arm about her neck, and, her own voice
tremulous with the pity which she felt for her, she tried to soothe her
spirits; "you shall have a mother! My mother shall be your mother! for
are you not to be my sister? and she will love you as did your own
gentle mother! but Mrs. Santon will yet become reconciled to you, for
when she finds what a good heart you have, she cannot but treat you with
kindness."

At this juncture the door opened, and Mrs. Santon brushed rudely in;
"welladay! is this your usual morning's occupation? Miss Grosvenor, I
think you should have more wisdom than to be petting a spoiled child! I
imagine that I shall have as much as I shall care to undertake, to undo
the mischief which is already too apparent. It has been as much as I
could do for the last two hours, to get things a little in order; but I
suppose I need not look for assistance here," she scornfully said, and
turned to leave the room. Winnie had it upon her tongue's end to reply,
"My father employs his servants to keep his house in order, and they
have never failed to give satisfaction," but biting her lip, the thought
died away. Natalie arrested Mrs. Santon's steps, saying, "Winnie and
myself will consider it a pleasure to assist you, and whatever we can do
at any time for your enjoyment, we shall be most happy to do it." The
hard-hearted woman quailed a little, at the Sea-flower's proffered
assistance, and Natalie accompanied her to the upper drawing-room,
wondering much what could have given offence to her ideas of a
well-regulated house; for under the housekeeper's scrupulous care,
everything was kept in the nicest order. Desiring Natalie to assist her
in the disposal of some articles, she directed Winnie to find some
out-of-the-way place, and to stow away the rubbish which she would find
in the next apartment, pointing to the room which had been her mother's,
and which Winnie had not permitted any one to disturb, since her death.
Everything had been left just as she had left it, even some withered
flowers had not been removed, and the book from which she had read, had
been left opened at the place her eye had last looked upon. This room
had been kept as a place sacred to Winnie's heart, and indeed the very
servants passed it by with a blessing on their departed mistress; and it
was now with trembling steps that Winnie, hardly realizing what had been
said to her, followed in the direction which the cruel woman had
pointed. She opened the door, and sank fainting into a chair! In the
middle of the floor were the very clothes which her mother had worn,
with other articles thrown together in a pile! her mother's portrait
had been removed, and the room was otherwise in disorder. Natalie ran to
Winnie's assistance, bathing her temples, and smoothing back her long
tresses with tenderness. Just at that moment Mr. Santon entered the
room; he looked at his daughter! at the disordered apartment of his
buried wife, which he had never held more sacred, and he looked at Mrs.
Santon! Without speaking a word he left the room. Poor Winnie! this is
indeed life's lesson! but thou art learning to "suffer and be strong."

Had the character of the mother-in-law been in accordance with her
exterior, Santon Mansion might still have resounded with joy, for hers
was a face by no means forbidding. On the contrary, a stranger would
have pronounced her to be decidedly good-looking, considering that she
was a woman of nearly fifty years, and those good looks were the secret
of Mr. Santon's unfortunate connection with her. From the first, the
woman had taken a dislike to Natalie; it seemed as if she was determined
to spite her in every way possible. Why she should have felt thus toward
her, was certainly unaccountable, as there was no trait more unlovable
than innocency, about her character; but this very gentleness of nature,
in contrast with the iciness, seldom found in woman's heart, would, as
an unavoidable result, serve to widen the two extremes.

The Sea-flower would, as time advanced, have sought refuge in her own
home, from this mist of unrest, which had by degrees spread itself
around, but when she had spoken of the thing to Mr. Santon, he had
grasped her by the hand, as a drowning man would catch at a straw,
saying, if she would not entirely sever the golden thread which was once
bound around their home circle, she would defer her departure, for at
least, a little time; and she had seen the tear, which was as molten
lead, welling up from the strong man's heart. Then she said, "It is my
duty! I will remain with you! I feel there is something which bids me
stay; some mysterious power controlling my destiny."

"May you have your reward!" was Mr. Santon's reply; and we heartily
respond, "May she have her reward!"

Never a word did Mrs. Santon receive from the Sea-flower, in return for
her ungenerous treatment of her, other than tones of kindness; and
Natalie was happy under this new dispensation, for she said within
herself,--"I am but bearing a part of the burden which would crush dear
Winnie's heart;" and so she sang and played with her usual glad spirit,
gliding about the house with simple dignity, with a cheering word for
every one, and, as Biddy said,--"she was an escaped ray of light, too
bright for the darkness to hide."

As we may foresee, this very light-heartedness of the Sea-flower only
served to incite the ire of Mrs. Santon, who saw that every new
indignity which she had cast upon her, was returned with more meekness
of spirit. If Natalie had resented such conduct, giving "measure for
measure," the stern woman could have borne it better; but as it was, it
enraged her, that she could not come within her sphere; and, if the
truth were known, her senses were not so steeped in the waters of
insensibility, but that in her very heart she felt her great superiority
over herself.

"I will put her down, yet!" she said to herself, after another return,
through the Sea-flower, of "good for evil." "She shall yet feel my
power! and why Mr. Santon will persist in her staying with us, is more
than I can tell. But that is the way with these men! they will get
strange notions into their heads, which nobody can account for; even a
wife's wishes are looked upon as of little consequence, in comparison
with their lordly commands. I should not be surprised at any time if
Santon should withhold a favor from me to lavish upon her! But I'm
thinking that he will before long find out what I am made of, if he
thwarts my wishes. To be sure, his daughter has become attached to her,
but what of that? She must learn that she cannot have every whim
gratified; she is a spoiled child at best, and will not be likely to
improve under her skim-milk discipline. Leave me alone for managing
affairs. I've got the staff in my own hands, and all they can do wont
make me anything but the Honorable Mr. Santon's lady! though I'm greatly
mistaken if he don't look with evil eyes on the day that made me his
bride; but that's not of the slightest consequence, as I used to tell my
first husband. Poor fellow! I suppose I was rather hard upon him once in
a while; but I knew he was waiting patiently for the day which should
separate us. He little thought he would go first," and the woman
laughed aloud, as she thought how she had crept into the good graces of
her present husband. "Leave me alone for playing my part," she said, as
seated in her own apartment, she listened to the voice of Delwood in the
drawing-room. "It is evident that her very life is wrapt up in Mr.
Delwood, and it is really quite a pity that so fine a fellow should be
deceived; and lest she should follow my illustrious example, I might as
well interfere in their arrangements; and if I can see aright, she has
talked the enviable heiress into the belief that her brother is a very
paragon of perfection, for she knows right well that a good bag of money
would be no serious objection to his fishermanship. How they ever raised
two such likely looking specimens of humanity down there in the land of
whales, is a mystery; but they'll find they cannot take the precedence
with Boston gentry. If I can avail anything, my particular friend
Montague shall try his luck in securing that portion of the heiress's
estate which I shall be pleased to leave her."

With these plans matured, she ushered herself into Delwood's presence,
and in her blandest manner made him welcome, initiating herself as far
as possible into his good opinion, which was no difficult task, inasmuch
as he had been accustomed to look upon a character so spotless, that he
was not prepared for the detestable machinations of one who was not
worthy the name of woman. It had been far from the Sea-flower to breathe
a suspicion that there was aught amiss in the character of the
flattering mistress of Santon Mansion. Her high esteem for Mr. Santon
had not permitted her to speak of the sad change, even to her mother.

"My dear," said Mrs. Santon, turning to Natalie, "in the pleasure which
we must ever find in Mr. Delwood's society, you have forgotten your
engagement with the destitute family, which you have taken under your
especial charge, and poor Mrs. Brown's child is so ill, I fear a few
hours' delay in taking the necessary restoratives recommended by our
physician, may cause the poor thing to suffer; I would despatch an
attendant, but I fear there may be some mistake made, and I know your
very presence will impart comfort to the poor woman."

"Oh, no, I had not forgotten them," replied Natalie; "but the physician
said any time this afternoon would do, as the little sufferer's disease
is about turning, and we must await the result."

"Yes, but I have such an anxiety about them, for in their ignorance they
may act contrary to orders, and so be the means of the little fellow's
death. It will be a great relief to my mind if you will just step around
and look in upon them, as it is but a step, and I know Mr. Delwood will
excuse you for a few moments, and I will promise to do my best to supply
your absence."

Natalie prepared to depart on this errand of mercy, and Delwood would
have taken his hat to accompany her, but Mrs. Santon held him fast by
commencing a brisk conversation, from which he could not with politeness
take himself away.

"Miss Grosvenor excels in her performance of the latest style, which the
Signor has introduced," remarked Mrs. Santon, endeavoring to draw him
out, when the Sea-flower had departed.

"I am perfectly amazed at her original rendering of the Italian,"
replied Delwood, "and I think I can safely say, that among all my
sojournings among their people, I have never met with one whose style is
more pure than that of Miss Grosvenor's. I should certainly say that
she is of Italian birth, though she tells me that she has never crossed
the Atlantic."

"She is evidently captivated with their people, or perhaps I may more
properly say, with the only person she has ever met of that nation,"
said Mrs. Santon, with a mysterious manner.

"To what or whom do you refer?" asked Delwood, in an altered tone of
voice.

"Mr. Delwood, I feel that it is my duty to inform you of a matter, which
has been a source of no little uneasiness, not only to myself, but to
every member of my family; and as you have shown a manifest interest in
Miss Grosvenor, it is not well that you should remain in ignorance of
what so deeply concerns your welfare."

"Speak! what can it be?" asked Delwood, pale with emotion.

"Do not allow yourself to be thus moved, I pray you; but what I have to
say is, that three months ago, we gave the Signor notice that we should
require his services no longer, as we had reason to believe his visits
were becoming something more than mere professional calls, and to our
great consternation, we found that Miss Grosvenor was not entirely
indifferent to his marked attentions. I was the last to believe that
Miss Grosvenor could so lose her self-respect and standing, as to look
upon a poor professor, who gains his bread by his own exertions, as a
favored competitor for her hand, and, it was not until I saw with my own
eyes, that I could credit what I had heard. I was satisfied in time,
that his rapt admiration as he gazed upon her, was something more than
enthusiasm that she had excelled even his most ardent expectations; and
the expression of her beautiful face, as she concluded, might have been
the envy of a greater than the Signor. We dismissed the Signor, but he
still continued his visits, under the plea that it was his custom to
give a few additional lessons at the close of a course, and if he might
be allowed, he should consider it a valuable acquisition to his own
musical powers, to continue for a time his exercises under Miss
Grosvenor's superior talent."

As Mrs. Santon paused, Delwood, in a state of frenzy, exclaimed,--

"It cannot be! I will never believe that she is false to me, even though
she should declare to me with her own lips, that another's claims upon
her affections were paramount to my own! Excuse me, madam, but I think
there must be some dreadful misunderstanding in regard to the facts
which you have stated. No! I would scorn myself if I had a doubt of her
innocence! and if such a thing might be possible, I would die rather
than be forced to believe it! I will tell her this very day what I have
heard, but I will not degrade myself, or forfeit her trust, by asking
her if it can be so!"

"Be calm, my dear friend," said Mrs. Santon; "compose yourself, I pray
you, and take my advice in the matter. Say nothing of what you have
heard to any one, but come here to-morrow morning at ten, when the
Signor will make his appearance, and from a private window, opening from
the conservatory, you may, unknown to any one, witness for yourself the
truth of what I have said."

"I will follow your advice, inasmuch as I will reveal to no one what I
have heard, until I become like myself," said Delwood, endeavoring to
compose himself as he heard the light step of the Sea-flower in the
hall; and as she entered, he arose to depart, pleading a slight
indisposition as an apology for his abruptness.

The calm, spiritual eyes of Natalie looked out upon him, as he walked
rapidly down the street, for she could not but notice an estrangement in
his manners; but she did not mistrust that an arrow, poisoned by sin in
its vilest form, had been aimed at his heart.

The starry heavens of that night told that another day had gone to be
with the past, and innocence laid her head upon her pillow and slept,
unmindful of plots of guilt, engendered of sin, which might prove for
her a draught of bitterness.

At an early hour the following morning, Clarence Delwood bent his steps
towards the residence of Mr. Santon. "Come here to-morrow, and you shall
see for yourself,"--those words still sounded in his ears, and, as he
drew nearer the house, it seemed as if they grew louder and louder, till
his brain was nearly distracted. But would he privately watch her ways,
whom of all others in the "wide, wide world," he had looked upon as
nearest perfection? No, he would not thus debase himself.

It was at a much earlier hour than that which Mrs. Santon had named,
that Delwood presented himself, and handsomely feeing the porter who
answered his summons, he asked to see Miss Santon; "and, James," said
he, "you need mention my presence to no other member of the family, as
my business is strictly private, for Miss Santon's ear alone."

"Yes, sir," replied James, twisting his face info a most knowing wink,
as he smiled upon the yellow ore, "I've been there before."

Winnie soon made her appearance with no little astonishment pictured in
her countenance, that Mr. Delwood should have honored them with what she
termed "a sunrise call;" and that he should have asked for her in
particular, was a matter more mysterious. His manners, so unlike
himself, served to check at once her flow of spirits, which, in spite of
the weight of oppression which had marked the last year, would find
vent, if not in a witty remark, in the expression of her speaking
countenance was it visible; but she was not slow to discern that some
serious subject was upon his mind, and became serious also.

In a few words he informed her of what he had learned from Mrs. Santon
the day previous, but what was his astonishment to find her totally
ignorant of the circumstances, not hesitating to declare the whole a
base falsehood.

"I had not a doubt of the falsity of the report," said Delwood; "but
what can have given rise to such a statement? Surely, your mother would
not wish to injure my feelings, by repeating what may have originated,
without foundation, among the servants, and which she could not have
herself credited!"

Winnie saw the truth at once, knowing as she did the character of her,
whom, if she had ever looked upon as a mother, must from this moment
forfeit every claim upon her feelings, unless it were that of
utter contempt.

"Mr. Delwood," said she, raising herself to her full height, her slender
fingers clenched together, every nerve 'roused to action,--"if you would
not insult me, never again call the woman who has had the heart to cast
such a slur upon the character of her whom we know is innocent, _my
mother_! It is not to injure your feelings that she has invented such a
vile scheme, but it is by injuring Natalie's character in your eyes, she
may banish from her heart all future happiness. Nay, do not start at
such a strange declaration from my lips; you are the only person, out
of my father's household, who has a suspicion that our happiness is not
what it once was; but since it has come to this, I will, at the risk of
disclosing to the world what it were wisdom to conceal, establish the
innocent; and rest assured that what I say is true,--this originated not
among the servants, for there is not one but would kneel and kiss the
very ground upon which our dear Sea-flower treads."

Delwood was thunderstruck.

"Indeed, I never could have mistrusted Mrs. Santon's character was so
vile!" said he; "but I can sooner believe this than that darkness is
born of light. And has Miss Grosvenor suffered the ill-will of this
cruel, cruel woman, and never lisped a word but should lead others to
respect her? Noble girl that she is! thrice noble have these very evil
designings proved her! 'Tis useless for intrigue to cope with purity."

"And she bade you come and see for yourself. What meaning is there in
that?" asked Winnie; for surely such an act would go to prove her
innocence."

"If Mrs. Santon can stoop to the deed, which fortunately has been
disclosed in time to prevent the affair from coming to Miss Grosvenor's
knowledge, she would not hesitate to do a meaner thing, favorable to the
furtherance of her plans; and it is my opinion there is more to be
learned in regard to this matter. I will foil her by following her own
advice, and at the appointed hour will station myself as desired, not as
a spy upon her ways, but that I may sift this affair to the bottom."

Accordingly, at the hour which Mrs. Santon had mentioned, Mr. Delwood's
summons were answered by the mistress of the mansion in person, who
smilingly drew him to the conservatory, which overlooked the
drawing-room, where he could, unobserved by any one, notice every
movement of her whose very being was dearer than his own. Natalie was
performing his favorite air, and as he listened, he gradually lost sight
of the object of his visit,--engulfed in the ocean of bliss which her
impassioned tones had spread before him, when he was recalled to a sense
of outward circumstances by the voice of the Signor, who, as the
bird-like trill of her voice died away, sprang to his feet, and in a
voice hoarse with passion, exclaimed,--"Never!" and was about to leave
the house, when Delwood intercepted him in the hall, and taking him by
the collar, demanded to know the cause of his strange conduct. The
Signor, in his peculiar dialect, replied, "Do not detain me, sir! it
were far better that none should ever know of the temptation which
well-nigh made me a villain!"

"You do not leave this house, sir, until you disclose to me what may
concern my welfare! And do not, I pray you, sir, force me to treat you
as other than a gentleman, for if I mistake not, you are yet worthy
of respect."

"You do me proud, sir; but I would much prefer to keep my own tongue;
for should it come to the ear of madam that her secret is a secret no
longer, I fear it may prove an injury to my professional duties."

"Remember that I have said, sir, you do not leave this house until you
have given me an account of your strange conduct; but in doing thus, if
I find you undeserving of censure, it shall be no sacrifice to your
reputation. I will pledge myself that you lose nothing."

"Since you are determined, sir, I will make a clean breast of it," said
the Signor, dashing several pieces of gold upon the floor,--"there, sir,
is indeed the root of all evil! that gold was placed in my hands by a
woman, who would make me a tool for the carrying out of designs, which I
have not the heart to perform."

"Well."

"Madam, for some cause, has an under current of thought, which does not
appear to be in keeping with the more open sentiments of this family;
for that amount of gold she connived with me to express such sentiments
toward Miss Grosvenor, as should fire you with a belief of her
inconstancy, and an attachment for myself. It was some time before I
could be bought with gold, but she, doubling the amount, I at last
yielded to what, thank God, I have not had strength to perform. Had it
been other than Miss Grosvenor whom I was to injure, I tremble for my
weakness in resisting so great a temptation; but she reminds me too
strongly of the tear which I have seen in my mother's eye, when she
prayed for her baby boy. No, sir, thrice that paltry amount should not
tempt me now to such degradation!"

"You have done well, sir," said Delwood, calmly, as he placed double
the amount of Mrs. Santon's bribe in the Signor's hand; "you have done
well, sir; and mark my words,--gold can never relieve a guilty
conscience! Go, sir, and see that you lisp not a syllable of this to
any one."

Mr. Delwood was about to take his leave, when he was met by Winnie, who
tripped lightly in, fresh from a morning walk. He grasped her hand and
pressed it to his lips, saying,--"You have helped to do away with the
sinful impressions which did their best to fasten themselves upon me.
You will never be forgotten by me, and I know you will do your best to
protect _her_ from the wiles of this hard-hearted woman, of whose deeds
the world shall through me be none the wiser."

"I should be iron-hearted, did I not strive to make her happy; for it is
in pity for my father and his motherless child, that she consents to be
separated from her own loved family."

Mrs. Santon had never the impudence to inquire in what way this matter
terminated, but she could see that her machinations had been foiled, as
day after day brought Mr. Delwood a welcome visitor to the house; yet
this defeat did not subdue her bitter feelings towards the Sea-flower;
they only slumbered, to break out afresh on the first occasion that
might present. Natalie had observed the Signor's abrupt departure; she
knew that something must be amiss, and questioning Winnie in the matter,
she disclosed to her what never came to the ear of Mr. Santon:

"I forgive her," said the Sea-flower, "and I can pity her; for perhaps
she has never had dear friends who might teach her how to love."




CHAPTER X.


THE MADONNA AND CHILD.


  "Pure and undimmed, thy angel smile
     Is mirrored on my dreams,
   Like evening's sunset girded isle,
     Upon her shadowed streams;
   And o'er my thoughts thy vision floats,
   Like melody of spring-bird notes,
   When the blue halcyon gently laves
   His plumage in the flashing waves."

        PARK BENJAMIN.


"Please, miss, a letter for you," said the post-boy, handing Natalie a
letter, which she was not long in discovering, was from her dear mother.

"I thank you, most heartily," said she, in her low, musical voice, which
caused the youthful sprig of Uncle Sam's department to leave incomplete
the angle of forty-five degrees, which he had been in the habit of
considering as of no little importance in the perfecting of his duties,
as he went his daily rounds.

"Zounds!" said he to himself, as he went whistling up the street, "if I
don't hope they'll send down another document to her soon!" and his eyes
wandered up to the little patch of blue sky which was to be seen between
the tops of brick walls.

The Sea-flower perused the letter, and sat, apparently buried in deep
thought.

"Why, Natie, darling," exclaimed Winnie, as she came bounding into the
room, "what has given you such a wise look this morning? A letter, eh?
good news, I trust; far be the day which shall bring to you aught but
happiness."

"Thank you, thank you, Winnie, for your good wishes; but I cannot well
conceive of any other than pleasure coming from my gentle mother's pen."

Winnie ran her fingers lightly over the keys of the piano, and Natalie
did not suspect, as she listened to her sprightly air, that there was a
bright tear glistening in her eye at the holy name of--mother.

"But you are unusually thoughtful to-day, Natalie," said Winnie,
running her taper fingers through the sunny tresses of her friend, "did
I not know it were an impossibility, I should say you had lost your best
friend;" and putting her dimpled mouth close to her ear, she whispered
some mysterious words so softly,--so very softly, that were we disposed
to turn listener, we could only have distinguished that one
word,--"Delwood;" but we might have seen the delicate tinge of pink,
which, tell-tale like, overspread the face and neck of the Sea-flower.
Be that as it may, there was a thoughtful look lingering about those
expressive features, which could even be traced, when at night-fall, a
well-known step was heard, echoing with no unpleasant sound along the
corridor, and a hand, which, though of feminine delicacy, could have
been fired with sufficient nerve to have wielded a giant's weapon, at
the invader who should come between him and the gentle being, whose hand
was not withdrawn as he held it reverently within his own.

"Ah, Miss Sea-flower," said Delwood, as he gazed deep into her eyes,
"you are far away among the invisible sprites of ocean to-night, are
you? not one thought for us poor unfortunates, who are so ungenial to
those translucent ones, as never to have been initiated to their fairy
haunts. Really; I must get up a little smile at your expense, for you
could not better please an artist, in the composing of your features, if
you were sitting for your picture. By the way, have you seen the famous
Madonna, whose great beauty is the theme of all conversation? I am told
it is a master-piece, by some gentleman who appears not anxious that his
brilliant artistical powers shall be published, as his name never
accompanies his works, and the piece in question was but by accident,
brought to public view. It hangs, among others, in his fine gallery of
paintings, and is hung with a heavy drapery of black, which was by
chance removed by a gentleman, a friend of mine, who offered a handsome
fortune at once for the prize; but his rich offer was declined by the
owner, who, to the gentleman's earnest desire that he might become its
possessor, replied,--'sir, that bit of inanimate canvas is all upon
which my weary life feeds! were you to offer me the wealth of the world,
I would not part with that one small picture! neither can I be wrought
upon to produce a copy of the same, without violating feelings which
are sacred.' Whether this is a fancy piece, or if it bears the semblance
of some one of his kindred, my friend did not inform me, as he said his
very tongue clave to the roof of his mouth, as the sad artist spoke
those few deep-toned words. I have not myself seen this wonder, and
whether I might be thus warm in my praises is a question, as you know I
am insensible to female beauty, if I may judge by remarks which from
time to time have come to my ear, in past years, from estimable mothers,
whose beautiful daughters ought to have called forth my glowing
sentiments; 'but that which is wanting cannot be numbered,'" said he,
stealing an arch glance at Natalie.

"I have not seen this painting," replied Natalie, her countenance
lighting up with a new thought, "but I have several times visited the
artist's rooms, though I have never been so fortunate as to get sight of
the mysterious connoisseur. Those who have met him, describe him as
being a middle-aged gentleman, of foreign birth, very marked in his
polite, graceful manners; yet there appears to be a great mystery
hanging about him, and some have ventured to remark that his is no
common history, that he is not merely what he pretends,--an obscure
artist! there is that about his bearing which denotes high birth. I have
admired his talent displayed, and must see this remarkable production;
for you know I am a great admirer of female beauty."

That night, Natalie mused over the events of the day,--the contents of
the letter which she had received, were first in her mind. Her mother
had expressed an earnest desire to see her child once more; among other
things, she had briefly made mention of a matter in regard to their
pecuniary affairs,--quite a little sum of the comfortable fortune which
Capt. Grosvenor had, by dint of the many perils at sea, accumulated, had
been lost in a recent bank failure;--a failure, as Mrs. Grosvenor
stated, which had proved a source of poverty to many a family, upon
their little island; many a widow had been obliged to part with the last
dollar, which had been earned by the seafaring husband, who had never
returned to share the benefit of his labors; Their whole community had
been more or less affected by this failure. As to Mrs. Grosvenor's own
loss, she had said it was not heavy, or, at least, she had spoken of it
as not resting heavily upon her spirits; why then should the
Sea-flower's thoughts dwell thus upon the matter?--she still mused--"I
fear this may have been a heavier loss, than the gentle words, so
characteristic of my mother's tenderness for me, may imply! she would
not, if it were in her power to prevent, have me feel that I must
curtail my expenses in the least, and I know that my necessary expenses
here, must be a great tax upon her income; to be sure Harry has often
said, that our dear mother shall never know what it is to want; but for
all that, I feel that I might do something to repay my mother for all
that she has done for me. Yes! it is my duty! and it certainly would be
a duty of pleasure, if I could do anything to assist her." This it was,
which had caused the thoughtful expression of the Sea-flower; this which
had called forth the ever ready wit of Miss Winnie--had detained
Delwood's gaze! But what would be the sentiment of uppertendom, when it
should be rumored that the beautiful young creature, of the proud
Clarence Delwood's choice, had stooped so low, as to maintain herself by
her own hands? How would Mr. Delwood himself receive such an
announcement? such thoughts did not occur to the mind of the noble
hearted girl; her every thought and act were of good, and she did not
for once think, that there were those, who could sneer at good motives.
Ah! Natalie, this is a cold, unfeeling world, at best! as experience of
long years doth confirm. Thy little day hath not yet taught thee, that
the world is born of sin, for thou only lookest on the human face as
divine. How Natalie was to render assistance to her mother, by relieving
her of any incumbrance, of which she, herself, might be the cause, had
not yet been matured, until Delwood had spoken of the popular
picture-gallery, of the unknown artist; when as we have said, her face
was lit up with a new thought. "I will seek this gentleman, and it may
be that he can be induced to bring out the dormant powers, which I am
persuaded are in existence; for my love for his department of the fine
arts, knows no bounds! To-morrow I will visit him. This veil of mystery
would seem a barrier, yet perhaps it is of sadness, and I can conceive
that such are of the tender hearted,--alive to another's wants."

"Want!" she repeated aloud; it sounded strangely upon her ear; and
indeed, we cannot couple the thought with such as she! Can such fair
ones of earth, meet with the chilling breath of adversity? Yes, we may
meet with them in our wanderings! Let us deal with them tenderly; for it
may be one of heaven's sensitive flowers. Stranger still would that word
have sounded to Mrs. Grosvenor and her son, in connection with their
Sea-flower, yet it was remotest from their minds, that such thoughts
would find their way to her heart. Mrs. Grosvenor's circumstances were
indeed more embarrassed than she had expressed to Natalie, yet she had
sufficient left, wherewith they might by retrenching a little, live very
comfortably. Accordingly, that Natalie might not feel this change, she
had dismissed her only servant (if we may do honor to old Vingo, by
dubbing him with a more elevated appellation), making some other
restrictions in her domestic affairs, for the sake of the child, whom
she knew was not her own by kindred, doing away with what she persuaded
herself were but unnecessary indulgences. Faithful mother! thou wilt
have thy reward.

Natalie arose the next morning, refreshed by the sweet repose which
innocence only knows, and although the day was ushered in with clouds,
and an occasional rain-drop, she proceeded to put into execution the
plans of yesterday; she had made no one a confidant of her designs, not
even Winnie; and when that little lady met her in the hall, all armed
and equipped as the weather directed, she exclaimed,--"where now? Miss
Snow-wreath! are you going to temper your indissolvable charms to an
April shower? or is it to hunt up some poor little refugee; who is so
unfortunate as to be minus an umbrella, that you are so bereft of your
senses, as to venture out, afoot and alone, this disagreeable morning?"

"Neither the one, nor yet the other, my fair sister," joyously replied
the Sea-flower, and she tripped down the steps, smiling upon the little
frightened rain-drops, which fell lightly upon her, from the skies, not
offering to treat them with such indecorum, as the spreading of her
umbrella, and, when Winnie called to her to come back, or if she would
venture forth, to take the carriage, she was far out of hearing. Arrived
at her point of _destination_, Natalie was so lost in admiration of the
noble illustrations of the infinite mind of man, that she had lost sight
of her object, in visiting the unknown artist, until she was awakened
from her revery, by a voice near her, and looking 'round, she discovered
a poor, dejected looking old negro woman, kneeling with her hands
clasped together, and her eyes fixed upon--Natalie followed in the
direction--it must be the beautiful Madonna! of which she had heard.
Involuntarily she assumed the position of the negress! What visions
filled her soul! flitting to and fro. The past, the present, and the
future rushed in mingled indistinctness through her mind! and over the
chaos there floated a calm, which gradually took the form of
recollections which now caused her heart to beat loudly with the
uncertainty, fraught with reality. _That night!_ came fresh again to her
memory, when she had overheard her brother's words,--"she is not my
sister by birth!" The same holy passions filled her soul, and she gazed
upon that face, the semblance of which, she had many a time, ere now,
looked upon in dreams! might they not have been waking dreams?

"God grant dat such as she, neber know what it am to be torn from her
childer!" groaned the black woman, with a deep-drawn sigh.

"Ah, my poor woman," said Natalie, her eyes still fixed upon that
spiritual face, "I trust such has never been your lot."

"Bress you! missy, dem is de only kind words I hear dis many a day,
since dey take me way from my poor ole man, and de young uns! but I's
not sure now but you's de spirit ob dat pure cretur, (pointing to the
Madonna) dat's speakin a few words, jus to cheer me like."

"And where are your children now? and your poor old man?"

"O! missy," said the woman, drawing a parcel from her bosom, carefully
unfolding it, and holding a large red handkerchief up to view,--"if I
tinks I eber find de mate to dat, I'specks I die wid de joy! but it am a
long story, missy, it begins way back, a long fore your sweet eyes see
de light ob dis wicked world."

"Do not call it a wicked world; it is a beautiful world, which God has
given us to live in!"

"Ah, missy, if oder white folks like you, I 'specks it be jus no world
at all; it be all one great heaben!"

"But what is this mark upon the handkerchief?" asked Natalie, for she
had seen a fac-simile of the little device, upon old Vingo's bandanna,
which he used to lend her when she was a child, and she had handled it
so carefully, because he had told her that it was the most valuable
thing he owned in the world, beside his Bible, and she had looked up
into his face, with her great blue eyes, and asked him what the two
little crooked marks were made to represent; and he had told her they
were to represent himself and his poor Phillis, for they were bent with
the sorrows of the world; and now, here were the same crooked marks,
wrought upon the corner of this black woman's handkerchief, which she
seemed to treasure so much! What could it mean? Natalie looked upon it
in astonishment.

"Where did you get this?" she asked.

"My poor ole man gabe it to me, de last time I sees him, and he takes
anoder like it, and say, 'Phillis, we will keep dem; dey's not quite as
'spressive as de garultypes ob missus's, but when you sees dat, you may
know dat old Bingo am tinking ob you."

"And do you ever think to meet him again?" asked Natalie, without
betraying her emotion at such a discovery.

"Oh, missy, if he know anyting about heaven, I might 'speck to meet him
dar; but we not know anyting 'bout dat good place den, and I 'specks he
am clean used up by dis time; clean gone, widout eber hearin' ob de
good Lor'!"

"And your children,--you have never forgotten them?"

"No, missy, I neber forgets dem, and though dey brack as dar mammy, I
lub dem as much as dat pure creter dar; and I takes dem in my arms, and
press dem to my heart de same, but I rudder be called to part wid dem,
dan dat such as she hab to gib up her chilen, for 'pears like I can bear
it better, cause I's brack."

"My good woman, you have a forgiving spirit for your oppressors, and,
thank God, I have it in my power to make two of my fellow mortals happy.
What should you say, if I were to tell you where you may find
your husband?"

The woman looked at her, without speaking a word.

"Your husband is alive and well; and faithful old Vingo is at this
moment in my mother's family, where his wants, spiritual and temporal,
are cared for; and he has often told me, if he could but once again see
his wife, Phillis, he should die happy."

The woman gave one long, piercing cry, and sank upon the floor. At this
instant the artist issued from an adjoining apartment, and stood gazing
upon the scene.

"My God! what do I see?" exclaimed the gentleman, in a voice which
instantly riveted the Sea-flower's attention upon him.

"Tell me! in mercy tell me who thou art!" and he leaned against a column
for support.

Had Natalie been heir to that weakness which is somewhat characteristic
of the gentler sex, she might have been terrified at such deep,
impassioned language from a perfect stranger, trembling with the
certainty that she stood face to face with a lunatic; but no such fear
was hers. Advancing, she bowed low, in honor to his superior age,
saying, "pardon me, if I am an intruder here; yet, sir, an apology is
needless, for who can resist the grace and beauty which is here
displayed? My presence, sir, has evidently disturbed you, and if you
will permit me to ask one question, I will retire;--the Madonna, that
face of an angel, is she the pure production of your own soul, or can
it be that such as she has indeed been amongst us?"

"She has been, and has passed away!--has passed away," he repeated to
himself; "I never thought to meet her again until the dark river had
been crossed! but what do I see?" and he passed his hand over his eyes,
as if to assure himself that he were not dreaming.

No, it was no dream; a gentle, living form stood before him who had
sorrowed for his only child nearly twenty long years, and was devoutly
regarding those inanimate features to which his soul had clung, as if it
were of life; and his eye now wandered from the animate to the
inanimate,--the beauteous countenance of the Madonna. It was not unlike
that of the Sea-flower; the features were the same. Regaining his
composure, the artist proceeded, in a peculiarly mellow tone of voice--

"Dear lady, you will pardon my seemingly ill-mannered reception of you,
I know, when you have heard what has never yet passed my lips to any
mortal! Near twenty years have expired since I left my cherished home,
on the other side of the Atlantic, and came to America. I met with
sorrow at an early age; the young wife of my choice was taken from me,
and I should have been overwhelmed with grief, had not the precious boon
left to me by her, claimed my heart-felt love; the beautiful babe smiled
upon me, and I felt rebuked in spirit that I should thus murmur at God's
will, when in his loving kindness he had spared to me this, her very
likeness, and I came to smile again. I could then smile upon his
chastening rod, but,"--and a deep shudder thrilled his frame, "I have
since been led to ask myself if there is a God! O! can a good God thus
afflict his children?"

"Pause, sir, I beseech you, ere you give utterance to such dreadful
thoughts! Think of the countless mercies which you have received at his
hand,--weigh them well in a balance with your sorrows, whatever they may
have been, and you will find the measure of your blessings tenfold."

"Your words are as balm to my calloused heart; yet listen to me, and
judge if my cruel fate would not engender a dark distrust in a purer
heart than mine. My child grew in strength and beauty,--grew to be like
her who had left us; she was the pride of my luxuriant home, the main
spring of my life! Yes, I could realize it then, while I could yet gaze
upon her face and dream of heaven; but other days drew near. It was in
her twentieth year when my Natalie knelt before the altar--a bride. She
had given her hand to a noble-hearted American gentleman, upon whom I
looked as being worthy of my darling's choice; and as she placed one
hand within his, she took the hand of her father with the other, and
whispered,--'you now give your daughter to another, yet it shall only
serve to bind me still closer to my father.' I was happy then; and when
two years later, I pressed my daughter to my heart, and bade her adieu,
for the first time, without a thought that it might be the last, I was
happy; and when I pressed a kiss on the cheek of her infant child, and
grasped the hand of my noble son, her husband, I was happy; for so full
was my cup of joy, that I had forgotten the drop of bitterness which I
had tasted therefrom. But, alas! it was not so full to overflowing that
there was not room for the draught that was to be my portion. They
sailed for America, to visit his home, when, after the settlement of his
estate in this Western world, they would return to make glad their
father's home; that day has not yet come! A year elapsed, and I had no
tidings of them, yet I would not permit the thought to dwell with me
that I should never hear from them more, and another year passed on
before the despair entered my soul, which has been to me a burning flame
ever since. I gave my possessions to the keeping of another, and left my
native Italy, to cross the deep, if I might learn of the fate of my
children. I went to the place he had told me was his home, but I met
with only strangers there. I inquired for the noble vessel in which my
child had sailed; she had not belonged on this coast, and thus were my
earnest inquiries repulsed, day after day, with a heartless--'we can
give you no information.' I travelled from place to place, in hopes to
get some clue to the mystery which hung around my lost ones; but, alas,
that was not to be! I sought in vain. It was then a change came over me;
I hardly knew myself. I concealed my name, and lived a recluse, never
disclosing to any one the history of my sorrows. But I could not live
thus, and I endeavored to divert my mind from this state of frenzy, by
making use of the talent, for which, in my heart of stone, I would not
thank my God for bestowing upon me! And so I have lived, as you find
me,--'the unknown artist.' It is needless to add, the beautiful Madonna,
which was never designed for the rude gaze of public curiosity, is the
likeness of my child; and though I had no other than the impress of her
features upon my heart, to guide my trembling hand, yet I have got a
soul upon that canvas! Sometimes I have fancied that some good angel had
not forgotten me, and had breathed _her_ soul into those pure eyes!"

"And the child?" asked Natalie, in a suppressed breath, scarcely above a
whisper.

"Her child was but a tiny babe; her features were not sufficiently
developed to leave its memory on my mind; yet they told me the little
creature was like her mother. This, the Madonna's child, is from life.
In my wanderings I visited the island of Nantucket. I spent some little
time there, as I found the great hearts of those people more congenial
to my weary spirits, than the chilling air of avarice, which, in a
measure, marks this western world. One morning, as I strolled along the
shore, looking out upon the sea, depressed in spirits, I observed a
pretty sight not far from me; an old negro sat upon the beach, and by
his side an infant, some eighteen months old, with her arms clasped
about the neck of a large Newfoundland dog, while her eyes, which were
of the blue of heaven, were fixed upon the waves which rolled and broke
in harmless ripples at her feet. She was a beauteous child. I have never
seen another upon whom I could look, as the little angel that had gone.
I traced her beautiful features, as I was so fortunate as to have pencil
and paper by me, and was about to pass on, when I observed the brother
of the child approaching; he was a noble little fellow, with the air of
a young prince, and I never shall forget his proud answer, when I asked
him of his sister,--'We call her Sea-flower, sir, for she came to us
from God, and he smiles upon each little flower, as it lifts up its
head, all trembling with dew.' I breathed a blessing upon them both, for
they had drawn a tear from my heart of stone."

"Sir," said Natalie, as he paused, "Nantucket is my home; often have I
listened to my dear brother, as he has told me the pretty story of the
sad gentleman whom he met, when I was but an infant, and how he spoke to
me so tenderly, and sighed for his own Natalie. I had no other name
then but Sea-flower, and I have been called by that name ever since; yet
after that day, my Christian name was Natalie."

The artist gazed upon her, and pointing to the Madonna,
exclaimed,--"Thou art the child! you are like the Madonna! Can it be
that I have unconsciously restored to the mother her child? None other
than her own could thus resemble her!"

"In my innermost heart there has ever dwelt a mystery, which I can find
no language to describe! In my dreams I have had sweet visions of a
beauteous being, who has smiled upon me, and made me happy. The Madonna
awakens all those pure feelings, and I cannot but look upon her as in
some way connected with my being; yet my own mother lives, and my
affection for her is as for no other being upon the earth."

"_She_ is in heaven," mused the artist.

At this moment the door opened, and who should enter but Clarence
Delwood, who was much surprised to find Natalie thus unattended, in
earnest conversation with the mysterious artist. She arose as he
entered, and presented him to the gentleman, but she had not yet
learned his name. The artist presented his card to Delwood, assuming the
same frigid manner which had become his nature. Delwood gave one glance
at the Madonna.

"How is this, sir," asked he, in an excited manner, "that you have made
use of this lady's face to attract the notice of a vulgar public to your
works? Who gave you authority for such assurance as this, sir?"

"Calm yourself, Clarence," said the Sea-flower, mildly, "the gentleman
had never seen me, to his knowledge, until this morning. It rather
becomes us to apologize for this intrusion upon the sacred memory of
his child."

Mr. Delwood listened with astonishment to the information which we have
just learned, and his eyes wandered from the beautiful Madonna to the no
less beautiful being, whom he hoped, at no distant day, to call his own,
while a thought filled his soul with delight, and he said to
himself,--"I knew that she was infinitely above me, though outward
circumstances would make her of no particular distinction."

"Yes, there is a meaning in this, a mystery to be solved. Who is
she?--this pure being. And your mother still lives," mused the artist;
"do you resemble her?"

"I am unlike any one of my family, so much so that strangers have noted
it."

"And your father?"

"Is in heaven."

"Truly," mused the gentleman, "and your sainted mother likewise."

"Permit me to ask your address, gentle lady," said the artist, as his
visitors prepared to retire.

"And in return you will allow me to come every day, and look upon this
dear face?"

"You are the only person whom I have bade a welcome to my presence for
years;" and bidding them a "good morning," the artist retired to brood
over other than his sorrows.

It was then that Natalie remembered the poor black woman, though not a
thought of the object of her own visit thither, crossed her mind. The
woman was silently contemplating the Sea-flower, as if she were an
angel of mercy.

"Where do you live, my good woman?" inquired Natalie.

"One spot am not my home more dan anoder, missy; de wide earth am my
home. But tell me, missy, did ole Phillis hear you straight, or am she
so warped troughout, dat she hot get de right comprehensions?"

"What I have told you, you may rely upon; come here in a day or two
again, and you shall hear farther."

"Bress de Lor'! bress de good Lor', for sending de bright angel!"
shouted the woman, as she ran out of the house, throwing about her long
arms, (now freed from slavery's chains,) and making sundry other uncouth
manifestations of her joy, so characteristic of her race, which caused a
policeman to realize the dignity of his station, by actually opening one
eye, and puffing diligently at the cloud of tobacco smoke which
encircled the other.

A week later, and Natalie received a letter from her mother, in reply to
her account of her visit to the mysterious artist. It ran thus:--

"MY DEAR DAUGHTER,--It was with joy, mingled with a shade of sadness,
that I perused your last. Not that you, my innocent child, could impart
other than pleasure to the meanest of weak mortals, yet it brought
afresh to my mind a subject, which, though it marks one of the happiest
moments of my life, owing to peculiar circumstances,--the memory of my
dear husband being closely associated therewith,--brings to my heart,
also, a shadow of grief. That which I would say has to do with yourself,
my daughter, yet I cannot commission my pen to the revealing of this
long-buried secret. I would tell you with my own lips, of the mystery
which hangs around your birth, for I would seal the tale with a mother's
kiss, looking upon my foster-child for an assurance of love
undiminished. You must now come home to us. I can bear this separation
no longer. The time has come when our dear little Sea-flower, for so
many years the sunshine of our home, shall test the strength of her
affection for those who will ever regard her--a blessing from that
heavenly shore. Say to the author of the Madonna and child, that I would
earnestly wish that he may accompany you home, as he may be informed of
that which so nearly concerns his happiness. Adieu, my daughter, until I
shall see you once more. From your affectionate mother."

Natalie folded the letter, and repeating aloud, "can I ever love my
mother less?" she leaned her head upon her hand, and wept.

The day drew near when the Sea-flower, accompanied by Mr. Alboni, (for
such was the name of the gentlemanly artist,) and Clarence Delwood,
should seek her island home. This was anything but a pleasant
anticipation for Winnie, for since her mother's death she had learned to
lean upon Natalie, though younger than herself, and had received from
her in times of trial, such sweet counsel as would sink into her heart,
giving her new strength, making her a wiser and a better being. In the
time which Natalie had been in the Santon family, there had been a
perceptible change in the character of the beautiful coquettish heiress.
Those blemishes which the faithful mother had discovered, upspringing in
her daughter's youthful heart, marring her otherwise lovable character,
had been erased; not that she had lost in any degree that gay, cheery
openness of heart which we love so well to meet,--she was yet the Winnie
Santon of days which had known no lowering skies, the singing bird of a
June morning,--save that an occasional plaintive note, breathed out upon
youth's freshness of life's realities.

It was the last night in which these maidens, Winnie and Natalie, might
pour out to each other the fulness of their hearts. The last, did we
say, the last? distance would separate them ere another sunset, and
ocean would intervene; yet we have said,--the last. Folded in each
other's arms, they sat in the pale moonlight, each reading within the
other's soul, an appreciation of this holy hour. Holy hours are they
indeed, which lead our thoughts far up beyond this mortal sphere,
pointing us to other than earth's vanities. Beautiful, yet so unlike,
they were; and ah, what is more beautiful than maiden purity?
Woman,--she fell, yet her name will ever stand foremost in the ranks of
all that is exalting.

"And who will there be to love me, when you are gone? Who will talk with
me so gently, and keep my feet from the dangerous paths which surround
me?" asked Winnie, as the discordant tones of Mrs. Santon's voice stole
in upon their quietude, from an adjoining apartment.

"If there is anything in this beautiful world of ours which can make me
sad, it is the parting from those whom I love; yet I know it is but for
a little while. Dear Winnie, can you realize how kind our Father is,
that he has given us the promise of a home where there will be no more
parting,--never a farewell? and he will guide your footsteps; make him
your friend, and though all others should forsake you, you will be
happy. He will be a better friend to you than ever I have been, and
remember, Winnie dear, when I am gone, should sorrow come to you, or
bitter trials mark your way, go to our Father for counsel, and he will
give you sweet rest."

Thus did the Sea-flower endeavor to leave upon Winnie's heart that which
should prepare her for meeting the trials which she but too plainly
foresaw would be her lot, from the unmotherly spirit evinced by Mrs.
Santon. Blessings on thee, noble girl! would there were more like thee
to be found in this sinful world below! But what is a blessing craved by
the lips of frail mortal, compared with the seraph blessings showered
upon thy gentle head, from her who is looking down upon her child, as
thy voice is raised in prayer to the God of this motherless one, that
she may find refuge beneath the shadow of his wing.

The last farewell was spoken by poor Winnie, with an aching heart, Mr.
Santon had pressed the Sea-flower's hand, with a tear in his eye, as if
reluctant to let her go, lest the severing of one of the last ties
which bound him to happy days, should be too much for his sorrowing
heart,--and she had gone, leaving her impress upon the hearts of all who
had met and loved her. Her spirit was the spirit of love, forgiving as
she hoped to be forgiven,--her sins, which, had it not been said of man,
"not one is perfect," we should have looked upon as of no deeper stains
than are of the newly washen lambs, gambolling in fresh pastures of
innocence. Even to Mrs. Santon's unpardonable slight, in not giving her
a parting salutation, pleading one of her timely headaches as an excuse
for her non-appearance at the hour of separation,--the Sea-flower had
left for her a kind farewell.

After an absence of nearly three years, Natalie stood once again upon
the shores of her island home. Everything was as when she had left, for
the bustle and change of the outer world does not disturb the quiet of
this sea-girt isle. Her mother received her with tears of joy, that
fulness of joy which only the mother can feel, who, after a long
separation from the child whose beauty of character sheds a halo of
honor around the household name, holds her to her heart again, where she
knows her to be safest from the world's contumely. Harry welcomed his
sister home, with the wild delight of his boyish days, regardless of the
presence of strangers in their family circle; while old Vingo, who had
been beside himself for a week past, with the prospect of at last
actually beholding his missy face to face, capered about the room, as if
he were not so near his second childhood. The Sea-flower pressed his
bony, black hand to her lips.

"Ah! I know dat you neber change, missy; I know you always be de same! I
tells mysef dat, dese long years past, and bress de Lord, poor old Bingo
hab one friend as long as he hab a hope ob libin'!"

"Yes, my good Vingo," said the Sea-flower, "you may truly rely upon one
friend,--that best of friends, he will never forsake you; but," and she
spread out the veritable handkerchief, so precious to the poor black
woman, before his wondering eyes, "you are deserving of the rich
blessings of earthly friends; for had I been tried, as it has been the
will of an overruling providence that you should be, I doubt if I had
borne my cross with the submissive spirit which you have manifested.
Tell me," added she, pointing out the crooked marks in the corner of the
handkerchief, "do you recognize that?"

Vingo drew forth the bandanna, which always accompanied him in his
wanderings, and laid it by the side of the other. They were just alike;
there were the two crooked marks upon each, speaking as accurately as
the most highly finished ambrotype of the day.

"Praise de Lord foreber!" shouted the negro; "I neber 'speck to see dat
sight, while I not'ing but ole brack Bingo! I can lib to de end ob my
days wid joy at de sight ob dat! it am next to finding poor Phillis
hersef. Pray, missy, did you find dat in some accidental cotton bag? or
am Bosting only the Christian name for wicked old Kintuck? I shouldn't
tink dat angels could lib in dat cannibal hemisphere!"

It was with difficulty that those who witnessed the fellow's ludicrous
movements, could refrain from a smile; but when, at a summons from
Natalie, the door opened, and the black woman, so nearly allied to the
human family as to have manifested an appreciation of the beautiful,
stood before them, there was not a dry eye in the room. It was an
affecting sight, to witness the meeting of this man and wife, who had
been separated for so many long years, and under such trying
circumstances. To be sure, they were poor ignorant negroes, who are
looked upon by a large portion of the world, as only fit to be ranked
with dogs and other dumb animals: yet they have souls, hearts which had
been given to Christ, and the meek and lowly Jesus, were he now upon the
earth, would not be ashamed to take this down-trodden race by the hand
and lift them up. God looks down from his throne above with pitying eye;
he pities his children; we grow strong in the assurance of his tender
mercies; but let us remember,--he will avenge with a powerful arm, the
wrongs inflicted upon his feebler ones; for he hath said,--"My children,
love ye one another, even as your heavenly Father loveth you."

This meeting of old Vingo and Phillis, was enough to have softened the
heart of the vilest "Legree;" but probably, had one of those gentlemen,
whose highly respectable occupation it is to deal in the traffic of
buying and selling--man, been present, they might have been led to
remark, "The silly creatures seem to imagine they have some feeling."

The evening shades descended. The night was wild, and the voices of the
breakers rose loud, as if responding to the angry aspect of nature; yet
peace sat beneath the roof of Mrs. Grosvenor's dwelling. The evening
lamps were lit, and as Mrs. Grosvenor produced a small casket and laid
it on the centre-table, she thought within herself,--it was much such a
storm only a few days after our dear one came to us. Mr. Alboni sat with
bowed head, as the mother proceeded to bring forth evidences which
should identify her darling child as being of the descent and lineage of
another line of ancestors than hers; while the Sea-flower, her hand
clasped within that of him who had found favor in the mother's eyes,
prepared herself to receive any information in regard to her destiny,
which it should be the will of a just God to decree. The tiny lace
dress, which the infant had worn, when she was first placed in her
foster-mother's arms, was held up to view. It was of a costly fabric,
embroidered heavily with needle-work, evidently the production of the
industry of some lone sister of convent life. The casket, the contents
of which had been so long treasured as things sacred was opened and the
bands of gold placed in Mr. Alboni's hands. He examined them closely;
there were no initials, not the least mark whereby he might learn of
that which was of such vast interest to him, when lo! he pressed the
spring which had before yielded to Mrs. Grosvenor's touch, and
behold!--the same features which he had looked upon day by day, for
twenty years, were revealed to him,--the features of his
Madonna--his child!

"My God!" exclaimed he, "I thank thee that thou hast brought me from
darkness to light, not only that I may acknowledge thy supremacy, but to
bless thee during the brief remainder of my days; if I may atone for my
deep sin in living so long without thee, even doubting thy existence!
This is truly a convincing proof that thou art all in all. I here vow,
that should the gracious Lord see fit to chasten his servant, by taking
away this, my last support, it shall only serve to increase my faith in
the love of my most precious Redeemer!" and with tearful eyes the old
gentleman held his grand-daughter to his heart.

"And is it really thus?" asked Natalie; "can it be that my mother has
been looking down upon me, from her home in the skies?"

"Your sainted mother is in heaven," spake Mr. Alboni.

The Sea-flower glanced towards her from whom she had ever received a
mother's tenderness; there was a smile upon her countenance, yet Natalie
observed, though she would fain be happy that her loved one was restored
to her kindred, undoubtedly an advantageous discovery in every point of
view, it was like an arrow to her heart; for was she not her child?
Natalie arose, and giving one hand to her mother, the other to him whom
she would henceforth look upon as a father, she said,--"Yes, my own
mother has gone to her home; she is an angel there, where I shall meet
her at the last; but you, my mother, can never be less dear to me; I
must always look upon you as my mother!" and throwing her arms about
Mrs. Grosvenor's neck, she exclaimed, "though others shall claim me by
the ties of kindred, they never shall part me from you; your child will
never forsake you!"

It was enough; the widowed mother was not "written childless." Then it
was that Mrs. Grosvenor related every minute particular in regard to the
child's discovery, and how she had been a blessing to them all,
repaying them doubly for their care. It was a long and interesting
story, to which this little circle listened, regardless of the raging
elements without, with the exception of the Sea-flower, who drank in
every note of nature's mighty chorus, scarcely thinking of the perils to
which those who were riding at the mercy of the waves, might be exposed;
for her young heart shrank not from ocean's awe; she had always looked
upon an ocean grave as a hallowed place of burial.

"And your daughter's name was Natalie," remarked Mr. Delwood; "it is a
singular coincidence that the child should be named for the mother."

"It is all a miracle," said Harry, "and sometimes I have thought old
Vingo not far out of the way, when he declared 'Missy Sea-flower to have
been left upon the beach by no other than the Lord.'"

Gradually Mr. Alboni came to be like himself again. He was a remarkably
handsome man, his countenance denoting his generosity of heart. His
delight in the society of the Sea-flower, as she pointed out to him each
day, some new attraction about her island home, knew no bounds. It was
now that Mr. Alboni directed his attention to his unsettled affairs in
Italy. Had he lived out his days as the unknown artist, without
discovering an heiress to his vast estates, he would probably never have
given the subject a thought, and strangers, or some public institution,
would have realized a handsome legacy; but his every nerve thrilled now
with new life for her; every advantage which wealth could procure would
be hers. But it was not only to look after his pecuniary affairs that he
laid the question before Mrs. Grosvenor, if her child should accompany
him to the land of her birth, but that she might become acquainted with
the position in life which she was every way capable of filling. And so
it was arranged that Natalie, with her grandfather, should make the tour
of the eastern world, whither Mr. Delwood should accompany them. After
disposing of Mr. Alboni's estates, and visiting the lions of the East,
they would return, to make America their home; and it being left for
Natalie to decide what spot should be chosen as their future home, she
said, stealing a glance towards Clarence Delwood,--"we will return to my
mother's peaceful island home, for we can be happy here."

Accordingly the day was fixed when they should depart, but the very
evening before they would sail, brought news to Mr. Delwood of the
dangerous, and probably fatal illness of his father. It was with a sad
heart that he looked upon such a separation from his betrothed, for he
would necessarily resign the pleasure which he had anticipated, in
escorting her to countries which he had visited, and which had become
dear to him. It was a great disappointment also to Natalie; yet she
sought to persuade him it was for the best; "she would soon return, and
the separation would bring a thrice joyful meeting."

It was a glorious evening; the soft moonlight kissed the white sea-caps,
as each strove to lift its head above its fellows, as if to gaze upon
night's purity,--or, mayhap, they would beckon that gentle one, who
smiled upon their wild joy, as she reclined upon her lover's breast, to
join them, in their revellings. Upon the broad bank of the old South
Shore they sat,--a favorite resort of the youth and maidens of this
little island of a mid-summer's eve,--old Sankoty to the eastward,
lifting high his head, imparting a flood of radiance in pity to
thousands, who watch with an intensity, to make the well-known light,
rejoicing no less when they have left it far behind, for well do they
realize that they have passed one of the most dangerous shoals to be
found on the American coast. Behind them, distance about three miles, is
the town; there is no din and bustle borne on the night air to their
ears,--naught is heard but the moaning voice of the night wind, mingled
with the ceaseless roar of the ocean. Here, far from the world's
contumely, no eye to see, no ear to hear, save that of Him who is
omnipresent, were those vows of love renewed, and registered above. Many
a fair maiden has here since plighted her faith, here given her hand to
the loved one of her choice, (heaven bless the union of Nantucket's fair
ones!) yet the night has never since looked down upon two of more
perfect oneness of heart, than those of whom this serene night
bore witness.

"And will you still retain your foster-name?" asked Delwood, "or will
you travel under your grandfather's Italian name? By the way, I have not
heard the name of your father."

"Paul Sunderland was my father's name."

"Sunderland! the Lady Sunderland! I have seen your mother, Natalie!"
exclaimed he. "It was none other than she, the kind, beautiful lady who
sang to me when I was but a child, in Italy; she whom I begged to take
me to that beautiful place again! Ah, it comes to me now, in no dream,
but a reality; I have always thought, since I first beheld you, that I
had somewhere, at some unknown time, seen a picture which was like you;
but, strange, it was none other than the mother of my own dear
Sea-flower!"

"And your eyes have looked upon my mother, Clarence," said she, gazing
into his very soul,--"and she has smiled upon you? Oh, I shall love you
with a holier love for this!" and the young girl paused, and trembled,
as he held her to his heart, for the thought came rushing into her
soul,--"Oh, what a fearful thing is this,--this depth of fervent love!"

The morrow came; came to all of our friends who were gathered around the
hearthstone of the widow Grosvenor, with joy, for genial rays, other
than of a May morning's sun, were in their hearts; yet those
indescribable tones, which under any circumstances hang around the
word--farewell, were gradually, unawares, jarring, jarring those gentler
notes of peace, even before spoken.

"Farewell!"--the mother strained her child to her heart again, and again
put her from her, to embrace her more closely. Farewell, came welling up
from that proud brother's heart, with the same breath, thanking God for
giving him a sister. Broken sobs measured the bitterness of the parting
of those down-trodden ones, who, "by an angel of mercy," had been lifted
up, to taste one drop of that bliss upon earth, which the white man
holds within his power to give or withhold. Farewell!--was it not that
one word, which marked the parting of those two, whose hearts had been
united above? "Adieu to my island home," said the Sea-flower, and the
wild waves whispered,--"we are lonely."




CHAPTER XI.


WE ARE GOING HOME.


  "The sounds that fall on mortal ear
     As dew-drops pure at even,
   That soothe the breast, or start the tear,
     Are Mother, Home, and Heaven.

  "A home, that paradise below,
     Of sunshine and of flowers,
   Where hallowed joys perennial flow,
     By calm celestial bowers."

        ANONYMOUS.


Time wore heavily on with Winnie Santon, after Natalie had left them.
Left as she was, much in her unnatural mother's society, who seemed to
be never more pleased than when she might thwart her designs, or, in
some manner act so as to make those about her uncomfortable, it was not
to be wondered at, if she did sigh for other days, and a confidant, to
whom she might unburden her heart. Her father spent but a small portion
of his time at home; on the contrary, he rather sought to avoid the
fireside, which had once been so dear to him. His feelings, whatever
they might have been, were kept locked up within his own breast, yet
Winnie could read the look of sympathy which he bent upon her, as he
grasped her by the hand, ere he hurried away to banish painful
recollections by duties "on change." When difficulties, which Natalie
had foreseen, caused Winnie's heart to ache, she would school herself to
meet the injustice as she knew _she_ would have done; and the timely
advice of the Sea-flower proved to the lone girl a valuable legacy. She
had heard from Natalie, through the correspondence which for some time
she had kept up with our friend Harry Grosvenor, the which letters were
anticipated and perused with no common interest; indeed, her happiness,
scarcely realized by herself, was closely allied therewith. Mrs. Santon
looked upon these ever punctual letters, which appeared so frequently
among the post-boy's morning deposits, with an evil eye, yet they did
not serve to banish the schemes of her invention in regard to Mr.
Montague, as a favored competitor for the hand of the heiress; and it
was his unwelcome visits, which were not unfrequent, that counted among
the numerous trials which weighed more and more heavily upon her
spirits. Poor Winnie! each life is made of joys and sorrows.

The death of Mr. Delwood was a deep affliction to his son, for although
he was an austere man, forbidding in his manners, he had always
manifested a spirit of tenderness for his only remaining relative, and
Clarence now sought to dispel the loneliness which was creeping over
him, by directing his attention to his father's unsettled estates, which
was no light task, as Mr. Delwood had been a gentleman of great
property. The life-like specimens of artistical skill, executed by Mr.
Alboni, known only to Boston lovers of the fine arts as "the unknown
artist," were disposed of by Clarence Delwood, in accordance with the
wishes of Mr. Alboni, who, in entrusting the Madonna to his keeping
until his return, placed not only the likeness of the mother before him,
but it possessed him of a correct likeness of his betrothed.

The noble steamer Atlantic, after a most favorable passage of twelve
days, carried our friends safely to the desired port of Liverpool. As
Natalie stood once again upon terra firma, she could hardly credit that
over three thousand miles of ocean separated her from her home,--that
the same waves which washed the shores of her cherished island, broke
upon the shores of this Eastern world.

Mr. Alboni was in the happiest frame of mind as they made the tour of
England and Scotland, for from thence they would repair to his own loved
Italy. Over the mind of the tourist, visiting the Old World for the
first time,--countries where have transpired thrilling events recorded
in history, what an immensity of thought and feeling sweeps! It was thus
with Natalie; she could not realize that she was treading in the
footsteps of royalty, who living in long past days, had held sway over
this land, had looked upon this land of "merrie England" as their home.
London, like a mighty Babel, rose before them, her gigantic towers
telling of man's greatness, while the resplendent shining of the sun,
reflected from a million turrets, proclaimed that there was one above
all. St. Paul's, with its dome of grandeur, reflecting not only honor
upon her world-renowned architect, Sir Christopher Wren, but standing a
living memento that Christ hath built his church upon earth.

Westminster must be visited by every stranger. As Natalie roamed over
this vast structure, in itself a world of curiosity, like so many small
churches roofed in by one great canopy, she lingered in the south
transept, in what is called the Poet's Corner. Here are the tombs of
many of the most famous poets of England. Chaucer, Edmund Spencer,
Francis Beaumont, and others, have tablets here erected to their memory,
while in other chapels are monuments erected in memory of sovereigns,
who have long since gone to render an account of their deeds done here,
to the one great Sovereign of the universe. As the eye of Natalie rested
upon the tomb of the gentle Mary, Queen of Scots, the history of whose
brief life, and the many cruel indignities which were heaped upon her,
rushing to her memory, she stood as if riveted to the spot, when a voice
near her attracted her attention, and a rough-looking old sailor,
tarpaulin in hand, threw himself at her feet, exclaiming,--"Bless the
memory of old England! She is more sensible than I ever thought for.
They couldn't have done a nobler thing than to have placed _her_
likeness here!" and thus the jolly fellow's tongue flew, as if he would
re-spin all the forecastle yarns of his lifetime, much to the
discomfiture of the eagle-eyed guide, who bade the intruder begone; but
our nautical friend, deigning to give this polite invitation to depart
no further notice than he would have given to the juvenile whales, as
they were taking first lessons in spouting of their maternal protector,
the guide seized him by the shoulder, and was about to show honest Jack
what virtue there was in "force of arms," when Mr. Alboni interfered,
saying,--let us at least hear what the honest fellow would say
for himself."

"Your honor,", exclaimed Jack, whose very countenance spoke as plainly
as a nose which appeared as if it had been imitating the feathered
tribes, in their efforts to satisfy thirst, for so long, that its
tendency had become upward in sympathy, and eyes which it were difficult
to follow in the direction of both at the same time, could speak, that
he who had been accustomed to guiding his bark by stars of the first
magnitude, all his days, would not now, at this age of life, be guided
by this "star" of diminutive light. "Your honor," said the astonished
tar, as he discovered the beautiful form before him to be actually
possessed of life and breath, and was no senseless piece of statuary,
"shiver my topsails, but if I didn't take the lady to be _her_
representation, my name's not John Sampson!"

"Sampson!" exclaimed Natalie, actually taking him by the hand, "Are you
John Sampson?"

"I'm Sampson the world over, my lady," replied the tar, "and why
shouldn't I be? I've come all the way from Yankee America, to visit my
native dust-heap, which never produced, beside its daily growth of what
might be known the other side of the water, as nature's own pie-plant
and sausage-improver, but one Sampson; but," added he, in a subdued
voice, "may I ask who can take enough interest in a poor fellow, who
never belonged to nothing, as to speak his name? If I had not seen _her_
go down with my own eyes, I should say that the noblest lady that ever
lived was standing before me; but she's gone where only her kind do go;"
and the rough man drew the sleeve of his jacket across his eyes.

"I am the sister of a little sailor-boy, whom you once rescued from
imminent peril,--perhaps death; and I rejoice that fortune has favored
me with a sight of your honest face, that I may repay in part, at least,
the debt of gratitude which we owe to you,--Harry Grosvenor, do you
remember him?" asked she, placing her well-filled purse in his hand.

"Ah, that noble little specimen of young America! a young hero!--could
have jumped over two Johnny Bulls, although my dust-heap happened to be
this side of the water. Well do I remember him! and you are the sister
that he used to talk about, till I really thought the fellow had got
into a lunatic's overall?"

"Yes, I am his sister," said the Sea-flower, and she might have
added,--your name has never been forgotten in my prayers; but this was
no place for the illiterate, though good-hearted sailor's ludicrous
expressions, and having doubly feed the guide, who did not witness a
scene like this often, within these walls, which were looked upon as
sacred by other than his eagle eye, our friends sought the Adelphi,
whither, at Mr. Alboni's request, Sampson joined them; for there was
something in the words which he had uttered, that struck upon that
gentleman's ear; and yet, what it was, was not clear to his mind.

"You have spoken of some noble lady," remarked Mr. Alboni; "pray tell me
if you have never met with but one whom you could distinguish by that
title, in all your travels?"

"And for a very sensible reason; there never was but one like her; or,
that is, I have always thought so until to-day," replied the tar,
glancing toward Natalie; "for my old eyes have seen pretty much
everything they have got in this little world. Ha! I should like to see
the inch of land or water that my foot hasn't measured."

"Let us hear a little of your history, my good fellow: begin with the
beautiful lady," said Mr. Alboni, proudly contemplating his
grand-daughter.

"It's a yarn, your honor, that hasn't been spun to every jack tar that's
sailed the seas, for I've a sort of feeling about me, that her memory
shouldn't be used to gratify common curiosity; and, sir, it's only
through the lady's sweet face, so much like _her_, that I am induced to
tell the story, word for word. Ye see, it was about twenty years ago,
come September, and I shipped for a voyage to America in the De--De--,
well, never mind the name; those Frenchmen always spile their crafts
with a jaw-breaker of a name. Well, we had a fair time of it, till we
got pretty well on to the American shores; and as for me, I never expect
to enjoy myself again, as I did the first part of that voyage. We had
quite a crowd of passengers, and among them was a gentleman, with his
lady and child; if that wasn't the handsomest couple that I ever sot
eyes on, then I've missed my reckonings! The lady,--why, your honor, it
fairly dazzled my eyes to look at her! She always had a kind word for
everybody; even us old tars she would talk with, as if she wasn't the
best lady in the world; there wasn't one of us but would have gone to
the mast-head feet first, to do her a favor; and as for gold, she wasted
a young fortune on our ugly selves. We were within a couple o' days sail
of New York, when one of those moist fogs came up, such as will make a
fellow lose a whisk of his patience, if he happens to have any. Well, we
kept on, as we thought, in the same course, for about twelve hours,
when, like a clap of thunder, we struck fast upon a rock! It was as calm
as any day I ever saw, but our sails were all set, and that with the
run of the sea, gave us no small shock; but our captain hoped we might
not have received any serious damages, and set the carpenters to work to
find what our situation was. Well, your honor, it wasn't ten minutes
after we struck, afore we began to settle down. I knew I'd sailed the
ocean longer than our captain, and when I found that we were going down,
I ran below, and found the gentleman and his lady, and told them just
how matters stood with us, and offered to stand by them till the last;
for we had but two boats aboard, and I knew there'd be a scene. When the
lady heard this, she turned to her husband, and said,--'I am prepared,
to share whatever is to be your fate, Paul; but God in mercy save our
child!" We went aloft to the hurricane deck, and such a sight I have
never seen since! every man, woman, and child that we met there, was
looking for something, if no more than a straw, to save themselves. We
had now settled down even with the water, when I, 'spying a large trough
floating near, made for it, and the gentleman taking the babe from its
mother's arms, spread a few clothes in it, and lashed the little thing
into this curious looking craft; both gave it one last kiss, and it was
launched on the wide ocean. At this instant the lady drew from her
pocket a roll of parchment, and handing it to me, said,--"You may be
saved; if you ever hear from my child again, put this into safe hands
for her; but if you should never hear of her, keep it for yourself, and
may God be with us all." At that moment we were carried down, and as I
rose again, I caught at a spar which was floating near, and looking
after my friends, I saw them rise far to leeward; they were still
clasped in each other's arms. I would willingly have gone down if she
might have been saved; but that could not be, and I was borne far out to
sea. The fog lifted, but I was not able to make my whereabouts, and in
this condition I was left for two days, when I was picked up by a vessel
bound to Liverpool direct. I told the captain my story, and found that
we had missed our bearings, that our vessel had been wrecked upon the
Nantucket shoals. Our voyage proved to be a long and stormy one, for the
September gales took us on to the coast of Africa; and when a year after
I shipped for New York, I heard nothing of the child, and have always
supposed her little bark took her to a better land."

"And so it did!" exclaimed the weeping Natalie, holding the great rough
hand of the tar within her own; "the little bark bore her in safety to a
peaceful shore, where she was received with open arms by those who have
filled the place of her natural parents. You see before you, my honest
friend, no other than the child of that gentle mother, whose parting
from her babe you witnessed."

Sampson gazed upon her with astonishment, and clapping both hands to his
head, as if to assure himself that his exterior was yet in a healthful
condition, whatever transmogrification the interior might have
undergone, he exclaimed,--"I'm not so sure, after all, that my name's
Sampson! I really begin to think that I must have gone down, with the
rest; and yet, I could swear to it that I'm a portion of that dust-heap!
If my topsails aren't shivered this time; clean gone by the board!" and
as if to verify his words, he sank deeper into his chair, and broke into
such a train of musing, as caused the little son of Africa in
attendance, to jingle his glasses right merrily, that the wild bursts of
his uncontrollable mirth might sound the less.

Mr. Alboni could scarce credit what he had heard. "And the parchment,"
inquired he, "what was the purport of that?"

The tar sat as one in a trance, but by certain gesticulations, it
appeared that his skysails were not so shattered that he did not
comprehend the drift of the question, and after much tugging and pulling
at an old waistcoat, which was worn beneath the round-about, he produced
a roll, which, from twenty years' wear, it having been his constant
companion during that time, by sea and by land, had become in appearance
of an uncertain nature, and handing it to the gentleman, he said, after
examining the miniature which Natalie put into his hand, of her mother,
"The document belongs to her, and if I'd a happened to have met her on
the sea, I might have known it, even If I hadn't seen the picture of the
noble lady, for she's the exact imitation; but I never can get the land
fog out of my eyes when I'm ashore. That's a sorry looking bit of paper,
your honor, but it's what'll buy more than one twist of pig-tail."

Mr. Alboni perused the document. He was astounded!--not so much at the
contents of that soiled bit of parchment, which was the instrument by
which Natalie, or the holder, could come into possession of a handsome
fortune; but it was at the honesty of this whole-souled sailor. Was it
possible that this poor fellow, who gained his bread by dint of hard
labor, having a fortune within his grasp, which he conscientiously could
have called his own, had not disturbed a farthing thereof?--choosing
rather to reap the fruits of his own industry, treasuring this rich
legacy, as sacred to the memory of a friend.

Is there indeed such honor to be found in the breast of fallen man? Aye,
't is the heart of the noble sailor that beats with a heroism like this!
To him who goeth down to the great waters in ships, such honor is due!

"And you have had this in your possession for more than twenty years,"
said Mr. Alboni, "and yet have never helped yourself to a cent of that
which was rightly your own? Pray tell me, how would you have disposed of
this wealth at last, had you never heard of an heiress to the estate?"

"D' ye see, sir, I haven't travelled this world over so many times,
without making a beacon light occasionally. Now there's a difference in
light-houses, yer honor. There's the revolving light, and many other
kinds of light, but the brightest of all is that steady light which
shines into the darkness of the poor sailor's soul. I first made that
light, sir, at the Seamen's Home, in New York, and it was there I made
up my mind that I would lend this money to the Lord, for I was convinced
that that would be the most profitable investment; and I've been
thinking of it more and more, for these last few days, if I hadn't
better settle this on the Home, for you know these iron frames will give
out after a while; men don't live to see nine hundred years nowadays,
though I'm named after the strongest fellow that ever handled
a harpoon."

Mr. Alboni read the document to his grand-daughter, the effect of which
was, that certain sums of specie, deposited in the bank of ----, by the
Honorable Paul Sunderland, could by the bearer of this instrument, be
withdrawn at sight.

Sampson's tongue was still flying with rapidity, as if his auditors had
not been void of a number, while Mr. Alboni and Natalie were holding a
consultation aside.

"You are right, my child; you will never miss this from the wealth,
which I thank God I have it in my power to place in your hands. Let it
be as you say,--divide this sum between your protectors."

"I thank you, my dear, generous father," said Natalie, imprinting a kiss
upon the cheek of her relative; "you have made me happy. I will send
this most acceptable gift to my dear mother, not paining her feelings
with the thought that I would seek to repay her love for her child with
gold, but as an expression of her daughter's filial affection; and not
only will I reward this honest man with the half of this sum, but he
shall have the pleasure of presenting with his own hand this offering to
my mother."

To this latter proposition Sampson acquiesced with pleasure; he was
delighted with the prospect of once more seeing his young shipmate,
whose mysterious allusions to the Sea-flower he could now comprehend;
but as to himself receiving so liberal a legacy, he was not prepared to
look upon the proposition as favorably.

"Take it, my good fellow," said Mr. Alboni, "it is rightly your own; and
should you ever have anything to spare, you cannot do better than to
make the investment which you had purposed."

They parted,--the honest tar to take his way to Columbia's happy land,
while Mr. Alboni and the Sea-flower would prolong their visit for a
little here, then depart to feast their eyes upon Italian skies. Sampson
looked long after the gentle form of the Sea-flower, as he left them,
for when might he see so fair a sight again?

       *       *       *       *       *

"And this was the home of my mother," mused Natalie, as arrived in
Florence, our tourists entered the arched gateway, which led to the
broad domains of the long absent master, just as the sun was sinking to
rest, his soft lingering rays kissing the fleecy clouds, o'er which a
blush came and went, now deepening as the rose carmine, giving place to
the most delicate tinge that e'er sat upon a maiden's cheek,--born of
pure modesty. The scent of the delicate jasmine perfumed the air, while
the pensive strains of some fair one, soft and clear as the tones of a
wind-harp, was borne on the stillness of evening to the ear of the
lovely Sea-flower, who, reclining upon the bosom of her father, her
sunny tresses mingling with the silvery locks, which told that he had
seen many winters, whispered in words low and musical,--"My angel
mother,--I can feel her presence near; she has breathed this blissful
air; can it be more heavenly there?" With her eyes still upturned, as if
their mildness might pierce the veil of azure, her lips moved, as they
had ofttimes done before, in praise and thanksgiving for the wondrous
beauty which our Father, in his boundless love, hath set before his
children. As Mr. Alboni gazed upon each familiar object, surrounding his
beautiful villa, he was greatly surprised to find everything in the same
state of preservation as when he had last beheld his home, once so dear;
instead of an air of desolation, everything falling to decay, as would
be a natural consequence attendant upon the long absence of the family,
the scrupulous care and attention of some interested one, was apparent
on all sides. Even the little ivied bower, which Mr. Sunderland had
arranged with his own hands, when he first smiled upon his beautiful
bride, was still in existence; and here did Natalie dream away many a
happy hour, during her stay in dear Florence.

The old man and his frugal wife, to whose keeping the premises had been
entrusted, and who occupied a small tenement upon the grounds, could
not have been more surprised if one had appeared to them from the dead,
than were they when Mr. Alboni stood in the door of their cottage.

"I told you his honor would come again!" said the woman, turning to her
husband; "but I was really afeared it mightn't be in our time; and as
we've no one to leave in our shoes, I'm of the 'pinion that the place
would've dropped off to some stranger."

"Ha, yes," replied the husband, "my old woman's never far out o' the
way, though she does sometimes talk as if she expected to become
extinguished; but for all that, she's equal to two common ones. But I'm
particularly glad you've come home, on a good many 'counts, for if the
place must go into any other hands than an Alboni, I'm not over anxious
to witness the change in the coat of arms."

Mr. Alboni received this compliment as it was intended, and as one
motive in visiting his native land again was to dispose of this estate,
he now directed his attention to the future comfort of this most worthy
couple; for the domestics who had served in the family of Alboni, must
not suffer from want. Accordingly a comfortable cottage, adjoining
these lands, was obtained for their use, and an annual income,
sufficient to supply their wants, settled upon them for life; and so
with the estate of the Albonis, whose last representative of the name
would soon depart, for a memorial of days past, this aged couple hoped
to spend in contentment the residue of their days.

Amid all the splendor and gayety of fashionable life in Italy, the
Sea-flower was never so happy as when seated in the ivy bower, which
looked out upon a little lake, the same which had been her mother's
favorite place of retreat, where she might watch the ever-changing face
of the mellow skies, or roaming through those ancient halls, she might
feast her eyes on the many antique surroundings; but most of all, she
loved to linger in the great reception hall, whose walls were hung with
the portraits of her mother's family, for many past generations. Some of
those countenances denoted men of much strength of character, amounting
almost to a fierceness, but in nearly every female face Natalie
discerned that same gentleness of spirit, which, unknown to herself, was
the expression of her own spiritual countenance. Beneath the portrait
of the last Mrs. Alboni was a place reserved for that of her child,--the
Lady Sunderland; but by some circumstance it had never been placed
there. During the period of our heroine's stay in Italy, she spent much
of her time in the home of her ancestors, to which she became greatly
attached; but once having been introduced to an admiring Italian
assembly, it was no easy matter to remain in seclusion. This new star,
so mild, yet brilliant, was the theme of present conversation. She never
appeared in public, but the blessings of high and low marked her way;
and as she knelt in public worship, meekly bowing at the name of Christ,
there was not one who looked upon her, but this passage of Scripture was
brought to their minds,--"If the righteous scarcely are saved, where
shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?"

But all times come to an end; passing away, is written upon everything
pertaining to earth; and the time when our friends should return to
their island home, drew near.

It was the day before they would bid adieu to pleasant scenes here, to
journey to Liverpool, for business led Mr. Alboni to sail for America
from that port. The sun had gone down,--the last sunset which the
Sea-flower would look upon here,--the last sunset! Pause, dear
reader,--when will that same sun set to us for the last time? It may be
soon, it may be later; yet it is the same, for all time is present with
God. The evening shades began to claim their reign, regardless of the
smiles and entreaties of lingering day, that he would delay his
approach,--fit symbol of sunny youth, who would banish from his presence
death's unrelenting grasp. And yet, who does not love night with earnest
tenderness? and has no one a smile for death?

Natalie still lingered beneath the ivy trellis, her feet drawn upon the
cushions, for she would not crush the gentle flowers, which told to her
their love in the rich perfume of the air; and yet, if trodden under
foot, the flowers, with their dying breath, the beauteous flowers, do,
with their richest perfume, breathe forgiveness.

Her eye was fixed upon the lake,--its glassy ripples a striking contrast
to the giant waves upon which she had ever looked with delight. Ah, who
may divine her thoughts, as she muses thus? A faint smile plays with the
dimples around her mouth, and but for the words she whispers, one might
indeed think her intent upon the ripples which kiss the shore at her
feet; but no, she is transported to where the breaker's roar is heard,
and a proud, noble form she sees,--his piercing eye bent upon the sea.
Full well she knows for whom his heart thus wildly beats; "dear, good
Clarence," she whispers, and starting from her revery, she kneels in
prayer. "My Father, God, thou art merciful unto the weakest of thy frail
ones, keep thou my heart to thee alone; may I have no other gods before
thee; cast out all idols, if any there be, and breathe thy spirit within
my soul; and may thy will be done."

"Amen," was the response of bright ones, of upper spheres, and may we
receive strength to say,--"Thy will be done."

"Adieu, dear home of my childhood," spake Mr. Alboni, as the dim
outlines of the land of his nativity at last faded in the distance; and
burying his face in his hands, he gave himself up to his own
reflections, from which Natalie would not recall him.

Arrived in Liverpool, the steamer in which they were to have embarked
had sailed; consequently a few more days were added to their sojourn
there; but when at length their proud steamer left her pier, accompanied
by many heartfelt good wishes that she might be attended with all
success, that her voyage might prove most favorable, the Sea-flower wept
tears of delight, that she might once more listen to those voices of the
deep; and calmly gazing upon the countenance of Mr. Alboni, she said,--

"Father, we are going home."

Her words fell upon the ear of an officer of the ship, a gentleman of
that nobleness of soul which alone constitutes a true man; one whose
kind and gentlemanly consideration of the comfort and pleasure of those
who have, from time to time, crossed that three thousand miles of ocean
which separates Liverpool from New York, have before been publicly
mentioned, and will long be remembered by those who have before come
under his guidance. "We are going home,"--the officer raised his hat as
he passed the Sea-flower, involuntarily repeating her words,--words
which many times have been idly spoken, but how full of meaning.

As that gallant steamship made her way over the rolling billows, like
"a thing of life," as if indeed she recognized the course o'er which she
had so many times borne aloft her proud head, in seasons of tempest as
well as of sunshine, there was not one who walked her decks, but looked
upon her gigantic form as an ark of safety, rather than the frail plank
which only separated not far from three hundred immortal beings from an
ocean grave. Several days' sail left "merrie England" far behind, and as
they drew nearer the American shores, many an eye was deluded with the
belief that it had been the successful one, in being the first to make
the outline of the nearest shore of this land of the free. There was the
eye of youth, lit up with the light of innocence, which when riper years
should have left their impress, might have given place to more of guile;
while hand in hand, along her peaceful decks, roamed old age and
infancy, alike joyous in the air of cheerfulness which reigned with
all around.

It was near the hour of mid-day, weather favorable, with the exception
of a fog which had suddenly sprung up. Occasionally the signal bell
sounded, that if any vessel were in their neighborhood, she might know
of their whereabouts. The fog as suddenly lifted as it had shut in upon
them, but to close down again heavier than before. Natalie had not, as
most of the ladies, gone below, but stood, intent upon those new
thoughts which the veil of fog, which had shut out all sight and sound,
save an occasional tone of the bell, had inspired, when,--a crash, which
shook their vessel from stem to stern, caused every one to look upon the
countenance of his fellow, there to read the words which he had no power
to utter. A propeller was at that instant seen moving athwart their
bows, and from the severity of the shock, it was thought that the
smaller vessel must have sustained serious damage. Accordingly a boat
was lowered from the steamer, under command of the first officer, to
render the unfortunates such assistance as was in their power, believing
their own damages to be but slight; but the boat had not been long gone,
when word was passed to their captain that they were in a sinking
condition. Upon examination it was found that a large breakage had been
made, directly under their bows, and the sea was rushing in
terrifically.

All was now a scene of confusion; some applied themselves diligently to
the pumps, and others sought to diminish the leak by stretching a sail
across the gap, while the passengers hurried, some one way, and some
another, as if in a state of frenzy. To seek assistance from the
propeller, even if she might not be in as disastrous a condition as
themselves, was out of the question; for both vessels being under full
headway at the moment of the collision, she was now again enveloped in
fog. Oh, God! must it be thus? no escape for these three hundred beings?
What an awful moment of suspense! Still the steamer settles down; what
is done must be done speedily. The captain is without his first officer,
with whom he might consult, his absence necessarily detracting from the
number of boats; but had the boats been suffered to remain unmolested,
for the benefit of the passengers, it were doubtful if they could have
contained so large a number. Where now are those gladsome little
children, those aged men and women, who, listening to those voices of
childhood, would fain have believed themselves young again? Ah! where
are they? Wringing their hands in wild despair! clambering over the
sides of the ship, endeavoring to save themselves on rafts, spars, or
articles affording inferior protection.

The Sea-flower,--where is she? where is her aged protector? Upon the
deck of that ill-fated steamer the Sea-flower kneels, with eyes meekly
turned heavenward. She asks that peace may be shed upon the hearts of
that agonized throng; that they may fitly receive this will of divine
dispensation. Never was her countenance more serene. Just then a voice
was heard at her side,--"we are going home;" it was the voice of the
noble officer, who had before noted her words.

"I was happy," replied Natalie, "when I said we are going home, but I
did not realize we would so soon meet the loved ones in that celestial
home, where we shall part no more forever; and I am happy now; yet this
terrible cry of anguish incites my deep, deep sympathies."

"Thank God for this presence of an angel, to shed light over my last
hour!" said the officer; "I now go down through that dark valley of
death, unattended by that gloom which had seized upon my soul. My God,
in mercy wilt thou sustain my wife and children, when they shall look
for my coming, and I shall never return to them more! and may they soon
meet me there." (He knew not that the youngling of his flock would so
soon join him in singing the songs of the redeemed.)

He said no more; they were going down; a life-preserver was in his
hands, which he would have secured about the Sea-flower, but she waved
her hand to him, saying,--"Take it to yourself. Farewell."

Supported by her grand-parent's arm, she gazed upon the waters; they
were not angry. Peacefully sighing, they met her touch, as if they would
welcome her home. "Mother," she breathed, with her last of mortal
breath;--was it a farewell to that loved one of earth, or did she
joyfully greet her sainted mother, who awaited the coming of her child
to her home in the skies, where "the Lamb which is in the midst of the
throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of
waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes?"

The blue waves rolled on, in their untiring way, and the sun went calmly
down upon this day,--the twenty-seventh of September, eighteen hundred
and fifty-four,--a day long to be remembered, both in the Eastern and
Western world, for in it was the sundering of many mortal ties. Many a
family circle wept as they looked upon the familiar places, which would
know their lost ones no more; but ah, chide me not, kind reader, in thus
leading you adown to the coldness of death, in setting before you that
which causes your tender heart to shudder. Mourn not for these departed;
for would we not wish to meet them there, when, ere long, this mortal
shall have put on immortality? Grieve not because that gentle one has
passed away! say not that she met with an untimely end, when in her
summer of life all was pleasantness before her. Think of her not as one
gone far away, never to be on earth more; cast her not from your heart,
where, during her little day here, in innocence she entwined herself
within its recesses. Oh, no, for she is nearer to us now; she is not
dead, but has passed from death to life; and may her memory remain with
us, in freshness as the ivy green, which loves best the churchyard's
place of holy quietude,--and by her influence may we in spirit come to
be more Christ-like.




CHAPTER XII.


ALONE.


  "Shall I not listen to the sea-shell's moaning,
     That strangely vibrates like the swelling sea,
   And fancy it an echoed storm, intoning
     A solemn dirge in memory of thee?"

        MISS MARY M. CHASE.


A lone man walks the shores of Nantucket; his noble form is slightly
bent, and with the raven of his hair is blended the faintest tinge of
gray, though he is evidently a man to whom the meridian of life is yet
far in the distance; his fine countenance is sad, yet as he gazes far
out o'er the sea, deep in his piercing eye is a subdued look of
resignation, shedding light over his features, which a stranger might
attribute to a mind of happiness; and yet that look of sadness is
oftenest triumphant, leading those who meet him for the first time to
ask from whence he came, for his countenance betrays that his has been
not the common lot of man. Ah, who is he,--on whom young men and maidens
look with pitying eye? to whom the old man lifts his hat, and little
children cease from their sports as he passes, and quietly slip the
innocent daisy, or the sweet-scented arbutus into his hand, which they
have culled from the wide commons, where, they have been told, the good
Sea-flower loved to stray.

It is Clarence Delwood! his has been a bitter, bitter draught; yet its
dregs have in a measure lost their power, for he has learned that 't is
his Father holds the cup. Little, did he think, as they sat together
there on that high bank, which overlooks the sea, upon that last evening
spent with his cherished one in her island home, that it was to be the
last forever! that her voice would no more be heard! in glad response to
nature's shouts of joyousness. Yet, as alone he sits beneath the silent
night, there where she last told to him her love, he fancies that the
stars in pity smile upon him, and as one more gentle than the rest,
leaves its place in the heavens and slowly descends, drawing nearer and
nearer, finally resting upon the bosom of ocean,--he listens, for the
music of her harp strikes upon his soul, and in the crested billows
which play at his feet, a shining form he sees, her robe all sparkling
with the pearly drops of the sea. He would fain go to her, as she smiles
upon him, as was ever her wont, but a voice he hears, saying, "not yet,"
and the bright one recedes from his view.

Reader, you may visit Nantucket's sea-girt isle, you may walk those
peaceful shores where she loved to roam; you may meet there that lone
man on the shore; you will approach him with feelings of deep regard,
not unlike reverence; but do not hesitate to inquire of him for the
grave of the Sea-flower. With eyes fixed upon the ocean's blue, pointing
with his finger heavenward, he will direct you to a grassy mound, at
whose head is a weeping willow, upon the broad trunk of which is wrought
in letters of pearl,--"The Sea-flower awaits for thee." With a tear you
turn away, with the resolve in your heart that you will henceforth so
live, as that when this mortal life is ended, you may "attain
everlasting joy and felicity, through Jesus Christ, our Lord."

You will seek the fireside of the widow Grosvenor, where from a mother's
lips, you will be assured of the blessings which accompany a dutiful
child. That fireside is not desolate, for the members of the household
have been led to say,--"Thy will, O Lord, not mine, be done." Mrs.
Grosvenor, though somewhat advanced in life, still retains that peculiar
freshness of her earlier days; and as she proudly glances upon the young
man by her side, calling him "my son," you can hardly recognize in his
athletic form the little sailor-boy of other days; yet it is none other,
although he has arrived to the dignity of captain, and as Sampson
prophesied, a smarter man never sailed the ocean. But who is this
witching beauty at his side, who would fain impress you with a belief
that that mischief which will not remain concealed for the briefest
period, is not her entire composition? Do you not mistrust? who other
than Miss Winnie Santon? she who having tired of the gallants of the
wild West, or rather of their numbers, came to the wise conclusion that
a city life was designed for such as she; she the coquettish heiress,
who once stood very much in doubt as to the state of civilization among
these "poor fishermen."

Yes, it is our Winnie, and she is now the wife of Capt. Harry
Grosvenor. And is she happy in this her choice? Ask her if she would
exchange her brave husband for one of those superfine niceties, who
suing for favor at her feet, had at the same time lined their vows of
love and constancy with the yellow dust, which had they known the strong
chest to have been at their backs, while in this humble posture, it were
uncertain to which might have been made an apology,--the fair lady or
her dowry.

But what is the cause of that little commotion among sundry flowered
blankets, juvenile counterpanes, etc., etc., which you have but this
moment discovered in a neighboring niche? Is it old Nep who has
ensconced himself in this dainty little nest? No, for you left him
sleeping under the shade of the weeping willow. Surely, those seven
kits, with fourteen blue eyes, have not lived to this green old age! Ah,
the mystery is solved, by the presence of a tiny hand, which elevates
itself above the little heap of whiteness, and a smiling baby face has
contrived to work its way into the no less smiling sunlight, the which
baby must not partake of too freely; consequently the owner of said
property appears, to alleviate the difficulty, which is done by giving
miss baby a toss into mid-air, and with a ringing laugh, not unlike
those wild bursts of merriment which were wont to be heard reverberating
through the halls of Santon Mansion.

Yes, it is Winnie's child; and she tells you, while a more thoughtful
look sits upon her countenance, that the name of the little one is
"Natalie;" although she adds, "as earnestly as I love my child, I know
there can never be another like _her_"--and pointing to a portrait,
draped in white, she presses her child more closely to her heart.

You look long and earnestly upon that countenance of the Madonna,--the
one face representing mother and child. The portrait is the property of
Clarence Delwood, he who is now known as 'the lone man of the shore;'
and while you are yet gazing upon it, he enters, and pressing his lips
to the canvas, he takes a bible from the case and reads. You
accidentally observe the fly-leaf, upon which is written,--"To the
Sea-flower, from her mother, on her second birthday;" and as he reads a
smile lights up his countenance, for it is there written,--"thou shalt
labor unto the Lord," and a more cheerful expression is his; for it is
through his ready pen that the alms chest of the poor receives its
liberal supplies.

Ere you depart, you inquire as to the fate of Mr. Sampson, learning that
through his agency the widow Grosvenor has come in possession of a
handsome fortune,--the daughter's gift to her mother,--so that now she
is enabled to make comfortable many a cheerless fireside, where poverty,
through the loss of a husband and father, as he went down to do business
on the great deep, had reigned. Honest Mr. Sampson, after so many years
spent upon the ocean, has concluded to live the remainder of his days on
shore; and in the darkest night, when the hurricane roars, and the waves
break high, the brilliant light entrusted to his care, may be seen for
many miles around, by the voyager who may be sailing in the neighborhood
of old Nantucket. Capt. Harry Grosvenor has also bade adieu to his
much-loved home on the sea; for together with Winnie's entreaties, and
the goodly amount of wealth, which she declares as rightly belonging to
her husband as to herself, he has been induced to give his little wife
the promise that he will sail the seas no more.

But there is one, who is no unimportant member of this happy family, for
whom you have forgotten to inquire, so intent are you, as you pass out
from them into the silent night, upon what you have seen and heard; but
you are minded of this negligence by a voice near, and a negro,
tottering from beneath the weight of years, whom you recognize at once
as old Vingo, stands before you. His mind is much impaired, for he has
attained his second childhood; yet from his disconnected remarks, it is
evident that he still retains a pleasant remembrance of the past.

"Old Bingo neber want noting more," he replies to your question of what
you can do for him; "nobody neber can do noting more for Bingo; for
Missy Sea-flower hab gib Bingo, Phillis, and gib him Heaben, and what
more does he want?"

"And where is your mistress's home?" you ask.

"Dar," said the negro, pointing to the skies, "dar is Heaben, dar am my
missus's home; and dat is whar she tell me dat she wait for me if she
go home first. If it hadn't been missy dat tole me, I couldn't beliebe
dat such an ole brack fellow like me, go to dat white place; but I
beliebes it now, for since missy gone home I's seen a new star up dar;
and I knows it am her, for didn't she say she look down to me, jus' like
ole Massa Grobener and dat poor brack Injin look down upon her! Yes, I
know dat I shall meet her dar, and what am better, Phillis am going dar
too! only sometimes she get skeered like, when she remember what her ole
cotton massa tell her; for he tells her dat de hounds go to dat bright
place, afore good for notin' niggar like her get dar; and she's afeared
dey remember dar ole habits and hunt her up, for she run away from her
ole massa, and gets sabed in dese free states, whar de folks don't
mistake poor niggar for someting else dan a man."

"Farewell, faithful Vingo, and may the remainder of your days shed peace
along your way. Thy portion here has not indeed been to sit in 'kings'
courts,' yet thou hast so used the one talent lent unto thee, that at
the last, when every 'island shall have fled away, and the mountains
shall not be found,' thou shalt have a place at the right hand of that
glorious throne, whose king is our God; thou shalt hear those blessed
words,--'well done, good and faithful servant,' and the morning star
shalt be thine; and there thou shalt again find that pure gem, who, in
her little day on earth, led thee to the bright river of life, where
thou hast sought and found that 'pearl of great price.'"

The blue waves have not yet tired of their unceasing sports; they still
chase each other in mad glee from far over the sea, each striving to
outdo his fellows, as they come tumbling in with deep-toned voices. The
beaming beacon still keeps vigil over Nantucket's peaceful slumberers,
while her little ones, in their gladsome dreams of childhood, wander up
and down those shores, intent upon their search for the most delicate
sea-mosses, exclaiming with each new found treasure,--"See! I have found
a _gem_ among the sea-weeds."

Gentle reader, you are weary, and I will here seek to bid you adieu,
with many thanks for your kind attention; and great is my joy, if haply
any have been impressed in spirit with that meek and holy submission
which shall lead them to say,--"Thy will, O Lord, not mine, be done;"
and when loved ones shall be borne away from us, may we take up our
cross with renewed love for Him who gave, and hath taken away,--and say,
"blessed be the name of the Lord," forever.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Natalie, by Ferna Vale

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NATALIE ***

***** This file should be named 10848.txt or 10848.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/8/4/10848/

Produced by V-M Osterman, Juliet Sutherland, Veronique Durand and PG
Distributed Proofreaders


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


