The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Life and Romances of Mrs. Eliza Haywood
by George Frisbie Whicher

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Life and Romances of Mrs. Eliza Haywood

Author: George Frisbie Whicher

Release Date: January 31, 2004 [EBook #10889]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. ELIZA HAYWOOD ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Carol David and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team





THE LIFE AND ROMANCES OF

MRS. ELIZA HAYWOOD

BY

GEORGE FRISBIE WHICHER, PH.D.

INSTRUCTOR IN THE UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS

1915



_This Monograph has been approved by the Department of English and
Comparative Literature in Columbia University as a contribution to
knowledge worthy of publication._

A. H. THORNDIKE,

_Executive Officer_




PREFACE


The purpose of the following study is not to revive the reputation of a
forgotten author or to suggest that Mrs. Haywood may yet "come into her
own." For the lover of eighteenth century fashions her numerous pages
have indeed a stilted, early Georgian charm, but with the passing of
Ramillies wigs and velveteen small-clothes the popularity of her novels
vanished once for all. She had her world in her time, but that world and
time disappeared with the French Revolution [a]. Now even professed
students of the novel shrink from reading many of her seventy odd
volumes, nor can the infamous celebrity conferred by Pope's attack in
"The Dunciad" save her name from oblivion. But the significance of Mrs.
Haywood's contributions cannot safely be ignored. Her romances of
palpitating passion written between 1720 and 1730 formed a necessary
complement to Defoe's romances of adventure exactly as her Duncan
Campbell pamphlets supplied the one element lacking in his. The domestic
novels of her later life foreshadowed the work of Miss Burney and Miss
Austen, while her career as a woman of letters helped to open a new
profession to her sex. Since even the weakest link in the development of
a literary form is important, I have endeavored to provide future
historians of English fiction with a compact and accurate account of
this pioneer "lady novelist."

Hitherto the most complete summary of Mrs. Haywood's life and writings
has been Sir Sidney Lee's article in the "Dictionary of National
Biography," which adds much information not found in the earlier notices
in Baker's "Biographia Dramatica" and Chalmers' "Biographical
Dictionary." The experienced palates of Mr. Edmund Gosse and Mr. Austin
Dobson have tested the literary qualities respectively of the earlier
and later aspects of her work. Professor Walter Raleigh, Dr. Charlotte
E. Morgan, and Professor Saintsbury have briefly estimated the
importance of her share in the change from romance to novel.

Perhaps the main reason for the inadequacy of these notices lies in the
fact that no one library contains anything like a complete collection of
Mrs. Haywood's innumerable books. In pursuit of odd items I have
ransacked the British Museum, the Bodleian, and several minor literary
museums in England, and in America the libraries of Columbia, Harvard,
Yale, and Brown Universities, the Peabody Institute, and the University
of Chicago. The search has enabled me to correct many inaccuracies in
Miss Morgan's tentative list of prose fiction and even to supplement Mr.
Esdaile's admirable "List of English Tales and Prose Romances printed
before 1740," which mentions only works now extant in British libraries.

In the Bibliography I have adopted an alphabetical arrangement as most
convenient for ready reference. Under the various editions of each book
I have referred to libraries, English or American, where copies are to
be found. Or when no copy was to be had, I have referred to
advertisements, either in the newspapers of the Burney Collection, in
the "Gentleman's Magazine," the "Monthly," or the "Critical," or in the
catalogues of modern booksellers. In the Chronological List I have dated
each work from the earliest advertisement of its publication.

Naturally I have incurred obligations to scholars who have previously
passed over the same little-cultivated territory. Mr. Arundell Esdaile
of the British Museum staff both facilitated the course of my
investigations in England by valuable suggestions and cheered it by his
cordial hospitality. To Professors R.P. Utter of Amherst, J.M. Clapp of
Lake Forest College, A.H. Upham of Miami University, and A.H. Thorndike
of Columbia I am indebted for friendly advice, encouragement, and
helpful criticism. And above all my thanks are due to Professor W.P.
Trent, whose love of eighteenth century letters suggested the subject of
this research, whose sage and kindly supervision fostered the work
through every stage in its development, and for whose forthcoming "Life
and Times of Daniel Defoe" this monograph is intended as a footnote.

G.F.W.

URBANA, ILLINOIS.

[a] Through the kindness of Professor J.M. Clapp I am provided with the
    following evidence of the decline of Eliza Haywood's popularity. In
    W. Bent's _General Catalogue of Books_ (1786) fourteen of her
    productions are advertised, namely: _Works_, 4 vols; _Clementina;
    Dalinda; Epistles for the Ladies; La Belle Assemblee; Female
    Spectator; Fortunate Foundlings; Fruitless Enquiry; Jemmy and Jenny
    Jessamy; Betsy Thoughtless; The Husband; Invisible Spy; Life's
    Progress through the Passions; Virtuous Villager_. In 1791 only
    four--_Clementina; Dalinda; Female Spectator; Jemmy and Jenny
    Jessamy_--appeared in Bent's _London Catalogue_, and of these the
    first two had fallen in value from 3/6 to 3 shillings.



CONTENTS


I.    ELIZA HAYWOOD'S LIFE

II.   SHORT ROMANCES OF PASSION

III.  THE DUNCAN CAMPBELL PAMPHLETS

IV.   SECRET HISTORIES AND SCANDAL NOVELS

V.    THE HEROINE OF "THE DUNCIAD"

VI.   LETTERS AND ESSAYS

VII.  LATER FICTION: THE DOMESTIC NOVEL

VIII. CONCLUSION

BIBLIOGRAPHY

CHRONOLOGICAL LIST

INDEX




THE LIFE AND ROMANCES OF MRS. ELIZA HAYWOOD



CHAPTER I


ELIZA HAYWOOD'S LIFE

Autobiography was almost the only form of writing not attempted by Eliza
Haywood in the course of her long career as an adventuress in letters.
Unlike Mme de Villedieu or Mrs. Manley she did not publish the story of
her life romantically disguised as the Secret History of Eliza, nor was
there One of the Fair Sex (real or pretended) to chronicle her "strange
and surprising adventures" or to print her passion-stirring epistles, as
had happened with Mrs. Aphra Behn's fictitious exploits and amorous
correspondence[1]. Indeed the first biographer of Mrs. Haywood[2] hints
that "from a supposition of some improper liberties being taken with her
character after death by the intermixture of truth and falsehood with
her history," the apprehensive dame had herself suppressed the facts of
her life by laying a "solemn injunction on a person who was well
acquainted with all the particulars of it, not to communicate to any one
the least circumstance relating to her." The success of her precaution
is evident in the scantiness of our information about her. The few
details recorded in the "Biographia Dramatica" can be amplified only by
a tissue of probabilities. Consequently Mrs. Haywood's one resemblance
to Shakespeare is the obscurity that covers the events of her life.

She was born in London, probably in 1693, and her father, a man by the
name of Fowler, was a small shop-keeper.[3] She speaks vaguely of having
received an education beyond that afforded to the generality of her sex.
Her marriage to Valentine Haywood,[4] a clergyman at least fifteen years
older than his spouse, took place before she was twenty, for the
Register of St. Mary Aldermary records on 3 December, 1711, the
christening of Charles, son of Valentine Haywood, clerk, and Elizabeth
his wife. Her husband held at this time a small living in Norfolk, and
had recently been appointed lecturer of St. Mathews, Friday Street.
Whether the worthy cleric resided altogether in London and discharged
his duties in the country by proxy, or whether Mrs. Haywood, like
Tristram Shandy's mother, enjoyed the privilege of coming to town only
on certain interesting occasions, are questions which curious research
fails to satisfy. At any rate, one of the two children assigned to her
by tradition was born, as we have seen, in London.

No other manifestation of their nuptial happiness appeared until 7
January, 1721, on which date the "Post Boy" contained an Advertisement
of the elopement of Mrs. Eliz. Haywood, wife of Rev. Valentine
Haywood.[5] The causes of Eliza's flight are unknown. Our only knowledge
of her temperament in her early life comes from a remark by Nichols that
the character of Sappho in the "Tatler"[6] may be "assigned
with ...probability and confidence, to Mrs. Elizabeth Heywood, who ...was
in all respects just such a character as is exhibited here." Sappho is
described by Steele as "a fine lady, who writes verses, sings, dances,
and can say and do whatever she pleases, without the imputation of any
thing that can injure her character; for she is so well known to have no
passion but self-love, or folly but affectation, that now, upon any
occasion, they only cry, 'It is her way!' and 'That is so like her!'
without farther reflection." She quotes a "wonderfully just" passage
from Milton, calls a licentious speech from Dryden's "State of
Innocence" an "odious thing," and says "a thousand good things at
random, but so strangely mixed, that you would be apt to say, all her
wit is mere good luck, and not the effect of reason and judgment." In
the second paper Sappho quotes examples of generous love from Suckling
and Milton, but takes offence at a letter containing some sarcastic
remarks on married women. We know that Steele was personally acquainted
with Mrs. Manley, and it is possible that he knew Mrs. Haywood, since
she later dedicated a novel to him. With some reservation, then, we may
accept this sketch as a fair likeness. As a young matron of seventeen or
eighteen she was evidently a lively, unconventional, opinionated
gadabout fond of the company of similar She-romps, who exchanged verses
and specimen letters with the lesser celebrities of the literary world
and perpetuated the stilted romantic traditions of the Matchless Orinda
and her circle. A woman of her independence of mind, we may imagine,
could not readily submit to the authority of an arbitrary, orthodox
clergyman husband.

Mrs. Haywood's writings are full of the most lively scenes of marital
infelicity due to causes ranging from theological disputes to flagrant
licentiousness. Her enemies were not so charitable as to attribute her
flight from her husband to any reason so innocent as incompatibility of
temper or discrepancy of religious views. The position of ex-wife was
neither understood nor tolerated by contemporary society. In the words
of a favorite quotation from "Jane Shore":

  "But if weak Woman chance to go astray,
  If strongly charm'd she leave the thorny Way,
  And in the softer Paths of Pleasure stray,
  Ruin ensues, Reproach and endless Shame;
  And one false Step entirely damns her Fame:
  In vain, with Tears, the Loss she may deplore,
  In vain look back to what she was before,
  She sets, like Stars that fall, to rise no more!"

Eliza Haywood, however, after leaving the thorny way of matrimony,
failed to carry out the laureate's metaphor. Having less of the fallen
star in her than Mr. Rowe imagined, and perhaps more of the hen, she
refused to set, but resolutely faced the world, and in spite of all
rules of decorum, tried to earn a living for herself and her two
children, if indeed as Pope's slander implies, she had children to
support.

The ways in which a woman could win her bread outside the pale of
matrimony were extremely limited. A stage career, connected with a
certain degree of infamy, had been open to the sex since Restoration
times, and writing for the theatre had been successfully practiced by
Mrs. Behn, Mrs. Manley, Mrs. Centlivre, Mrs. Pix, and Mrs. Davys. The
first two female playwrights mentioned had produced beside their
dramatic works a number of pieces of fiction, and Mrs. Mary Hearne, Mrs.
Jane Barker, and Mrs. Sarah Butler had already gained a milder notoriety
as _romancieres_. Poetry, always the elegant amusement of polite
persons, had not yet proved profitable enough to sustain a woman of
letters. Eliza Haywood was sufficiently catholic in her taste to attempt
all these means of gaining reputation and a livelihood, and tried in
addition a short-lived experiment as a publisher. Beside these literary
pursuits we know not what obscure means for support she may have found
from time to time.

Her first thought, however, was apparently of the theatre, where she had
already made her debut on the stage of the playhouse in Smock Alley
(Orange Street), Dublin during the season of 1715, as Chloe in "Timon of
Athens; or, the Man-Hater."[7] One scans the _dramatis personae_ of
"Timon" in vain for the character of Chloe, until one recalls that the
eighteenth century had no liking for Shakespeare undefiled. The version
used by the Theatre Royal was, of course, the adaptation by Thomas
Shadwell, in which Chloe appears chiefly in Acts II and III as the maid
and confidant of the courtesan Melissa. Both parts were added by Og. The
role of Cleon was taken by Quin, later an interpreter of Mrs. Haywood's
own plays. But if she formed a connection with either of the London
theatres after leaving her husband, the engagement was soon broken off,
and her subsequent appearances as an actress in her comedy of "A Wife to
be Lett" (1723) and in Hatchett's "Rival Father" (1730) were due in the
one case to an accident and in the other to her friendship for the
playwright.

She herself, according to the "Biographia Dramatica," when young
"dabbled in dramatic poetry; but with no great success." The first of
her plays, a tragedy entitled "The Fair Captive," was acted the
traditional three times at Lincoln's Inn Fields, beginning 4 March,
1721.[8] Aaron Hill contributed a friendly epilogue. Quin took the part
of Mustapha, the despotic vizier, and Mrs. Seymour played the heroine.
On 16 November it was presented a fourth time for the author's
benefit,[9] then allowed to die. Shortly after the first performance the
printed copy made its appearance. In the "Advertisement to the Reader"
Mrs. Haywood exposes the circumstances of her turning playwright,
naively announcing:

  "To attempt any thing in Vindication of the following Scenes, wou'd
  cost me more Time than the Composing 'em took me up...

  "This Tragedy was originally writ by Capt. Hurst, and by him deliver'd
  to Mr. Rich, to be acted soon after the opening of the New House;[10]
  but the Season being a little too far elaps'd for the bringing it on
  then, and the Author oblig'd to leave the Kingdom, Mr. Rich became the
  Purchaser of it, and the Winter following order'd it into Rehearsal:
  but found it so unfit for Representation, that for a long time he laid
  aside all thoughts of making any thing of it, till last January he
  gave me the History of his Bargain, and made me some Proposals
  concerning the new modelling it: but however I was prevail'd upon, I
  cannot say my Inclination had much share in my Consent.... On Reading,
  I found I had much more to do than I expected; every Character I was
  oblig'd to find employment for, introduce one entirely new, without
  which it had been impossible to have guessed at the Design of the
  Play; and in fine, change the Diction so wholly, that, excepting in
  the Parts of Alphonso and Isabella, there remains not twenty lines of
  the Original."

The plot, which is too involved to be analyzed, centers about the
efforts of Alphonso to redeem his beloved Isabella from, the harem of
the Vizier Mustapha. Spaniards, Turks, keepers and inhabitants of the
harem, and a "young lady disguis'd in the habit of an Eunuch," mingle in
inextricable intrigue. Some of the worst absurdities and the most
bathetic lines occur in the parts of the two lovers for which Mrs.
Haywood disclaims responsibility, but even the best passages of the play
add nothing to the credit of the reviser. Her next dramatic venture was
produced after her novels had gained some vogue with the town, as the
Prologue spoken by Mr. Theophilus Cibber indicates.

  "Criticks! be dumb tonight--no Skill display;
  A dangerous Woman-Poet wrote the Play: ...
  Measure her Force, by her known Novels, writ
  With manly Vigour, and with Woman's wit.
  Then tremble, and depend, if ye beset her,
  She, who can talk so well, may act yet better."

The fair success achieved by "A Wife to be Lett: A Comedy," acted at
Drury Lane three times, commencing 12 August, 1723,[11] is said to have
been due largely to the curiosity of the public to see the author, who
by reason of the indisposition of an actress performed in person the
part of the wife, Mrs. Graspall, a character well suited to her romping
disposition. It is difficult to imagine how the play could have
succeeded on its own merits, for the intricacies of the plot tax the
attention even of the reader. A certain Ann Minton, however, revived the
piece in the guise of "The Comedy of a Wife to be Lett, or, the Miser
Cured, compressed into Two Acts" (1802).

Apparently the reception of her comedy was not sufficiently encouraging
to induce Mrs. Haywood to continue writing plays, for six years elapsed
before she made a third effort in dramatic writing with a tragedy
entitled, "Frederick, Duke of Brunswick-Lunenburgh," which was first
produced at Lincoln's Inn Fields on 4 March, 1729,[12] and shortly
afterward published with a dedication to Frederick Lewis, Prince of
Wales. The intention of the dedication was obviously to bid for royal
patronage, but the intended victim was too astute to be caught. In
eulogizing the Emperor Frederick (_c_. 1400) the author found abundant
opportunity to praise by implication his namesake, but unfortunately for
the success of the play none of the royal family "vouchsafed to honour
it with their Presence." Mrs. Haywood complains that hers "was the only
new Performance this Season, which had not received a Sanction from some
of that illustrious Line," and the "unthinking Part of the Town"
followed the fashion set by royalty. Unlike "The Fair Captive," which
suffered from a plethora of incidents, Mrs. Haywood's second tragedy
contains almost nothing in its five acts but rant. An analysis of the
plot is but a summary of conversations.

Act I. The German princes hail Frederick, recently elected Emperor.
Count Waldec and Ridolpho, in league with the Archbishop of Metz,
conspire against him. Waldec urges his sister Adelaid to marry the
gallant Wirtemberg. Sophia, her woman and confidant, also urges her to
marry, but Adelaid can only reply, "I charge thee Peace, Nor join such
distant Sounds as Joy and Wirtemberg," and during the rest of the act
proclaims the anguish inspired by her unrequited passion for Frederick,
married three years before to a Saxon princess.

Act II. The conspirators plan to kill Frederick. Adelaid reproaches him
for abandoning her. He welcomes his imperial consort, Anna, and takes
occasion to deliver many magnanimous sentiments.

Act III. Adelaid declares that she cannot love Wirtemberg. Waldec
excites the impatient lover to jealousy of Frederick. Ridolpho is
banished court for murder.

Act IV. Frederick is distressed by Wirtemberg's discontent. The Empress,
seeking to learn the reason for it, is infected by Wirtemberg's
suspicions. Adelaid overhears Ridolpho and Waldec plotting to slay
Frederick, but hesitates to accuse her own brother. Wirtemberg
reproaches her for her supposed yielding to Frederick, and resolves to
leave her forever.

Act V. Adelaid, in order to warn him, sends to ask the Emperor to visit
her. Waldec intercepts the letter and resolves to murder Frederick in
her chamber. Wirtemberg learns that he has been duped and defends the
Emperor. Waldec and Ridolpho are killed, though not before they succeed
in mortally wounding Frederick, who dies amid tears.

Genest says with truth that the love scenes are dull, and that the
subject is not well calculated for dramatic representation. The play was
acted only the usual three times, and fully deserved the deep damnation
of its taking off.

In 1730 Mrs. Haywood took part in the "Rival Father, or the Death of
Achilles," written by her friend, the actor and playwright William
Hatchett, and performed at the Haymarket.[13] Three years later she
joined with him to produce an adaptation of Fielding's "Tragedy of
Tragedies, or the Life and Death of Tom Thumb the Great" on the model of
Gay's popular "Beggar's Opera." The "Opera of Operas" follows its
original closely with a number of condensations and omissions. Almost
the only additions made by the collaborators were the short lyrics,
which were set to music by the ingenious Mr. Frederick Lampe.[14] The
Hatchett-Haywood version was acted at the Haymarket on 31 May, 1733, and
according to Genest, was repeated eleven times at least with Mrs. Clive
as Queen Dollalolla.[15] It was published immediately. On 9 November a
performance was given at Drury Lane. Although unusually successful, it
was Mrs. Haywood's last dramatic offering.[16]

The aspiring authoress apparently never found in dramatic writing a
medium suitable to her genius, and even less was she attracted by a
stage career. The reasons for her abandoning the theatre to develop her
powers as a writer of fiction are stated in a characteristic letter
still filed among the State Papers.[17]

  _Sir_

  The Stage not answering my Expectation, and the averseness of my
  Relations to it, has made me Turn my Genius another Way; I have
  Printed some Little things which have mett a Better Reception then
  they Deservd, or I Expected: and have now Ventur'd on a Translation to
  be done by Subscription, the Proposalls whereof I take the Liberty to
  send You: I have been so much us'd to Receive favours from You that I
  can make No Doubt of y'r forgiveness for this freedom, great as it is,
  and that You will alsoe become one of those Persons, whose Names are a
  Countenance to my undertaking. I am mistress of neither words nor
  happy Turn of thought to Thank You as I ought for the many Unmeritted
  favours You have Conferr'd on me, but beg You to believe all that a
  gratefull Soul can feel, mine does who am Sir

  Yo'r most humble &
              most Obedient Serv't

                                 ELIZA HAYWOOD.

  August ye 5th 1720


Enclosed with the letter were "Proposals For Printing by Subscription A
Translation from the French of the Famous Monsieur Bursault Containing
Ten Letters from a Lady of Quality to a Chevalier."[18] The work thus
heralded was published in the latter part of 1720 by subscription--
"three shillings each Book in Quires, or five Shillings bound in Calf,
Gilt Back"--a method never again employed by Mrs. Haywood, though in
this case it must have succeeded fairly well. Three hundred and nine
names appeared on her list of subscribers, of which one hundred and
twenty-three were women's. Few subscribers of either sex were
distinguished. There were, however, that universal patron of minor
authors, George Bubb, Esq., later the Doddington to whom Thomson
dedicated his "Summer"; Mrs. Barker, the novelist; Aaron Hill; a Mr.
Osborne, possibly the bookseller whose name was afterward infamously
connected with Eliza's in "The Dunciad"; Charles de La Faye, the
under-secretary of state with whom Defoe corresponded; and a sprinkling
of aristocratic titles.

The publisher of the letters was William Rufus Chetwood, later the
prompter at Drury Lane Theatre, but then just commencing bookseller at
the sign of Cato's Head, Covent Garden. He had already brought out for
Mrs. Haywood the first effort of her genius, a romantic tale entitled
"Love in Excess: or, the Fatal Enquiry." We have the author's testimony
that the three parts "mett a Better Reception then they Deservd," and
indeed the piece was extraordinarily successful, running through no less
than six separate editions before its inclusion in her collected "Secret
Histories, Novels and Poems" in 1725. On the last page of "Letters from
a Lady of Quality to a Chevalier" Chetwood had also advertised for
speedy publication "a Book entitled, The Danger of giving way to
Passion, in Five Exemplary Novels: First, The British Recluse, or the
Secret History of Cleomira, supposed dead. Second, The Injur'd Husband,
or the Mistaken Resentment. Third, Lasselia, or the Unfortunate
Mistress. Fourth, The Rash Resolve, or the Untimely Discovery. Fifth,
Idalia, or the Self-abandon'd.[19] Written by Mrs. Eliza Haywood."
During the next three years the five novels were issued singly by
Chetwood with the help of other booksellers, usually Daniel Browne, Jr.,
and Samuel Chapman. This pair, or James Roberts, Chetwood's successor,
published most of Mrs. Haywood's early writings. The staple of her
output during the first decade of authorship was the short amatory
romance like "Love in Excess" and the "exemplary novels" just mentioned.
These exercises in fiction were evidently composed _currente calamo_,
with little thought and less revision, for an eager and undiscriminating
public. Possibly, as Mr. Gosse conjectures,[20] they were read chiefly
by milliners and other women on the verge of literacy. But though
persons of solid education avoided reading novels and eastern tales as
they might the drinking of drams, it is certain that no one of scanty
means could have afforded Mrs. Haywood's slender octavos at the price of
one to three shillings. The Lady's Library ("Spectator" No. 37)
containing beside numerous romances "A Book of Novels" and "The New
Atalantis, with a Key to it," which last Lady Mary Montagu also enjoyed,
and the dissolute country-gentleman's daughters ("Spectator" No. 128)
who "read Volumes of Love-Letters and Romances to their Mother," a
_ci-devant_ coquette, give us perhaps a more accurate idea of the woman
novelist's public. Doubtless Mrs. Haywood's wares were known to the more
frothy minds of the polite world and to the daughters of middle-class
trading families, such as the sisters described in Defoe's "Religious
Courtship," whose taste for fashionable plays and novels was soon to
call the circulating library into being.

Beside the proceeds arising from the sale of her works, Mrs. Haywood
evidently expected and sometimes received the present of a guinea or so
in return for a dedication. Though patrons were not lacking for her
numerous works, it does not appear that her use of their names was
always authorized. In putting "The Arragonian Queen" under the
protection of Lady Frances Lumley, in fact, the author confessed that
she had not the happiness of being known to the object of her praise,
but wished to be the first to felicitate her publicly upon her nuptials.
We may be sure that the offering of "Frederick, Duke of Brunswick-
Lunenburgh" to the hero's namesake, Frederick, Prince of Wales, was both
unsanctioned and unacknowledged. Sometimes, however, the writer's
language implies that she had already experienced the bounty of her
patron, while in the case of the novel dedicated to Sir Richard Steele
at a time when his health and credit were fast giving way, Eliza can
hardly be accused of interested motives. Apparently sincere, too, though
addressed to a wealthy widow, was the tribute to Lady Elizabeth Germain
prefixed to "The Fruitless Enquiry"; and at least one other of Mrs.
Haywood's productions is known to have been in Lady Betty's library. But
these instances are decidedly exceptional. Usually the needy novelist's
dedications were made up of servile adulation and barefaced begging.
With considerable skill in choosing a favorable moment she directed a
stream of panegyric upon William Yonge (later Sir) within two months
after his appointment as one of the commissioners of the treasury in
Great Britain. Soon after Sir Thomas Lombe was made a knight, the wife
of that rich silk weaver had the pleasure of seeing her virtues and her
new title in print. And most remarkable of all, Lady Elizabeth Henley,
who eloped with a rake early in 1728, received Mrs. Haywood's
congratulations upon the event in the dedication of "The Agreeable
Caledonian," published in June, though if we may trust Mrs. Delany's
account of the matter, the bride must already have had time for
repentance. Even grief, the specialist in the study of the passions
knew, might loosen the purse strings, and accordingly she took the
liberty to condole with Col. Stanley upon the loss of his wife while
entreating his favor for "The Masqueraders." But of all her dedications
those addressed to her own sex were the most melting, and from their
frequency were evidently the most fruitful.

The income derived from patronage, however, was at best uncertain and
necessitated many applications. To the public, moreover, a novel meant
nothing if not something new. Eliza Haywood's productiveness, therefore,
was enormous. When she had settled to her work, the authoress could
produce little pieces, ranging from sixty to nearly two hundred pages in
length, with extraordinary rapidity. In 1724, for instance, a year of
tremendous activity, she rushed into print no less than ten original
romances, beside translating half of a lengthy French work, "La Belle
Assemblee" by Mme de Gomez. At this time, too, her celebrity had become
so great that "The Prude, a Novel, written by a Young Lady" was
dedicated to her, just as Mrs. Hearne at the beginning of her career had
put a romance, "The Lover's Week," under the protection of the famous
Mrs. Manley. Between 1720 and 1730 Mrs. Haywood wrote, beside plays and
translations, thirty-eight works of her own composing, one in two stout
volumes and several in two or more parts. If we may judge by the number
and frequency of editions, most of the indefatigable scribbler's tales
found a ready sale, while the best of them, such as "Idalia" (1723),
"The Fatal Secret" (1724), "The Mercenary Lover" (1726), "The Fruitless
Enquiry" and "Philidore and Placentia" (1727), gained for her not a
little applause.

Nor was the young adventuress in letters unhailed by literary men. Aaron
Hill immediately befriended her by writing an epilogue for her first
play and another of Hill's circle, the irresponsible Richard Savage,
attempted to "paint the Wonders of Eliza's Praise" in verses prefixed to
"Love in Excess" and "The Rash Resolve" (1724).[21]

Along with Savage's first complimentary poem were two other effusions,
in one of which an "Atheist to Love's Power" acknowledged his conversion
through the force of Eliza's revelation of the tender passion, while the
other expressed with less rapture the same idea. But it remained for
James Sterling, the friend of Concanen, to state most vigorously the
contemporary estimate of Mrs. Haywood and her early writings.[22] "Great
Arbitress of Passion!" he exclaims,

  "Persuasion waits on all your bright Designs,
  And where you point the varying Soul inclines:
  See! Love and Friendship, the fair Theme inspires
  We glow with Zeal, we melt in soft Desires!
  Thro' the dire Labyrinth of Ills we share
  The kindred Sorrows of the gen'rous Pair;
  Till, pleas'd, rewarded Vertue we behold,
  Shine from the Furnace pure as tortur'd Gold:"

of _Love in Excess_, Part II, and at the front of each successive
edition, have never been reprinted. [Transcriber's note: wording in
original.] A specimen of his praise follows,

  "Thy Prose in sweeter Harmony refines,
  Than Numbers flowing thro' the Muse's Lines;
  What Beauty ne'er could melt, thy Touches fire,
  And raise a Musick that can Love inspire;
  Soul-thrilling Accents all our Senses wound,
  And strike with Softness, whilst they charm with Sound!
  When thy Count pleads, what Fair his Suit can fly?
  Or when thy Nymph laments, what Eyes are dry?
  Ev'n Nature's self in Sympathy appears,
  Yields Sigh for Sigh, and melts in equal Tears;
  For such Descriptions thus at once can prove
  The Force of Language, and the Sweets of Love.
  You sit like Heav'n's bright Minister on High,
  Command the throbbing Breast, and watry Eye,
  And, as our captive Spirits ebb and flow,
  Smile at the Tempests you have rais'd below:
  The Face of Guilt a Flush of Vertue wears,
  And sudden burst the involuntary Tears:
  Honour's sworn Foe, the Libertine with Shame,
  Descends to curse the sordid lawless Flame;
  The tender Maid here learns Man's various Wiles,
  Rash Youth, hence dread the Wanton's venal Smiles--
  Sure 'twas by brutal Force of envious Man,
  First Learning's base Monopoly began;
  He knew your Genius, and refus'd his Books,
  Nor thought your Wit less fatal than your Looks.
  Read, proud Usurper, read with conscious Shame,
  Pathetic _Behn_, or _Mauley's_ greater Name;
  Forget their Sex, and own when _Haywood_ writ,
  She clos'd the fair Triumvirate of Wit;
  Born to delight as to reform the Age,
  She paints Example thro' the shining Page;
  Satiric Precept warms the moral Tale,
  And Causticks burn where the mild Balsam fails; [_sic_]
  A Task reserv'd for her, to whom 'tis given,
  To stand the Proxy of vindictive Heav'n!"

Amid the conventional extravagance of this panegyric exist some useful
grains of criticism. One of the most clearly expressed and continually
reiterated aims of prose fiction, as of other species of writing from
time immemorial, was that of conveying to the reader a moral through the
agreeable channel of example. This exemplary purpose, inherited by
eighteenth century novelists from Cervantes and from the French
romances, was asserted again and again in Mrs. Haywood's prefaces,[23]
while the last paragraphs of nearly all her tales were used to convey an
admonition or to proclaim the value of the story as a "warning to the
youth of both sexes." To modern readers these pieces seem less
successful illustrations of fiction made didactic, than of didacticism
dissolved and quite forgot in fiction, but Sterling and other eulogists
strenuously supported the novelist's claim to moral usefulness.[24] The
pill of improvement supposed to be swallowed along with the sweets of
diversion hardly ever consisted of good precepts and praiseworthy
actions, but usually of a warning or a horrible example of what to
avoid.[25] As a necessary corollary, the more striking and sensational
the picture of guilt, the more efficacious it was likely to prove in the
cause of virtue. So in the Preface to "Lasselia" (1723), published to
"remind the unthinking Part of the World, how dangerous it is to give
way to Passion," the writer hopes that her unexceptionable intent "will
excuse the too great Warmth, which may perhaps appear in some particular
Pages; for without the Expression being invigorated in some measure
proportionate to the Subject, 'twou'd be impossible for a Reader to be
sensible how far it touches him, or how probable it is that he is
falling into those Inadvertencies which the Examples I relate wou'd
caution him to avoid." As a woman, too, Mrs. Haywood was excluded from
"Learning's base Monopoly," but not from an intuitive knowledge of the
passions, in which respect the sex were, and are, thought the superiors
of insensible man.[26] Consequently her chief excellence in the opinion
of her readers lay in that power to "command the throbbing Breast and
watry Eye" previously recognized by the Volunteer Laureate and her other
admirers. She could tell a story in clear and lively, if not always
correct and elegant English, and she could describe the ecstasies and
agonies of passion in a way that seemed natural and convincing to an
audience nurtured on French _romans a longue haleine_ and heroic plays.
Unworthy as they may seem when placed beside the subsequent triumphs of
the novel, her short romances nevertheless kept alive the spirit of
idealistic fiction and stimulated an interest in the emotions during an
age when even poetry had become the handmaid of reason.

But although Eliza had few rivals as an "arbitress of the passions," she
did not enjoy an equal success as the "proxy of vindictive heaven." When
she attempted to apply the caustic of satire instead of the mild balsam
of moral tales, she speedily made herself enemies. From the very first
indeed she had been persecuted by those who had an inveterate habit of
detecting particular persons aimed at in the characters of her
fictions,[27] and even without their aspersions her path was
sufficiently hard.

  "It would be impossible to recount the numerous Difficulties a Woman
  has to struggle through in her Approach to Fame: If her Writings are
  considerable enough to make any Figure in the World, Envy pursues her
  with unweary'd Diligence; and if, on the contrary, she only writes
  what is forgot, as soon as read, Contempt is all the Reward, her Wish
  to please, excites; and the cold Breath of Scorn chills the little
  Genius she has, and which, perhaps, cherished by Encouragement, might,
  in Time, grow to a Praise-worthy Height."[28]

Unfortunately the cold breath of scorn, though it may have stunted her
genius, could not prevent it from bearing unseasonable fruit. Her
contributions to the Duncan Campbell literature, "A Spy upon the
Conjurer" (1724) and "The Dumb Projector" (1725), in which the romancer
added a breath of intrigue to the atmosphere of mystery surrounding the
wizard, opened the way for more notorious appeals to the popular taste
for personal scandal. In the once well known "Memoirs of a Certain
Island adjacent to the Kingdom of Utopia" (1725-6) and the no less
infamous "Secret History of the Present Intrigues of the Court of
Carimania" (1727) Mrs. Haywood found a fit repertory for daringly
licentious gossip of the sort made fashionable reading by Mrs. Manley's
"Atalantis." But though the _romans a clef_ of Mrs. Haywood, like the
juvenile compositions of Mr. Stepney, might well have "made grey authors
blush," her chief claim to celebrity undoubtedly depends upon her
inclusion in the immortal ranks of Grubstreet. Her scandal novels did
not fail to arouse the wrath of persons in high station, and Alexander
Pope made of the writer's known, though never acknowledged connection
with pieces of the sort a pretext for showing his righteous zeal in the
cause of public morality and his resentment of a fancied personal
insult. The torrent of filthy abuse poured upon Eliza in "The Dunciad"
seems to have seriously damaged her literary reputation. During the next
decade she wrote almost nothing, and after her curious allegorical
political satire in the form of a romance, the "Adventures of Eovaai"
(1736), the authoress dropped entirely out of sight. For six years no
new work came from her pen. What she was doing during this time remains
a puzzle. She could hardly have been supported by the rewards of her
previous labors, for the gains of the most successful novelists at this
period were small. If she became a journalist or turned her energies
toward other means of making a livelihood, no evidence of the fact has
yet been discovered. It is possible that (to use the current euphemism)
'the necessity of her affairs may have obliged her to leave London and
even England until creditors became less insistent. There can be little
doubt that Mrs. Haywood visited the Continent at least once, but the
time of her going is uncertain.[29]

When she renewed her literary activity in 1742 with a translation of "La
Paysanne Parvenue" by the Chevalier de Mouhy, Mrs. Haywood did not
depend entirely upon her pen for support. A notice at the end of the
first volume of "The Virtuous Villager, or Virgin's Victory," as her
work was called, advertised "new books sold by Eliza Haywood, Publisher,
at the Sign of Fame in Covent Garden." Her list of publications was not
extensive, containing, in fact, only two items: I. "The Busy-Body; or
Successful Spy; being the entertaining History of Mons. Bigand ... The
whole containing great Variety of Adventures, equally instructive and
diverting," and II. "Anti-Pamela, or Feign'd Innocence detected, in a
Series of Syrena's Adventures: A Narrative which has really its
Foundation in Truth and Nature ... Publish'd as a necessary Caution to
all young Gentlemen. The Second Edition."[30] Mrs. Haywood's venture as
a publisher was transitory, for we hear no more of it. But taken
together with a letter from her to Sir Hans Sloane,[31] recommending
certain volumes of poems that no gentleman's library ought to be
without, the bookselling enterprise shows that the novelist had more
strings than one to her bow.

By one expedient or another Mrs. Haywood managed to exist fourteen years
longer and during that time wrote the best remembered of her works. Copy
from her pen supplied her publisher, Thomas Gardner, with a succession
of novels modeled on the French fiction of Marivaux and De Mouhy, with
periodical essays reminiscent of Addison, with moral letters, and with
conduct books of a nondescript but popular sort. The hard-worked
authoress even achieved a new reputation on the success of her
"Fortunate Foundlings" (1744), "Female Spectator" (1744-6), and her most
ambitious novel, "The History of Miss Betsy Thoughtless" (1751). The
productions known to be hers do not certainly represent the entire
output of her industry during this period, for since "The Dunciad" her
writing had been almost invariably anonymous. One or two equivocal bits
of secret history and scandal-mongering may probably be attributed to
her at the very time when in "Epistles for the Ladies" (1749-50) she was
advocating sobriety, religion, and morality. These suspected lapses into
her old habits should serve as seasoning to the statement of the
"Biographia Dramatica" that Eliza Haywood was "in mature age, remarkable
for the most rigid and scrupulous decorum, delicacy, and prudence, both
with respect to her conduct and conversation." If she was not too old a
dog to learn new tricks, she at least did not forget her old ones. Of
her circumstances during her last years little can be discovered. "The
Female Spectator," in emulation of its famous model, commences with a
pen-portrait of the writer, which though not intended as an accurate
picture, certainly contains no flattering lines. It shows the essayist
both conscious of the faults of her youth and willing to make capital
out of them.

  "As a Proof of my Sincerity, I shall, in the first place, assure him
  [the reader], that for my own Part I never was a Beauty, and am now
  very far from being young; (a Confession he will find few of my Sex
  ready to make): I shall also acknowledge that I have run through as
  many Scenes of Vanity and Folly as the greatest Coquet of them all.--
  Dress, Equipage, and Flattery were the Idols of my Heart.--I should
  have thought that Day lost, which did not present me with some new
  Opportunity of shewing myself.--My Life, for some Years, was a
  continued Round of what I then called Pleasure, and my whole Time
  engross'd by a Hurry of promiscuous Diversions.--But whatever
  Inconveniences such a manner of Conduct has brought upon myself, I
  have this Consolation, to think that the Publick may reap some Benefit
  from it:--The Company I kept was not, indeed, always so well chosen as
  it ought to have been, for the sake of my own Interest or Reputation;
  but then it was general, and by Consequence furnished me, not only
  with the Knowledge of many Occurrences, which otherwise I had been
  ignorant of, but also enabled me ...to see into the most secret
  Springs which gave rise to the Actions I had either heard, or been
  Witness of--to judge of the various Passions of the Human Mind, and
  distinguish those imperceptible Degrees by which they become Masters
  of the Heart, and attain the Dominion over Reason....

  "With this Experience, added to a Genius tolerably extensive, and an
  Education more liberal than is ordinarily allowed to Persons of my
  Sex, I flatter'd myself that it might be in my Power to be in some
  measure both useful and entertaining to the Publick."

A less favorable glimpse of the authoress and her activities is afforded
by a notice of a questionable publication called "A Letter from H---
G--- g, Esq." (1750), and dealing with the movements of the Young
Chevalier. It was promptly laid to her door by the "Monthly Review."[32]

  "The noted Mrs. H--- d, author of four volumes of novels well known,
  and other romantic performances, is the reputed author of this
  pretended letter; which was privately conveyed to the shops, no
  publisher caring to appear in it: but the government, less scrupulous,
  took care to make the piece taken notice of, by arresting the female
  veteran we have named; who has been some weeks in custody of a
  messenger, who also took up several pamphlet-sellers, and about 800
  copies of the book; which last will now probably be rescued from a
  fate they might otherwise have undergone, that of being turned into
  waste-paper, ... by the famous fiery nostrum formerly practised by the
  physicians of the soul in _Smithfield_, and elsewhere; and now as
  successfully used in _treasonable_, as then in _heretical_ cases."

This unceremonious handling of the "female veteran," in marked contrast
to the courteous, though not always favorable treatment of Mrs.
Haywood's legitimate novels, suggests the possibility that even the
reviewers were ignorant of the authorship of "The History of Jemmy and
Jenny Jessamy" (1753) and "The Invisible Spy" (1755). Twenty years
later, in fact, a writer in the "Critical Review" used the masculine
pronoun to refer to the author of "Betsy Thoughtless." It is quite
certain that Mrs. Haywood spent the closing years of her life in great
obscurity, for no notice of her death appeared in any one of the usual
magazines. She continued to publish until the end, and with two novels
ready for the press, died on 25 February, 1756.[33]

"In literature," writes M. Paul Morillot, "even if quality is wanting,
quantity has some significance," and though we may share Scott's
abhorrence for the whole "Jemmy and Jenny Jessamy tribe" of novels, we
cannot deny the authoress the distinction accorded her by the
"Biographia Dramatica" of being--for her time, at least--"the most
voluminous female writer this kingdom ever produced." Moreover, it is
not Richardson, the meticulous inventor of the epistolary novel, but the
past-mistress of sensational romance who is credited with originating
the English domestic novel. Compared with the delicate perceptions and
gentle humor of Fanny Burney and Jane Austen, Mrs. Haywood's best
volumes are doubtless dreary enough, but even if they only crudely
foreshadow the work of incomparably greater genius, they represent an
advance by no means slight. From "Love in Excess" to "Betsy Thoughtless"
was a step far more difficult than from the latter novel to "Evelina."
As pioneers, then, the author of "Betsy Thoughtless" and her obscurer
contemporaries did much to prepare the way for the notable women
novelists who succeeded them. No modern reader is likely to turn to the
"Ouida" of a bygone day--as Mr. Gosse calls her--for amusement or for
admonition, but the student of the period may find that Eliza Haywood's
seventy or more books throw an interesting sidelight upon public taste
and the state of prose fiction at a time when the half created novel was
still "pawing to get free his hinder parts."

FOOTNOTES

[1]
E. Bernbaum, _Mrs. Behn's Biography a Fiction_, PMLA, XXVIII, 432.

[2]
David Erskine Baker, _Companion to the Play House_, 1764.

[3]
The London Parish Registers contain no mention of an Eliza Fowler in
1693, but on 21 January, 1689, O.S., "Elizabeth dau. of Robert ffowler
[Transcriber's note: sic] & Elizabeth his wife" was christened at St.
Peter's, Cornhill. Later entries show that Robert was a hosier to his
trade. Possibly in suppressing the other particulars of her life, Mrs.
Haywood may have consigned to oblivion a year or two of her age, but in
her numerous writings I have not found any allusion that could lead to her
positive identification with the daughter of Robert Fowler.

[4]
He was the author of _An Examination of Dr. Clarke's Scripture-Doctrine
of the Trinity, with a Confutation of it_ (1719). The work is a
paragraph by paragraph refutation from the authority of scripture of the
_Scripture Doctrine of the Trinity_ (1712) by the metaphysical Dr.
Samuel Clarke, whose unorthodox views prevented Queen Caroline from
making him Archbishop of Canterbury. The Reverend Mr. Haywood was upon
safe ground in attacking a book already condemned in Convocation.

[5]
"Whereas Elizabeth Haywood, Wife of the Reverend Mr. Valentine Haywood,
eloped from him her Husband on Saturday the 26th of November last past,
and went away without his Knowledge and Consent: This is to give Notice
to all Persons in general, That if any one shall trust her either with
Money or Goods, or if she shall contract Debts of any kind whatsoever,
the said Mr. Haywood will not pay the same."

[6]
_Tatler_, No. 6 and No. 40.

[7]
W.R. Chetwood, _A General History of the Stage_, 56.

[8]
Genest, III, 59.

[9]
Genest, III, 73.

[10]
John Rich opened the New Theatre in Lincoln's Inn Fields during
December, 1714.

[11]
Genest, III, 113.

[12]
Genest, III, 241.

[13]
_Biographia Dramatica._ The production is mentioned by Genest, III, 281.

[14]
W.R. Chetwood, _A General History of the Stage_, 57.

[15]
Genest, III, 408.

[16]
In Kane O'Hara's later and more popular transformation of Tom Thumb into
a light opera, the song put into the mouth of the dying Grizzle by the
first adapters was retained with minor changes.

  "My body's like a bankrupt's shop,
    My creditor is cruel death,
  Who puts to trade of life a stop,
    And will be paid with this last breath; Oh!"

Apparently O'Hara made no further use of his predecessors.

[17]
S.P. Dom. George I, Bundle 22, No. 97.

[18]
In spite of the fact that "Translated from the French" appeared on the
title-page, Mrs. Haywood has hitherto been accredited with the full
authorship of these letters. They were really a loose translation of
_Lettres Nouvelles.... Avec Treize Lettres Amoureuses d'une Dame a un
Cavalier_ (Second Edition, Paris, 1699) by Edme Boursault, and were so
advertised in the public prints.

[19]
Probably a misprint. When the novels appeared, _Idalia_ was the
Unfortunate Mistress, _Lasselia_ the Self-abandon'd. Perhaps because the
work outgrew its original proportions, or because short novels found a
readier sale, the five were never published under the inclusive
cautionary caption.

[20]
E. Gosse, _Gossip in a Library_, 161, "What Ann Lang Read." Only one of
Mrs. Haywood's novels, _The City Jilt_, was ever issued in cheap form.
T. Bailey, the printer, evidently combined his printing business with
the selling of patent medicines.

[21]
The latter may be read in Savage's Poems, Cooke's edition, II, 162. The
complimentary verses first printed before the original issue.

[22]
His poem _To Mrs. Eliza Haywood on her Writings_ was hastily inserted in
the fourth volume of _Secret Histories, Novels, and Poems_ when that
collection had reached its third edition (1732). In the fourth edition
of ten years later it stands, with the verses already described, at the
beginning of Volume I.

[23]
In the Preface to _Lasselia_ (1723), for instance, she feels obliged to
defend herself from "that Aspersion which some of my own Sex have been
unkind enough to throw upon me, that I seem to endeavour to divert more
than to improve the Minds of my Readers. Now, as I take it, the Aim of
every Person, who pretends to write (tho' in the most insignificant and
ludicrous way) ought to tend at least to a good Moral Use; I shou'd be
sorry to have my Intentions judg'd to be the very reverse of what they
are in reality. How far I have been able to succeed in my Desires of
infusing those Cautions, too necessary to a Number, I will not pretend
to determine; but where I have had the Misfortune to fail, must impute
it either to the Obstinacy of those I wou'd persuade, or to my own
Deficiency in that very Thing which they are pleased to say I too much
abound in--a true description of Nature."

[24]
An eight page verse satire entitled _The Female Dunces. Inscribed to Mr.
Pope_ (1733) after criticizing the conduct of certain well known ladies,
concludes with praise of a nymph who we may believe was intended to
represent Eliza Haywood:

  "Eliza good Examples shews in vain,
  Despis'd, and laugh'd at by the _vicious Train_;
  So bright she shines, she might adorn a Throne
  Not with a _borrow'd_ Lustre, but her Own."

[25]
A single exception was _The Surprise_ (1724), dedicated to Steele in the
following words: "The little History I presume to offer, being composed
of Characters full of Honour and Generosity, I thought I had a fit
Opportunity, by presenting it to one who has made it so much his Study
to infuse those Principles, and whose every Action is a shining Example
of them, to express my Zeal in declaring myself with all imaginable
Regard," etc., etc.

[26]
See the Dedication to _The Fatal Secret_ (1724). "But as I am a Woman,
and consequently depriv'd of those Advantages of Education which the
other Sex enjoy, I cannot so far flatter my Desires, as to imagine it in
my Power to soar to any Subject higher than that which Nature is not
negligent to teach us.
"Love is a Topick which I believe few are ignorant of; there requires no
Aids of Learning, no general Conversation, no Application; a shady Grove
and purling Stream are all Things that's necessary to give us an Idea of
the tender Passion. This is a Theme, therefore, which, while I make
choice to write of, frees me from the Imputation of vain or
self-sufficient:--None can tax me with having too great an Opinion of my
own Genius, when I aim at nothing but what the meanest may perform. "I
have nothing to value myself on, but a tolerable Share of Discernment."

[27]
See the Preface to _The Injur'd Husband_ quoted in Chap. IV.

[28]
Preface to _The Memoirs of the Baron de Brosse_ (1725). A similar
complaint had appeared in the Dedication of _The Fair Captive_ (1721).
"For my own part ... I suffer'd all that Apprehension could inflict, and
found I wanted many more Arguments than the little Philosophy I am
Mistress of could furnish me with, to enable me to stem that Tide of
Raillery, which all of my Sex, unless they are very excellent indeed,
must expect, when once they exchange the Needle for the Quill."

[29]
See a poem by Aaron Hill, _To Eliza upon her design'd Voyage into Spain_
(undated), Hill's _Works_, III, 363. Also _The Husband_, 59. "On a trip
I was once taking to France, an accident happen'd to detain me for some
days at Dover," etc. Mrs. Haywood's relations with Hill have been
excellently discussed by Miss Dorothy Brewster, _Aaron Hill_ (1913),
186.

[30]
The first of these was a translation of the Chevalier de Mouhy's best
known work, _La Mouche, ou les Aventures et espiegleries facetieuses de
Bigand_, (1730), and may have been done by Mrs. Haywood herself. The
second title certainly savors of a typical Haywoodian production, but I
have been unable to find a copy of these alleged publications. Neither
of them was originally published at the Sign of Fame, and they could
hardly have been pirated, since Cogan, who issued the volume wherein the
advertisement appeared, was also the original publisher of
_The Busy-Body_. The _Anti-Pamela_ had already been advertised for
Huggonson in June, 1741, and had played a small part in the series of
pamphlets, novels, plays, and poems excited by Richardson's fashionable
history. If Mrs. Haywood wrote it, she was biting the hand that fed her,
for _The Virtuous Villager_ probably owed its second translation and
what little sale it may have enjoyed to the similarity between the
victorious virgin and the popular Pamela.

[31]
B.M. (MSS. Sloane. 4059. ff. 144), undated.

[32]
_Monthly Review_, II, 167, Jan. 1750.

[33]
The _Biographia Dramatica_ gives this date. Clara Reeve, _Progress of
Romance_, I, 121, however, gives 1758, while Mrs. Griffith, _Collection
of Novels_ (1777), II, 159, prefers 1759. The two novels were
_Clementina_ (1768), a revision of _The Agreeable Caledonian_, and _The
History of Leonora Meadowson_ (1788).




CHAPTER II

SHORT ROMANCES OF PASSION

The little amatory tales which formed Mrs. Haywood's chief stock in
trade when she first set up for a writer of fiction, inherited many of
the characteristics of the long-winded French romances. Though some were
told with as much directness as any of the intercalated narratives in
"Clelie" or "Cleopatre," others permitted the inclusion of numerous
"little histories" only loosely connected with the main plot. Letters
burning with love or jealousy were inserted upon the slightest
provocation, and indeed remained an important component of Eliza
Haywood's writing, whether the ostensible form was romance, essay, or
novel. Scraps of poetry, too, were sometimes used to ornament her
earliest effusions, but the other miscellaneous features of the
romances--lists of maxims, oratory, moral discourses, and conversations
--were discarded from the first. The language of these short romances,
while generally more easy and often more colloquial than the absurd
extravagances of the translators of heroic romances and their imitators,
still smacked too frequently of shady groves and purling streams to be
natural. Many conventional themes of love or jealousy, together with
such stock types as the amorous Oriental potentate, the lover disguised
as a slave, the female page, the heroine of excessive delicacy, the
languishing beauty, the ravishing sea-captain, and the convenient pirate
persisted in the pages of Mrs. Barker, Mrs. Haywood, and Mrs. Aubin. As
in the interminable tomes of Scudery, love and honor supplied the place
of life and manners in the tales of her female successors, and though in
some respects their stories were nearer the standard of real conduct,
new novel on the whole was but old romance writ small.

In attempting to revitalize the materials and methods of the romances
Mrs. Haywood was but following the lead of the French _romancieres_, who
had successfully invaded the field of prose fiction when the passing of
the precieuse fashion and Boileau's influential ridicule[1] had
discredited the romance in the eyes of writers with classical
predilections. Mme de La Fayette far outshines her rivals, but a host of
obscure women, headed by Hortense Desjardins, better known as Mme de
Villedieu, hastened to supply the popular demand for romantic stories.
In drawing their subjects from the histories of more modern courts than
those of Rome, Greece, or Egypt they endeavored to make their
"historical" romances of passion more lifelike than the heroic romances,
and while they avoided the extravagances, they also shunned the
voluminousness of the _romans a longue haleine_. So the stories related
in "La Belle Assemblee" by Mme de Gomez, translated by Mrs. Haywood in
1725 and often reprinted, are nearer the model of Boccaccio's novelle
than of the Scudery romance, both in their directness and in being set
in a framework, but the inclusion, in the framework, of long
conversations on love, morals, politics, or wit, with copious examples
from ancient and modern history, of elegant verses on despair and
similar topics, and of such miscellaneous matter as the "General
Instructions of a Mother to a Daughter for her Conduct in Life," showed
that the influence of the salon was not yet exhausted. In the
continuation called "L'Entretien des Beaux Esprits" (translated in
1734), however, the elaborate framework was so far reduced that fourteen
short tales were crowded into two volumes as compared with eighteen in
the four volumes of the previous work. Writers of fiction were evidently
finding brief, unadorned narrative most acceptable to the popular taste.

That the "novels" inserted in these productions had not ceased to
breathe the atmosphere of romance is sufficiently indicated by such
titles as "Nature outdone by Love," "The Triumph of Virtue," "The
Generous Corsair," "Love Victorious over Death," and "Heroick Love."
French models of this kind supplied Mrs. Haywood with a mine of romantic
plots and situations which she was not slow to utilize.[2] Furthermore,
her natural interest in emotional fiction was quickened by these and
other translations from the French. The "Letters from a Lady of Quality
to a Chevalier" emphasized the teaching of the "Lettres Portugaises,"
while "The Lady's Philosopher's Stone; or, The Caprices of Love and
Destiny" (1725),[3] although claiming to be an "historical novel" in
virtue of being set "in the time, when Cromwell's Faction prevail'd in
England," was almost entirely occupied with the matters indicated in the
sub-title. And in "The Disguis'd Prince: or, the Beautiful Parisian"
(1728) she translated the melting history of a prince who weds a
merchant's daughter in spite of complicated difficulties.[4] Much
reading in books of this sort filled Mrs. Haywood's mind with images of
exalted virtue and tremendous vice, and like a Female Quixote, she saw
and reported the life about her in terms borrowed from the romances. So,
too, Mrs. Manley had written her autobiography in the character of
Rivella.

This romantic turn of mind was not easily laid aside, but the women
writers made some progress toward a more direct and natural
representation of the passions. The advance was due partly, no doubt, to
a perception of the heroic absurdities of French fiction, but also to
the study of Italian _novelle_ and the "Exemplary Novels" of Cervantes.
But even when imitating the compression of these short tales Mrs.
Haywood did not always succeed in freeing herself from the "amour trop
delicat" of the romantic conventions. In two short "novels" appended to
"Cleomelia: or, the Generous Mistress" (1727) the robust animalism of
the Italian tales comes in sharp contrast with the _delicatesse_ of the
French tradition. "The Lucky Rape: or, Fate the best Disposer"
illustrates the spirit of the _novelle_.

Emilia, rusticated to Andalusia to escape falling in love, gives her
heart to Berinthus, whom she meets at a masquerade. On her way to a
second entertainment to meet her lover, her terror of a drunken cavalier
induces her to accept the protection of the amorous Alonzo and paves the
way for her ruin. Berinthus turns out to be her brother Henriquez.
Alonzo, his friend, marries the lady as soon as her identity is
discovered, and all parties are perfectly content.

Though the scene of "The Capricious Lover: or, No Trifling with a Woman"
is likewise laid in Spain, the atmosphere of the story is far different.

Montano, doubtful of Calista's affection for him, feigns to break with
her, and she, though really loving him, returns an indifferent answer
and marries Gaspero out of pique. The distracted lover thereupon falls
upon his sword in the presence of the newly wedded couple, and the
bride, touched by the spectacle of her lover's devotion, languishes and
dies in a few months.

There is little naturalness in the extravagant passion of the second
story, but until sensationalism cloyed the public palate, realism was an
unnecessary labor. By placing the events in some romantic country like
Spain, Portugal, Italy, or even France, any narrative of excessive love
could be made to pass current. The Latin countries were vaguely imagined
by romantic novelists as a sort of remote but actual _pays du Tendre_
where the most extraordinary actions might occur if only "love, soft
love" were the motivating force.

A collection of select novels called "Love in its Variety," advertised
in 1727 as "Written in Spanish by Signior Michel Ban Dello; made English
by Mrs. Eliza Haywood," was apparently a translation from the _novelle_
of Matteo Bandello, probably from a French version.[5] The best examples
of her brief, direct tales, however, are to be found in "The Fruitless
Enquiry. Being a Collection of several Entertaining Histories and
Occurrences, which Fell under the Observation of a Lady in her Search
after Happiness" (1727). Although the scene is laid in Venice, the model
of this framework story was probably not the "Decameron" but the
Oriental tales, known in England through French translations and
imitations of the "Arabian Nights." Intercalated stories were not
uncommon in French romances, but they were almost invariably introduced
as life histories of the various characters. A fantastic framework, with
a hint of magic, fabricated expressly to give unity to a series of
tales, half exemplary, half satirical, points directly to an ultimate
connection with the narratives of Scheherezade and Sutlememe. No attempt
to catch the spirit of the East is discernible, but the vogue of
Oriental tales was evidently beginning to make an impression on French
and English writers of fiction. Care for the moral welfare of her
readers doubtless influenced Mrs. Haywood to assert in the dedication to
Lady Elizabeth Germain that the following "Sheets ...contain the History
of some real Facts," and that the author's chief design in publishing
was to "persuade my Sex from seeking Happiness the wrong Way."

At any rate the moral of the stories suited the taste of the age.[6]

Miramillia, widow of a nobleman in Venice, loses her only son, and is
informed by a soothsayer that she will hear nothing of him until she has
a shirt made for him by a woman perfectly content. She, therefore, seeks
among her acquaintance for the happy woman, but one after another
reveals to her a secret disquiet.

Anziana, married against her will to the Count Caprera, encourages her
former lover, Lorenzo, to continue his friendship for her. Her husband
and father, believing that she is about to prove faithless to her
marriage vows, secretly assassinate Lorenzo, and cause his skeleton to
be set up in Anziana's closet for an object lesson. When she discovers
it, she refuses to be reconciled to her husband, and vows to spend an
hour a day weeping over Lorenzo's remains.

On the night of his marriage Montrano is torn from the arms of Iseria by
his cruel uncle and shipped to Ceylon. Shipwrecked, he becomes the slave
of a savage Incas, whose renegade Italian queen falls in love with him.
But neither her blandishments nor the terrible effects of her
displeasure can make him inconstant to Iseria. After suffering
incredible hardships, he returns to see Iseria once more before entering
a monastery, but she, loyal even to the semblance of the man, refuses to
allow him to leave her.

Stenoclea's doting parents refuse to let her wed Armuthi, a gentleman
beneath her in fortune, and he in hopes of removing the objection goes
on his travels. Her parents die, her brother is assassinated on his way
home to Venice, she becomes mistress of her fortune, and soon marries
her lover. Completely happy, she begins to make a shirt for Miramillia's
son, but before it is completed, a servant who had been wounded when her
brother was killed, returns and identifies Armuthi as the slayer.
Through Miramillia's influence the husband is pardoned, but Stenoclea
retires to a convent.

An adventuress named Maria boasts to Miramillia that she has attained
perfect felicity by entrapping the Marquis de Savilado into a marriage.
She too undertakes the shirt, but in a few days Miramillia hears that
the supposed Marquis has been exposed as an impostor and turned into the
street with his wife.

Violathia endures for a long time the cruelties of her jealous husband,
Count Berosi, but finally yields to the persistent kindness of her
lover, Charmillo. Just as he has succeeded in alienating his wife's
affections, Berosi experiences a change of heart. His conduct makes the
divorce impossible, and she is forced to remain the wife of a man she
loathes, and to dismiss Charmillo who has really gained her love.

Tellisinda, to avoid the reproach of barrenness, imposes an adopted boy
on her husband, but shortly afterward gives birth to a child. She is
forced to watch a spurious but amiable heir inherit the estate of her
own ill-natured son. (Cf. footnote 2 at end of this chapter.)

Even unmarried ladies, Miramillia finds, are not without their
discontents. Amalia is vexed over the failure of a ball gown. Clorilla
is outranked by an acquaintance whose father has obtained preferment.
Claribella pouts because a man has shot himself for love of her rival.
Selinda mourns her lap-dog dead.

Just as Miramillia is ready to give over her search for a happy woman,
Adario, her son, returns in company with a former lover of hers whose
daughter he has saved from a villain at the expense of a wound from
which he has but then recovered. Naturally the girl rewards him with her
hand, and all ends well.[7]

Of the stories in this diversified collection that of Anziana approaches
in kind, though not in degree, the tragic pathos of Isabella and the Pot
of Basil ("Decameron," IV, 5). The second narrative has all the glamor
of adventure in the barbaric East, and the romantic interest that
attaches to lovers separated but eternally constant. The histories of
Stenoclea and of Tellisinda contain situations of dramatic intensity.
But perhaps the story of Violathia is the most worthy of attention on
account both of its defects and of its merits. The weakest part of the
plot is the husband, who is jealous without cause, and equally without
reason suddenly reforms. But the character of Violathia is admirably
drawn. Unlike the usual heroine of Haywoodian fiction she is superior to
circumstance and does not yield her love to the most complacent adjacent
male. As a dutiful wife she resists for a long time the insinuations of
Charmillo, but when she decides to fly to her lover, her husband's tardy
change of heart cannot alter her feelings. Her character is individual,
firm, and palpable. If the story was original with Mrs. Haywood, it
shows that her powers of characterization were not slight when she
wished to exert them. The influence of the _novella_ and of the Oriental
tale produced nothing better.

From other literary forms the makers of fiction freely derived
sensational materials and technical hints. Without insisting too closely
upon the connection between novel and play, we may well remember that
nearly all the early novelists, Defoe excepted, were intimately
associated with the theatre. Mrs. Behn, Mrs. Manley, Mrs. Haywood, and
later Fielding and Mrs. Lennox were successful in both fields. The women
writers especially were familiar with dramatic technique both as actors
and playwrights, and turned their stage training to account when they
wrote prose fiction. Mrs. Haywood's first novel, "Love in Excess"
(1720), showed evidences of her apprenticeship to the theatre. Its three
parts may be compared to the three acts of a play; the principal climax
falls properly at the end of the second part, and the whole ends in
stereotyped theatrical fashion with the marriage of all the surviving
couples. The handling of incident, too, is in the fashion of the stage.
Mrs. Haywood had sufficient skill to build up a dramatic situation, but
she invariably solves it, or rather fails to solve it, by an
interruption at the critical moment, so that the reader's interest is
continually titillated. Of a situation having in itself the germs of a
solution, she apparently had not the remotest conception. When a love
scene has been carried far enough, the coming of a servant, the sound of
a duel near by, or a seasonable outbreak of fire interrupts it. Such
devices were the common stock in trade of minor writers for the theatre.
Dramatic hacks who turned to prose fiction found it only a more
commodious vehicle for incidents and scenes already familiar to them on
the stage. In their hands the novel became simply a looser and more
extended series of sensational adventures. Accident, though tempered in
various degrees by jealousy, hatred, envy, or love, was the supreme
motivating force.

The characters of Mrs. Haywood's "Love in Excess" also inherited many
traits from the debased but glittering Sir Fopling Flutters, Mirabells,
Millamants, and Lady Wishforts of the Restoration stage. Of character
drawing, indeed, there is practically none in the entire piece; the
personages are distinguished only by the degree of their willingness to
yield to the tender passion. The story in all its intricacies may best
be described as the _vie amoureuse_ of Count D'Elmont, a hero with none
of the wit, but with all the gallantry of the rakes of late Restoration
comedy. Two parts of the novel relate the aristocratic intrigues of
D'Elmont and his friends; the third shows him, like Mrs. Centlivre's
gallants in the fifth act, reformed and a model of constancy. It would
be useless to detail the sensational extravagances of the plot in all
its ramifications, but the hero's adventures before and after marriage
may serve as a fair sample of the whole.

D'Elmont, returning to Paris from the French wars, becomes the
admiration of both sexes, but especially in the eyes of the rich and
noble Alovisa appears a conquest worthy of her powers. To an incoherent
expression of her passion sent to him in an anonymous letter he pays no
attention, having for diversion commenced an intrigue with the lovely
Amena. Though Alovisa in a second billet bids him aim at a higher mark,
"he had said too many fine things to be lost," and continues his pursuit
until Amena's father takes alarm and locks her up. Through her maid she
arranges for a secret meeting, and though touched by her father's
reproofs, she is unable to withstand the pleas of the captivating count.
Their tete-a-tete in the Tuilleries, however, is interrupted by
Alovisa's spies, who alarm the house with cries of fire, so that the
lovers find themselves locked out. Half senseless with dismay, Amena
finds shelter in the house of Alovisa, who, though inwardly triumphant,
receives her rival civilly and promises to reconcile her to her father.
D'Elmont is so patently glad to be relieved of his fair charge that she
demands back her letter, but he by mistake gives her one of Alovisa's,
whose handwriting she immediately recognizes. When the polite Count
returns to enquire after her health, she accuses her lover and friend of
duplicity, faints, and letting fall Alovisa's letter from her bosom,
brings about an _eclaircissement_ between D'Elmont and that lady. Before
Amena's recovery the Count hastens away to welcome his brother, and when
the imprudent girl has been safely lodged in a convent, D'Elmont, moved
more by ambition than by love, weds the languishing Alovisa.

After his marriage the Count soon quarrels with his wife and consoles
himself by falling in love with his ward, the matchless Melliora, but
the progress of his amour is interrupted by numerous unforeseen
accidents. The mere suspicion of his inconstancy raises his wife's
jealousy to a fever heat. To expose her rival she pretends to yield to
the persuasions of her wooer, the Baron D'Espernay, but as a result of a
very intricate intrigue both Alovisa and the Baron perish accidentally
on the swords of D'Elmont and his brother.

Melliora retires to a convent, and her lover goes to travel in Italy,
where his charms cause one lady to take poison for love of him, and
another to follow him disguised as the little foot-page Fidelio. In
helping Melliora's brother to elope with a beautiful Italian girl, the
Count again encounters his beloved Melliora, now pursued by the Marquis
de Sanguillier. In a dramatic _denouement_ she deserts the Marquis at
the altar and throws herself upon the protection of her guardian. The
disappointed bridegroom is consoled by the discovery of an old flame who
has long been serving him secretly in the capacity of chambermaid.
Fidelio reveals her identity and dies of hopeless love, pitied by all.
The three surviving couples marry at once, and this time the husbands
"continue, with their fair Wives, great and lovely Examples of conjugal
Affection."

Such, with the omission of all secondary narratives, is the main plot of
Eliza Haywood's first novel.

"Love in Excess" best illustrates the similarity of sensational fiction
to clap-trap drama, but others of her early works bear traces of the
author's familiarity with the theatre. The escape of the pair of lovers
from an Oriental court, already the theme of countless plays including
Mrs. Haywood 's own "Pair Captive," was re-vamped to supply an episode
in "Idalia" (1723), and parts of the same novel are written in concealed
blank verse that echoes the heroic Orientalism of some of Dryden's
tragedies. In the character of Grubguard, the amorous alderman of "The
City Jilt" (1726), Mrs. Haywood apparently had in mind not Alderman
Barber, whom the character little resembles, but rather Antonio in
Otway's "Venice Preserved." And the plot of "The Distressed Orphan, or
Love in a Mad-House" (c. 1726), where young Colonel Marathon feigns
himself mad in order to get access to his beloved Annilia, may perhaps
owe its inspiration to the coarser mad-house scenes of Middleton's
"Changeling."[8] On the whole, however, the drama but poorly repaid its
debt to prose fiction.

An indication of the multifarious origins of the short tales of love is
to be found in the nominal diversity of the setting. The scene, though
often laid in some such passion-ridden land as Spain or Italy, rarely
affects the nature of the story. But as in such novels as "Philidore and
Placentia" and "The Agreeable Caledonian" the characters wander widely
over the face of Europe and even come in contact with strange Eastern
climes, so the writers of romantic tales ransacked the remotest corners
of literature and history for sensational matter. The much elaborated
chronicle of the Moors was made to eke out substance for "The Arragonian
Queen" (1724), a story of "Europe in the Eighth Century," while
"Cleomelia: or, the Generous Mistress" was advertised as the "Secret
History of a Lady Lately Arriv'd from Bengall." The tendency to exploit
the romantic features of outlandish localities was carried to the
ultimate degree by Mrs. Penelope Aubin, whose characters range over
Africa, Turkey, Persia, the East and West Indies, and the North American
continent, often with peculiar geographical results. But neither Mrs.
Aubin nor Mrs. Haywood was able to use the gorgeous local color that
distinguished Mrs. Behn's "Oroonoko," and still less did they command
the realistic imagination that could make the travels of a Captain
Singleton lifelike.

Even when, as in "The Mercenary Lover," the setting is transferred to
"the Metropolis of one of the finest Islands in the World," and the
action takes place "in the neighborhood of a celebrated Church, in the
Sound of whose Bells the Inhabitants of that populous City think it an
Honour to be born,"[9] the change is unaccompanied by any attempt at
circumstantial realism. We are told that Belinda of "The British
Recluse" is a young lady of Warwickshire, that Fantomina follows her
lover to Bath in the guise of a chambermaid, or that "The Fair Hebrew"
relates the "true, but secret history of two Jewish ladies who lately
resided in London," but without the labels the settings could not be
distinguished from the vague and unidentified _mise en scene_ of such a
romance as "The Unequal Conflict." Placentia in England raves of her
passion for Philidore exactly as Alovisa in Paris, Emanuella in
Madrid,[10] or Cleomelia in Bengal expose the raptures and agonies of
their passions. The hero of "The Double Marriage" (1726) rescues a
distressed damsel in the woods outside of Plymouth exactly as one of
Ariosto's or Spenser's knights-errant might have done in the fairy
country of old romance. In the sordid tale of "Irish Artifice," printed
in Curll's "Female Dunciad" (1728), no reader could distinguish in the
romantic names Aglaura and Merovius the nationality or the meanness of a
villainous Irish housekeeper and her son. And though the tale is the
very reverse of romantic, it contains no hint of actual circumstance.
The characters in Mrs. Haywood's early fiction move in an imaginary
world, sometimes, it is true, marked with the names of real places, but
no more truly realistic than the setting of "Arcadia" or "Parthenissa."

Nor are the figures that people the eighteenth century paradise of
romance more definitely pictured than the landscape. They are generally
unindividualized, lay figures swayed by the passions of the moment, or
at best mere "humour" characters representing love's epitome,
extravagant jealousy, or eternal constancy. Pope could make a portrait
specific by the vigorous use of epigrams, but Mrs. Haywood's comments on
her heroes and heroines are but feeble. The description of Lasselia, for
instance, contains no trait that is particular, no characteristic
definitely individual. The girl is simply the type of all that is
conventionally charming in her sex, "splendidly null, dead perfection."

  "But if the grave Part of the World were charm'd with her Wit and
  Discretion, the Young and Gay were infinitely more so with her Beauty;
  which tho' it was not of that dazzling kind which strikes the Eye at
  first looking on it with Desire and Wonder, yet it was such as seldom
  fail'd of captivating Hearts most averse to Love. Her features were
  perfectly regular, her Eyes had an uncommon Vivacity in them, mix'd
  with a Sweetness, which spoke the Temper of her Soul; her Mien was
  gracefully easy, and her Shape the most exquisite that could be; in
  fine, her Charms encreas'd by being often seen, every View discover'd
  something new to be admir'd; and tho' they were of that sort which
  more properly may be said to persuade than to command Adoration, yet
  they persuaded it in such a manner, that no Mortal was able to resist
  their Force." (p. 2.)

Mrs. Haywood's heroes are merely the masculine counterparts of her
women. Bellcour, the type of many more, "had as much Learning as was
necessary to a Gentleman who depended not on that alone to raise his
Fortune: He had also admirable Skill in Fencing, and became a Horse as
well as any Man in the World."[11] Victor over a thousand hearts, the
Haywoodian male ranges through his glittering sphere, ever ready to fall
in or out of love as the occasion demands. D'Elmont of "Love in Excess"
possesses a soul large enough to contain both love and fury at almost
the same moment. A "brulee" with his spouse merely increases his
tenderness for his ward.

  "You have done well, Madam, (said D'Elmont, looking on her with Eyes
  sparkling with Indignation) you have done well, by your impertinent
  Curiosity and Imprudence, to rouze me from my Dream of Happiness, and
  remind me that I am that wretched thing a Husband! 'Tis well indeed,
  answer'd Alovisa, (who saw now that there was no need of farther
  Dissimulation) that any thing can make you remember, both what you
  are, and what I am. You, resum'd he, hastily interrupting her, have
  taken an effectual Method to prove your self a Wife!--a very Wife!--
  Insolent--Jealous--and Censorious!--But Madam, continued he frowning,
  since you are pleased to assert your Privilege, be assur'd, I too
  shall take my turn, and will exert the--Husband! In saying this, he
  flung out of the Room in spite of her Endeavours to hinder him, and
  going hastily through a Gallery which had a large Window that look'd
  into the Garden, he perceiv'd Melliora lying on a green Bank, in a
  melancholy but a charming Posture, directly opposite to the place
  where he was; her Beauties appear'd, if possible more to advantage
  than ever he had seen them, or at least he had more opportunity thus
  unseen by her, to gaze upon them: he in a moment lost all the Rage of
  Temper he had been in, and his whole Soul was taken up with
  Softness.... Ambition, Envy, Hate, Fear, or Anger, every other Passion
  that finds entrance in the Soul, Art and Discretion may disguise; but
  Love, tho' it may be feign'd, can never be conceal'd, not only the
  Eyes (those true and most perfect Intelligencers of the Heart) but
  every Feature, every Faculty betrays it! It fills the whole Air of the
  Person possess'd of it; it wanders round the Mouth! plays in the
  Voice! trembles in the Accent! and shows itself a thousand different
  ways! even Melliora's care to hide it, made it more apparent; and the
  transported D'Elmont, not considering where he was, or who might be a
  witness of his Rapture, could not forbear catching her in his Arms,
  and grasping her with an extasy, which plainly told her what his
  thoughts were, tho' at that time he had not power to put 'em into
  words; and indeed there is no greater Proof of a vast and elegant
  Passion, than the being uncapable of expressing it." (p. 79.)

Oddly enough the early experimenters in fiction never perceived that to
seem real a passion must be felt by a real person. They attempted again
and again to heighten the picture of envy, fear, ambition, rage, or love
by all manner of extraordinary circumstances, but they rarely succeeded
in attaching the emotion to a lifelike character. It was indeed passion,
but passion painted on the void, impalpable. Consequently they almost
never succeeded in maintaining complete verisimilitude, nor was their
character drawing any less shadowy than in the sentimental romances of
Sidney and Lodge. Compare, for example, the first expression of
Rosalynde's love with the internal debate of Mrs. Haywood's
Placentia.[12] Both are cast in soliloquy form, and except that the
eighteenth century romancer makes no attempt to decorate the style with
fantastic conceits, the two descriptions are not essentially different.

"[Placentia] was no sooner at liberty to reflect, than she grew amazed
at herself for having expresd, and still feeling so uncommon a Concern
for the Service she had received from Jacobin [Philidore]; he did no
more, said she, than was his Duty, nay, any Man would have done as much
for a Woman to whom he had not the least obligation, if distressed and
assaulted in the manner she had been--why then, continued she, does the
action appear so charming, so meritorious from him?--'Tis certainly the
surprize to find so much gallantry and courage in a Man of his mean
birth, that has caused this disorder in my Soul--were he my Equal I
should think it was Love had seized me, but Oh! far be it from me to
debase myself so far--Yet, again would she retort, what can I wish in
Man that is not to be found in this too lovely Slave?... Besides, who
knows but that his Descent may be otherwise than he pretends--I have
heard of Princes who have wandered in strange disguises--he may be in
reality as far above me as he seems beneath.... The thought that there
was a possibility for such a thing to be, had no sooner entered into her
head than she indulged it with an infinity of rapture, she painted him
in Imagination the most desperate dying Lover that ever was, represented
the transports she shou'd be in when the blest discovery shou'd be made,
held long discourses with him, and formed answers such as she supposed
he wou'd make on such an occasion. Thus, for some hours did she beguile
her Cares, but Love, who takes delight sometimes to torment his Votarys
wou'd not long permit her to enjoy this satisfaction.... Reason, with
stern remonstrances checked the Romantick turn of her late thoughts, and
showed her the improbability of the hope she had entertained: Were he,
cryed she, with an agony proportioned to her former transports, of any
degree which you'd encourage his pretensions to my Love, he cou'd not
for so long a Time have endured the servile Offices to which he has been
put--Some way his ingenious passion wou'd have found out to have
revealed itself--No, no, he is neither a Lover nor a Gentleman, and I
but raise Chimera's to distract myself ...but Ill [_sic_] retrieve all
yet, Ill discharge him from my house and service--he is an Enchanter,
and has bewitched me from my Reason, and never, never more shall he
behold my face."

The normal character in Eliza Haywood's tales almost invariably
conformed to some conventional type borrowed from the romance or the
stage. The author's purpose was not to paint a living portrait, but to
create a vehicle for the expression of vivid emotion, and in her design
she was undoubtedly successful until the reading public was educated to
demand better things.

On [Transcriber's note: sic] exception, however, to the customary
conventionality of Mrs. Haywood's heroines ought to be noted. Ordinarily
the novelist accepted the usual conception of man the pursuer and woman
the victim, but sometimes instead of letting lovely woman reap the
consequences of her folly after the fashion of Goldsmith's celebrated
lyric, she violated romantic tradition by making her disappointed
heroines retire into self-sufficient solitude, defying society. In real
life the author of these stories was even more uncompromising. Far from
pining in obscurity after her elopement from her husband, she continued
to exist in the broad light of day, gaining an independent living by the
almost unheard of occupation (as far as women were concerned) of
writing. If she was blighted, she gave no indication of the fact.
Something of the same defiant spirit actuated the unfortunate Belinda
and Cleomira of "The British Recluse" (1722).

Belinda, a young lady of fortune in Warwickshire, comes to London on
business and meets at her lodging-house a mysterious fair recluse.
Imagining that their lots may be somewhat akin, she induces the retired
beauty to relate the history of her misfortunes.

Cleomira upon her father's death is removed from the court to the
country by a prudent mother. She does not take kindly to housewifery,
and languishes until friends persuade her mother to let her attend a
ball. There she meets the glorious Lysander, and in spite of her
mother's care, runs away to join him in London. Her ruin and desertion
inevitably follow. The sight of a rival in her place makes her
frantically resolve to die by poison, but the apothecary gives her only
a harmless opiate. Thinking herself dying, she sends a last letter to
her faithless lover. When she awakes and hears how indifferently he has
received the report of her death, she at length overcomes her unhappy
passion, and retires from the world.

Belinda then relates how her marriage with the deserving Worthly was
postponed by her father's death. In the interim the captivating Sir
Thomas Courtal has occasion to render her a slight service at the
overturn of her coach, and fires her with a passion which her mild
esteem for Worthly is too weak to overcome. Courtal perceives and
encourages her fondness, though he poses as Worthly's friend. She gives
him an assignation in a wood, where she is saved from becoming a victim
to his lust only by the timely arrival of her true admirer. In the duel
that ensues Worthly falls, Courtal flees, and a little later Belinda
goes to London in hopes of seeing him. At the playhouse she is only too
successful in beholding him in a box accompanied by his wife and
mistress. From the gossip of her friends she learns that his real name
is Lord----, and from one of the ladies she hears such stories of his
villainy that she can no longer doubt him to be a monster.

Worthly, meanwhile, has recovered from his wound and weds Belinda's
sister. Lysander and Courtal prove to be in reality the same bland
villain, the inconstant Bellamy. His two victims, sympathizing in their
common misfortune, agree to retire together to a remote spot where they
can avoid all intercourse with the race of men. "And where a solitary
Life is the effect of Choice, it certainly yields more solid Comfort,
than all the publick Diversions which those who are the greatest
Pursuers of them can find."

The same admirable sentiment was shared by the surviving heroine of "The
Double Marriage: or, the Fatal Release" (1726), who after witnessing a
signal demonstration of the perfidy of man, resolves to shun for ever
the false sex.

Dazzled by the numerous accomplishments of Bellcour, the charming
Alathia weds him in secret. When he finds that his father has designed
to bestow his hand upon the heiress of an India merchant, he dares not
confess his fault, but lets himself be carried to Plymouth to meet his
intended bride. There he determines to escape from his father during a
hunting party, but while passing a wood, he hears cries and rescues a
fair maiden from violation. The beautiful stranger allows him to conduct
her back to Plymouth, and turns out to be Mirtamene, the woman he is to
marry. Though very much in love with this new beauty, Bellcour cannot
relinquish the thought of Alathia without a struggle. But in fatal
hesitation the time slips by, and he is finally compelled to wed a
second bride. Meanwhile the deserted Alathia hears disquieting reports
of her husband's conduct. In disguise as a boy she travels to Plymouth
to see for herself, confronts her guilty partner, and after hearing his
confession, stabs herself. Overcome by remorse and love, Bellcour
imitates her, while Mirtamene "warn'd by the example of Bellcour, that
Interest, Absence, or a new Passion, can make the most seeming constant
Lover false, took a Resolution ever to contemn and hate that betraying
Sex to which she owed her Misfortune and the Sight of such a Disaster as
she had beheld in Alathia."

Not content to retire in disgust from the world, Glicera, the victim of
fickle man in "The City Jilt" (1726) determines to retaliate upon the
lover who has ruined and abandoned her when the death of her father left
her without a fortune or a protector. To secure her revenge she
encourages the advances of a senile alderman, Grubguard by name, whom
she takes infinite delight in deceiving by the help of an ingenious
confidant. Meanwhile an unfortunate lawsuit and the extravagances of his
wife have ruined the false Melladore, who is obliged to mortgage his
estate to Grubguard. Glicera obtains the deeds from the amorous
alderman, and then sends him packing. Melladore is forced to beg of her
sufficient funds to purchase a commission and later dies in battle. With
the fortune she has won from her various lovers Glicera retires from the
world and henceforth shuns the society of men.

In these three tales Mrs. Haywood followed the guidance of her own
experience when it ran counter to the traditions of romance. The
betrayed heroine ought to have died, or at least to have been immured in
a convent to suffer a living death, but instead of acquiescing in their
fate, Belinda and Cleomira, Mirtamene, and Glicera defy the world, and
in the last case prove that the worm may turn.

Among the works of her first decade of authorship a few effusions in
which Mrs. Haywood has succeeded to a degree in motivating,
characterizing, or analyzing the passions of her characters, must be
exempted from the general charge of commonplaceness. The first of these
is "Idalia: or, the Unfortunate Mistress" (1724), the story of a young
Venetian beauty--like Lasselia, her charms can only be imagined not
described--whose varied amorous adventures carry her over most of Italy.

She is sought by countless suitors, among them the base Florez, whom her
father promptly forbids the house. Idalia's vanity is piqued at the loss
of a single adorer, and more from perverseness than from love she
continues to correspond with him. He makes no further use of her
condescension than to boast of her favors, until at the command of his
patron, Don Ferdinand, he induces Idalia to make an assignation with
him. Ferdinand meets her and not without difficulty at length effects
her ruin. Her lover's friend, Henriquez, in conducting her to a place of
safety in Padua, becomes himself the victim of her charms, quarrels with
Ferdinand, and slays him and is slain. Henriquez' brother, Myrtano, next
succeeds as Idalia's adorer, but learning that he is about to make an
advantageous marriage, she secretly decamps. In her flight the very
guide turns out to be a noble lover in disguise. When she escapes from
him in a ship bound for Naples, the sea-captain pays her crude court,
but just in time to save her from his embraces the ship is captured by
Barbary corsairs--commanded by a young married couple. Though the
heroine is in peasant dress, she is treated with distinction by her
captors. Her history moves them to tears, and they in turn are in the
midst of relating to her the involved story of their courtship, when the
vessel is wrecked by a gale. Borne ashore on a plank, Idalia is succored
by cottagers, and continues her journey in man's clothes. She is loved
by a lady, and by the lady's husband, who turns out to be her dear
Myrtano. Their felicity is interrupted by the jealousy of Myrtano's
wife, who appeals to the Pope and forces the lovers to separate by his
order. Idalia leads a miserable life, persecuted by all the young
gallants of Rome. One day she sees Florez, the first cause of all her
misfortunes, pass the window, and with thoughts bent on revenge sends
him a billet, which he carries to his master. Myrtano keeps the
appointment, muffled in a cloak, and Idalia stabs him by mistake.
Overcome by remorse, she dies by the same knife.

The motivation of the heroine at the beginning of the story, as Miss
Morgan has pointed out,[13]is more elaborate than usual in Haywoodian
romance. To show a young girl's vanity teasing her into an intrigue
required a more delicate appreciation of the passions than the stock
situations in love stories afforded. Obliged to draw upon her own
resources, Mrs. Haywood handled the incidents with a niceness that could
hardly have been expected from the author of "Love in Excess." Her sense
for _vraisemblance_ protected her from many absurdities, though not from
all. For instance, when Idalia to preserve herself from the
importunities of Ferdinand employs the same threat of stabbing herself
that Clarissa Harlowe in similar circumstances holds over Lovelace, the
Italian heroine very naturally tries first to stab her seducer. But
realism vanishes when Idalia begins her romantic flight from place to
place and from lover to lover. The incidents of romance crowd fast
around her. When in man's clothes she is loved by a woman who takes her
for what she seems, and by the woman's husband who knows her for what
she is, the reader cannot help recalling a similar Gordian love-knot in
Sidney's "Arcadia." Perhaps the only convincing detail in the latter
part of the book is the heroine's miserable end. But although the
sentiments of the characters are reported in concealed blank verse that
smacks of theatrical rant, though the absurd Oriental digressions, the
disguises, the frequent poisonings, and fortunate accidents all detract
from the naturalness and plausibility of the tale, yet one cannot deny
the piece occasional merits, which if smothered in extravagances, are
hopeful signs of a coming change. The very excess of strained and
unnatural incidents indicates that the popular palate was becoming
cloyed; for a time the writers of fiction attempted to stimulate it by
spicing the dish, but when the limit of mordancy was reached, a new diet
became imperative.

Though in no sense a soothing draught for the overstrained sensibilities
of romance readers, "The Fatal Secret: or, Constancy in Distress" (1724)
nevertheless represents a valuable part of Mrs. Haywood's contribution
to the technique of the novel. Few of her works indicate more clearly
her power to display the operations of passion dominating a young and
innocent heart.

When the story opens, Anadea is a heart-free maid of sixteen, better
educated than most young girls, and chiefly interested in her studies.
Fearing to leave her unprovided for, her father urges her to marry, and
she, though inclined to a single life, returns a dutiful answer, begging
him to direct her choice. He fixes upon the worthy Chevalier de Semar,
and bids her prepare for the wedding.

  "The Time which the necessary Preparations took up, Anadea pass'd in
  modelling her Soul, as much as possible, to be pleas'd with the State
  for which she was intended.--The Chevalier had many good Qualities,
  and she endeavoured to add to them in Imagination a thousand more.
  Never did any Woman take greater Pains to resist the Dictates of
  Desire, than she did to create them ...yet she had it not in her
  Power to feel any of those soft Emotions, those Impatiencies for his
  Absence, those tender Thrillings in his Presence, nor any of those
  agreeable Perplexities which are the unfailing Consequences of Love
  ...and she began, at length, to lay the Blame on her own want of
  Sensibility, and to imagine she had not a Heart fram'd like those of
  other Women."

At the house of a friend Anadea meets the Count de Blessure and feels
the starts of hitherto unsuspected passion. Beside this new lover the
Chevalier appears as nought. Her mind is racked by an alternation of
hope and despair.

  "In Anxieties, such as hopeless Lovers feel, did the discontented
  Anadea pass the Night:--She could not avoid wishing, though there was
  not the least Room for her to imagine a Possibility of what she
  wish'd:--She could not help praying, yet thought those Prayers a Sin.
  --Her once calm and peaceful Bosom was now all Hurry and Confusion:--
  The Esteem which she had been long labouring to feel for the
  Chevalier, was now turn'd to Aversion and Disdain; and the
  Indifference she had for all Mankind, now converted into the most
  violent Passion for  one ...she thought she could be contended to
  live a single Life, and knew so little of the encroaching Nature of
  the Passion she had entertained, that she believed she should never
  languish for any greater Joy, than that she might, without a Crime,
  indulge Contemplation with the Idea of his Perfections; and to destroy
  that pleasing Theory by marrying with another ...was more terrible to
  her than the worst of Deaths.--Confounded what to do, or rather wild
  that there was nothing she could do that might be of Service to her in
  an Exigence like this, her Mind grew all a Chaos, and the
  unintermitting Inquietudes of her Soul not permitting any Repose, she
  ...had a very good Pretence to keep her Chamber, and receive no
  Visits."

She passes the day in tormenting perplexities, sometimes relieved by
intervals of unsubstantial joy, when she fancies that her affianced may
break off the match for some reason, that his sickness, an accident, or
death may leave her free to wed Blessure. In imagination she pictures to
herself happy meetings with her lover, and even repeats their
conversation. Then recollecting her true situation, she lapses into real
woe and bitterness of heart. The Count, however, has been deeply
affected by her charms, and though he learns that she is engaged to De
Semar, he sends her an appealing letter to discover whether the match is
the result of choice or duty. Upon the receipt of this billet the soul
of Anadea is distracted between the impulses of love and the dictates of
prudence. Finally she writes a discreet, but not too severe reply,
intimating that her choice is due more to duty than to inclination.
Naturally the Count protests vehemently against her sacrificing herself
to a man for whom she cares nothing, vows that the day of her wedding
with De Semar shall be his last upon earth, and entreats a meeting.

  "What now became of the enamour'd Anadea? How was it possible for a
  Heart so prepossessed as hers, to hold out in a Reserve which was very
  near breaking the Strings which held  it--... Yet still the
  Consequences that might attend this Meeting, for a Time repelled the
  Dictates of her Passion.--But it was no more than a faint Struggle;
  Love! all-conquering, all-o'er-powering Love! triumphed over every
  other Consideration! and she consented to his and her own impatient
  Wishes."

Under the pretence of a change of air she goes to a friend's house at
Versailles, where Blessure secretly weds her. After a short period of
felicity, they are betrayed by an officious maid. Blessure kills the
Chevalier, but is himself wounded and cast into prison. His father
secures a pardon by promising the king's mistress that the Count shall
marry her daughter, but Blessure remains constant to Anadea, though
keeping his marriage a secret for fear of infuriating his father. He is
sent away by his displeased parent to learn the virtue of obedience,
while Anadea retires to St. Cloud to await her husband's return. There
the story ends in an unexpected tragedy of incest and blood.

The back-stairs intrigues and the sensational horrors which to the
majority of Mrs. Haywood's readers doubtless seemed the chief attraction
of the story are not different from the melodramatic features of
countless other amatory tales, French and English. But when for a dozen
pages the author seeks to discover and explain the motives of her
characters both by impersonal comment and by the self-revelation of
letters, she is making a noteworthy step--even if an unconscious one--
toward the Richardsonian method of laying bare the inner natures of
ordinary people. She has here pursued the analysis of character as an
end in itself, for in "The Fatal Secret" there is no hint of disguised
scandal, nor any appeal to the pruriency of degenerate readers.
Sensational in the extreme the story is, but nevertheless the progress
of the narrative is delayed while the sentiments of the heroine are
examined in the minutest detail. While better known romancers exploited
chiefly the strange and surprising adventures (other than amorous) of
their characters, or used the _voyage imaginaire_ for the purposes of
satire, Eliza Haywood and her female colleagues stimulated the popular
taste for romances of the heart. In trying to depict the working of
intense human passions they rendered a distinct service to the
development of English fiction.

The story of "The Mercenary Lover" (1726) involved, besides the ability
to body forth emotion, considerable power to show a gradual degradation
in the character of one of the heroines.

The avaricious Clitander gains the moiety of a fortune by marrying the
young, gay Miranda, but cannot rest without securing to himself the
portion of the elder sister as well. Althea's thoughtful and less
volatile nature has hitherto resisted the assaults of love, but her
insidious brother-in-law undermines her virtue by giving her wanton
books and tempting her with soft speeches until she yields to his
wishes. When he attempts to make her sign a deed of gift instead of a
will to provide for their child, she discovers his treachery and flees
to the country. By playing upon her tenderness he coaxes her back and
poisons her. Miranda is fully informed of her husband's villainy, but
contents herself with removing from the house. Thus Clitander loses not
only his sister-in-law's, but his wife's fortune as well, and is
completely unmanned by remorse and apprehension.

The contrast between the characters of the gay and thoughtless wife and
the pensive, pure-minded girl is skilfully managed, and the various
steps in the downward course of Althea's nature are exhibited in detail.
Like Anadea in "The Fatal Secret" she retires to her chamber not to
sleep, but to indulge in the freedom of her thoughts, which are poured
forth at length to let the reader into the secrets of her passion-ridden
bosom. To reveal character in action was beyond the limit of Eliza
Haywood's technique; and once the story is well under way, Althea
becomes as colorless as only a heroine of romance can be. But the
author's effort to differentiate the female characters before the action
begins, and to make a portion of the plot turn upon a psychological
change in one of them shows that even sensation-loving readers were
demanding a stricter veracity of treatment than had hitherto been
necessary.

But perhaps the most careful interlocking of character and event to be
found among these embryo novels is contained in "The Life of Madam De
Villesache. Written by a Lady, who was an Eye-witness of the greatest
part of her Adventures, and faithfully Translated from her French
Manuscript. By Mrs. Eliza Haywood" (1727). Since no original source for
this story has come to light, we may probably assume that the French
manuscript was a complete fabrication on the part of the English author.
At any rate, the tale was one of passion and intrigue such as she
delighted to compose.

Henrietta, daughter of a certain Duke, grows up in obscure circumstances
to be a miracle of beauty. When her father comes to carry her to court,
her rustic lover, Clermont, pleads so effectually that she consents to a
secret union with him. In the glare of the court she half forgets her
country husband until too fatally reminded of him by being sought in
marriage by the Marquis of Ab----lle. Her attempts at evasion are vain,
and rather than face her father's anger, she permits herself to be
married a second time. She has not long enjoyed her new rank when
Clermont, whom she has informed of her step, appears to reproach her and
to claim his rights. Still irresolute, she persuades him by tears and
prayers not to expose her perfidy, and secretly admits him to a
husband's privileges. In due time the pair are caught by the Marquis,
and to avoid his rage confess their prior marriage. Clermont is thrown
into prison, where he dies not without suspicion of poison. Henrietta
retires to convent, but the Duke, her father, in order to gain the
Marquis's estate for her unborn infant, manages to stifle the evidence
of her first marriage. Enraged that he cannot obtain a divorce, the
Marquis resolves to be revenged upon his perjured wife. He intercepts
her coach in a wood outside of Paris and brutally murders her. The Duke
orders her magnificently buried. Although nothing against the Marquis
can be proved, he is not allowed to escape the vengeance of heaven, but
goes mad and in a lucid interval just before death confesses his crimes.

The weakness and irresolution of the heroine are made the pivot of each
turning point in the plot. When she yields to her lover's entreaties to
consummate a hasty marriage; when fear of her father's displeasure
induces her to keep their union a secret; when her love of luxurious
grandeur at court persuades her to contract a more exalted match; when
her terror of Clermont forces her into a shameless expedient for the
sake of mollifying his anger; and when after her exposure by her
husband, the Marquis, she brazens out her trial in hopes of maintaining
the splendor of her rank and fortune, she is welding link by link the
chain of circumstance that draws her to ultimate disaster. She is by no
means a simple heroine motivated by the elementary passions; instead she
is constantly swayed by emotions and desires of the most diverse and
complex nature. After her first taste of court life she learns to look
back on her husband's rusticity with a sort of contempt, and to regret
her precipitate action.

  "Not that she hated Clermont; on the contrary, she had yet very great
  Remains of her former Passion for him, whenever she reflected on the
  Endearments which had past between them: but then she depis'd the
  Meanness of his Extraction, and the Thoughts that she had put him in
  possession of a Title, which gave him the Power, whenever he pleas'd
  to exert it, of calling her from the present Grandeur of her State,
  and obliging her to live with him in a mean Retirement; made all
  Desires instigated by her Affection, immediately give way to that new
  Idol of her Wishes, Greatness! And she more ardently endeavour'd to
  find some Stratagem to prevent him from ever seeing her again, than
  she had formerly pray'd in the Simplicity and Innocence of her
  Affections, never to be separated from him." (p. 14).

When an ambitious marriage is proposed, her first horror at the thought
of deserting her country husband yields to a sort of resignation when
she persuades herself of the necessity of the step. And when she
considers the riches, title, and agreeable person of the Marquis, she
almost disdains herself for hesitating to prefer him to Clermont. Her
life is the tragedy of a soul too indolent to swim against the current
of events. Mrs. Haywood managed to give extraordinary vividness and
consistency to the character of the vacillating Henrietta by making the
plot depend almost entirely upon the indecision of the heroine.
Consequently none of the author's women are as sharply defined as this
weak, pleasure-loving French girl. The character drawing, though too
much subordinated to the sensational elements in the story, is
nevertheless distinct and true to life.

Most probably, however, the few attempts at analysis of character or
interrelation of character and plot were of little concern both to the
author of emotional fiction and to her readers. The romancer's purpose
was not to reveal an accurate picture of life and manners, but to thrill
the susceptible bosom by scenes of tender love, amorous rapture, or
desperate revenge. The department of sensationalism especially exploited
by women writers and generally allowed to be most suited to their genius
is sufficiently indicated by the words typographically emphasized on the
title-page of one of Mrs. Haywood's few essays. "Reflections on the
Various Effects of LOVE, According to the contrary Dispositions of the
Persons on whom it operates. Illustrated with a great many Examples of
the good and bad Consequences of that PASSION. Collected from the best
Ancient and Modern HISTORIES. Intermix'd with the latest AMOURS and
INTRIGUES of Persons of the First Rank of both Sexes, of a certain
Island adjacent to the Kingdom of Utopia. Written by the Author of The
Mercenary Lover, and the Memoirs of the said Island. Love is not sin,
but where 'tis sinful Love. Never before made Publick." To any
contemporary connoisseur of hectic literature such a feast of Love,
Passion, Histories, Amours, and Intrigues as this, offered in the shop
of N. Dobb in the Strand for the small price of one shilling, must have
been irresistible. No less moving was the appeal of Eliza's fiction to
such Biddy Tipkins and Polly Honeycombes as delighted in a tale of
amorous adventure, particularly if it was set in the glittering
atmosphere of the court. A typical story of intrigues among the great is
"Lasselia: or, the Self-Abandoned" (1723).

The heroine, niece of Madame de Montespan, finding herself in danger of
becoming her aunt's rival in the affections of Louis XIV, goes secretly
into the country to visit her friends M. and Mme Valier, where she falls
in love with De L'Amye, a married gentleman. Summoned back to court by
the amorous monarch, Lasselia chooses rather to flee from the protection
of her friends in the disguise of a pilgrim, and led by lucky chance
casts herself on the protection of her lover, who conveys her to a
country inn and there maintains her for some time to their mutual
felicity. Mile Douxmourie, once affianced to De L'Amye but jilted by
him, accidentally discovers the pair and immediately communicates with
the gallant's wife, who with the Valiers soon appears to reclaim the
recreants. The wife rages at her husband, he at the perfidious
Douxmourie, while Lasselia offers to stab herself. By the good offices
of her friends, however, the girl is persuaded to enter a nunnery where
she becomes a pattern of piety. De L'Amye is reconciled to his wife.

In the first few pages of the story the author makes a noteworthy
attempt to create an atmosphere of impending disaster. When De L'Amye
first meets the heroine, three drops of blood fall from his nose and
stain the white handkerchief in her hand, and the company rallies him on
this sign of an approaching union, much to his wife's discomfiture. The
accident and her yet unrecognized love fill Lasselia's mind with uneasy
forebodings. "She wou'd start like one in a Frenzy, and cry out, Oh! it
was not for nothing that those ominous Drops of Blood fell from him on
my Handkerchief!--It was not for nothing I was seiz'd with such an
unusual Horror--Nor is it in vain, that my Soul shrinks, and seems to
dread a second Interview!--They are all, I fear, too sure Predictions of
some fatal Consequence." These gloomy thoughts at length give way to an
ecstasy of despairing love, and when her affection is reciprocated, to a
series of passionate letters and poems, which indeed make necessary the
author's apology for the "too great Warmth" of the style.

Since the ultimate disaster of adventurous heroines was regarded as a
sop to moral readers, Mrs. Haywood frequently failed to gratify her
audience with a happy ending, but occasionally a departure from strict
virtue might be condoned, provided it took place in a country far
removed from England. The scene of "The Padlock: or, No Guard without
Virtue"[14] was appropriately laid in Spain.

Don Lepidio of Seville, by his jealous conduct, completely alienates the
affections of his young and beautiful wife, Violante. She finally writes
a reply to the earnest entreaties of an unknown lover, and though filled
with apprehension at seeing her letter carried off by an ugly black
slave, agrees to meet him. Don Honorius, for it was he who had assumed
the disguise of the slave, proves to be the wonder of his sex. He
persuades her to elope to the house of one of his relations, and after
Lepidio has secured a divorce, marries her with great felicity.

That novels of intrigue, even without the tinsel of court dress and the
romance of French or Spanish setting, were acceptable to Eliza Haywood's
public is shown by the two parts of "The Masqueraders: or, Fatal
Curiosity" (1724-5), which in the most luscious language of passion
narrate the philanderings of a "charming Rover" called Dorimenus, "whose
real Name, for some Reasons, I shall conceal." London masquerades, as
the title indicates, play a large part in the plot. A more sprightly
tale, though still of the unedifying sort, is "Fantomina: or, Love in a
Maze. Being the Secret History of an Amour between two Persons of
Condition." The story is so fantastic that it can hardly be suspected of
having any connection with an actual occurrence, but the novelist was
not unaware of the advertising value of hinted scandal.

A young lady of distinguished birth, beauty, wit, and spirit for a
frolic goes masked to the theatre, and there falling in love with the
agreeable Beauplaisir, begins an intrigue with him. When his ardor
cools, she lures him on again under a different disguise, and thus
manages four several _liaisons_ successively as Fantomina, Celia the
Chambermaid, the Widow Bloomer, and the fair Incognita. Meanwhile she
meets her lover frequently in public assemblies without ever arousing
his suspicion of her double, or rather manifold identity. But at length
she is unable to disguise the effects of her imprudence, her gallant
ungallantly refuses to marry her, and the fair intriguer is packed off
to a convent in France.

Though the story cannot pretend to support the cause of morality, the
style of this piece is unusually clear and straightforward, sometimes
suitably periphrastic, but never inflated. The passion described is that
of real life ungarnished by romance. Only greater refinement was needed
to make the entertainment fit for ladies and gentlemen.

The cardinal defect of some of Mrs. Haywood's romances-in-little lay,
however, in a romantic over-refinement of the passions rather than in a
too vigorous animalism. Full of the most delicate scruples is "The
Surprise: or, Constancy Rewarded" (1724),[15] appropriately dedicated to
the Sir Galahad of comedy, Sir Richard Steele. The story relates how
Euphemia discovers that the seemingly faithless Bellamant has, in
reality, abandoned her on the day set for their marriage because he was
unwilling to have her share in the loss of his fortune. She, meanwhile,
has inherited a convenient sum, redeems him from his creditors, and
after practicing a little mystification to test his constancy, leads him
to the altar. Few of Mrs. Haywood's novels are more entirely moral or
more essentially dull.

Though the scene of "The Rash Resolve: or, the Untimely Discovery"
(1724) is laid in Porto Rico and in Spain, the romancer took little
advantage of her opportunity to introduce the usual "cloak and sword"
incidents of Spanish fiction. Instead her tale is one of generous love
and melting pathos more characteristic of the romance than of the
_novella_ or its successors.

The Porto Rican heiress, Emanuella, is defrauded of her fortune by her
guardian, Don Pedro, and imprisoned in his house to force her to marry
his son, Don Marco. That generous lover helps her to escape to Madrid,
and to emphasize the truth of her claims against his wily father, falls
upon his sword in the presence of the court. Emanuella's title to her
fortune cleared by this extraordinary measure, she continues to reside
at the house of Don Jabin, whose daughter, Berillia, she saves from a
monastery by making up the deficiency in her dowry. The ungrateful girl,
however, resents Emanuella's disapproval of her foppish lover, and
resolves to be revenged upon her benefactress. She, therefore, forwards
Emanuella's affair with Emilius until the lovers are hopelessly
compromised; then taking advantage of the loss of the lady's fortune at
sea, blackens her character to Emilius and provokes him to desert her.
The abandoned Emanuella enters a convent.

Emilius is challenged by Octavio as a rival in the love of Julia, and
though he had never before heard of the lady, he soon becomes her lover
in fact, and eventually marries her. Emanuella escapes from the nunnery
and wanders to a little provincial town where she bears a son to
Emilius. Berillia, who has been rusticated to a village near by in
consequence of her amour, encounters her unfortunate friend by chance
and runs away from her duenna to join her. She persuades Emanuella to
draw a large sum on Don Jabin, robs her, and goes to join her gallant.
The injured lady supports her child by mean drudgery until by chance she
meets Emilius and his wife, who do all they can to comfort her. But worn
out by her afflictions, she dies of a broken heart, leaving her son to
be adopted by his father.

Dr. Johnson might with equal truth have said to Mrs. Haywood as to the
author of the "Memoirs of Miss Sydney Biddulph," "I know not, Madam,
that you have a right ...to make your readers suffer so much." Even the
pathetic "History of Jemmy and Jenny Jessamy" has nothing to surpass the
train of woes exhibited in this earlier tale.

In the same "soft" style are two novels, "The Unequal Conflict: or,
Nature Triumphant" (1725) and its sequel, "Fatal Fondness: or, Love its
own Opposer." The plot begins with the writer's favorite situation.

Philenia, affianced to Coeurdemont, falls in love with Fillamour. By the
help of a confidant, Antonia, the lovers are enabled to arrange a plan
of escape. On the eve of the wedding Fillamour breaks into the house
and, leaving his servants to bind and gag the father, flies immediately
to his soul's adored.

"He threw himself on his knees, as he approach'd the dear mistress of
his soul, and with a voice and manner all soft and  love-inspiring.--Now
madam, said he, if the adoring Fillamour is not unworthy the glory of
your deliverance, I come to offer it, and to assure you, that not only
this, but the service of my whole future life is entirely devoted to
you. The innocent Philenia had not presently the power of replying, the
different emotions of love, and shame, fear, and joy, made such a
confusion in her sentiments, that she could only look the meanings of
them all: Fillamour, however, found enough in this mute language to make
him know, he was in as fair a way of happiness, as he cou'd wish; and
returning her glances with others as languishing, as the most melting
longing love cou'd teach the loveliest eyes in the world, they
continued, for some moments, thus transmitting souls--" until their
confidant hurries them out of the house.

After the elopement Fillamour is distracted by the opposing motives of
love and interest. To marry Philenia means ruin, for his ambitious
uncle, who has proposed an advantageous marriage to him, would never
forgive him for a love match. The innocent cause of his distress finally
discovers his perplexity and agrees to live a single life until they can
marry without loss of fortune. In this state of affairs "their love
seem'd to be a copy of that pure and immaterial passion, which angels
regard each other with, and, which we are allow'd to hope shall be our
portion, when, shaking off our earth, we meet in a happier world, where
we are to live and love forever." The lovers' paradise is invaded by
Philenia's father, who carries her home and locks her up more closely
than before. In a short time she has the shocking intelligence that
Fillamour has married according to the wishes of his worldly uncle. She
still remains constant to him, but "the remainder of her yet surprising
adventures," remarks the author, "and those of Antonia and Coeurdemont
must be told another time, having good reason to doubt my reader will be
tir'd, when I am so myself."

Eliza was perhaps the first to recover from the fatigue, for in a little
more than two months the continuation, costing sixpence more than the
first instalment, was offered to her readers.

After making his marriage of _convenance_ Fillamour again pays his court
to Philenia, and seizing a lucky moment to surprise her on her daily
walk, half by persuasion, half by force, carries his point. But before
they can meet a second time she is carried off by a gang of villains,
who mistake her for another woman. The languishing Misimene, who has
pursued Fillamour into the country in man's clothes, consoles him for
the loss of his first love. Upon his return to town he finds that his
wife has fled to join her lover. Meanwhile Philenia's honor is preserved
by timely shipwreck of the vessel in which the ravishers are carrying
her off. Washed ashore on the inevitable plank, she supports herself
among the fisher folk by weaving nets until after a year's toil she is
relieved by Antonia and Coeurdemont, now happily married. The relation
of their adventures occupies some pages. Philenia comes back to town to
find her lover weltering in his blood, stabbed by the jealous Misimene.
Believing him dead, she seizes the same sword, plunges it into her
bosom, and instantly expires. Misimene goes into frenzies, and Fillamour
alone recovers to live out a life of undying grief.

  "Thus was the crime of giving way to an unwarrantable passion,
  punish'd in the persons of Philenia and Misimene, and that of perjury
  and ingratitude in Fillamour; while the constancy of Antonia, and the
  honour of Coeurdemont, receiv'd the reward their virtues merited, and
  they continued, to their lives end, great and shining examples of
  conjugal affection."

Apparently Philenia's adventures were somewhat too improbable even for
the taste of readers steeped in melodramatic romances, for if we may
judge by the few copies that have survived, these effusions did not
enjoy a wide popularity. But not to be discouraged by failure, Mrs.
Haywood soon produced another extravagant and complicated romance,
entitled "Cleomelia: or, the Generous Mistress. Being the Secret History
of a Lady Lately arriv'd from Bengall" (1727). The scene might equally
well have been laid in the Isle of Wight, but Bengal on the title-page
doubtless served to whet the curiosity of readers.

Gasper, secretly affianced to Cleomelia, is conveyed out of Bengal by an
avaricious father to prevent him from marrying, and she, believing him
unfaithful, gives her hand to the generous Heartlove. Informed of the
truth by a letter from her lover announcing his speedy return, she
boards a ship bound for England, leaving her husband and lover to fight
a duel in which Heartlove falls. Meanwhile the heroine is shipwrecked,
finds a new suitor in the ship's captain, and hearing of her husband's
death and of Gasper's marriage to a Spanish lady, marries the captain.
Hardly has he departed on his first voyage, when the still faithful
Gasper returns to claim her, only to find her again the bride of
another. In despair he goes to England, and when her second husband is
lost at sea, she follows to reward his constancy.

Cleomelia's generosity does not seem to be as notable as the sub-title
would indicate, but the story was evidently intended to illustrate
virtues exalted to a high romantic level.

With the same end in view Mrs. Haywood attempted an even loftier flight
into the empyrean of romance, with the result that "Philidore and
Placentia: or, L 'Amour trop Delicat" (1727) is more conventional and
stilted than any other work from her pen. It imitates closely the heroic
French romances, both in the inflated style and elaborate regard for the
tender passion, and in the structure of the plot with little histories
of the principal characters interspersed at intervals throughout the
story. In substance the tale is simply a mosaic of romantic adventures,
though some of the hero's wanderings in the desert after being marooned
by pirates and especially his encounter with the "tyger" sound like a
faint echo of "Captain Singleton" or of Captain John Smith's "True
Travels."

The noble Philidore falls in love with the rich and beautiful Placentia,
but as his estate is no match for hers, he contents himself with
entering her service in disguise and performing menial offices for the
pleasure of seeing her. One day she hears him singing in a grotto, and
is charmed by the graceful replies he makes to her questions. A little
later he saves her from robbers at the expense of a slight wound. She
offers to make him groom of her chamber, but fearful of being
recognized, he declines. Finally she lays her fortune at his feet, but
he has too much generosity to accept the offer. Leaving a letter
revealing his true rank and his poverty, he sails for Persia. Some time
later, the return of Placentia's long lost brother, by depriving her of
her fortune, puts her on a level with her lover.

Philidore is captured by pirates and with eleven others set on shore on
a desert strand. Three of the little company reach civilization. After
recuperating their strength, they set out for Persia overland, but a
tiger deprives Philidore of his two companions. A little later he
rescues an unknown youth from three assailants, but not before the
stranger has been seriously wounded. A passing traveller carries them to
the castle of a Persian nobleman. There Philidore waits with the utmost
impatience for the wounded man to recover strength enough to relate his
story, but this, as also the misfortunes, perplexities, and dangers to
which the despairing passion of the enamoured Placentia occasioned her
to reduce herself, and the catastrophe of Philidore's surprising fate,
must be told in a Second Part.

Part II. The youthful stranger, concealing his name and family, relates
the sad effects of his love for the favorite wife of the Bashaw of
Liperto, and how by her aid he was enabled to escape from slavery, only
to be pursued and about to be retaken by janizaries when rescued by
Philidore.

Our hero is kindly received by his uncle in Persia, who soon dies and
leaves him sole heir of an enormous fortune. He is now Placentia's equal
in wealth as well as rank, and immediately embarks for England. Driven
into Baravat by contrary winds, he is moved to ransom a female captive
on hearing of her grief at her hard fate, but what is his surprise when
the fair slave proves to be Placentia. "Kisses, embraces, and all the
fond endearments of rewarded passion made up for their want of speech--
in their expressive looks, and eager graspings, the violence of their
mutual flame was more plainly demonstrated, than it could have been by
the greatest elegance of language--those of the Persians that stood by,
who understood not English, easily perceived, not only that they were
lovers, but also that they were so to the most unbounded height of
tender passion."

Placentia relates how she had eluded her brother and set sail to rejoin
her lover, how she had been saved from the arms of the brutal ship's
captain by a timely attack of pirates, and how, sold to a Moslem
merchant and still annoyed by the attentions of the captain, she had
abandoned all thoughts of life till redeemed by Philidore's generosity.

With Placentia, her maid, and young Tradewell, the maid's lover,
ransomed, Philidore sails blissfully to England. But upon landing
Placentia becomes suddenly cold to him. He forces his way into her
house, and finds that her brother is the young stranger whose life he
had saved in Persia. Meanwhile Placentia, whose fortune is now no match
for Philidore's, flees to parts unknown, leaving a letter conjuring him
to forget her. After a long search the brother and lover find her place
of concealment, and the former removes her scruples by settling a large
estate upon her. "Nothing could be more splendid than the celebration of
their nuptials; and of their future bliss, the reader may better judge
by their almost unexampled love, their constancy, their generosity and
nobleness of soul, than by any description I am able to give of it."

"Philidore and Placentia" is one of the few novels by Mrs. Haywood that
do not pretend to a moral purpose. Realism needed some justification,
for realism at the time almost invariably meant a picture of vice and
folly, and an author could not expose objectionable things except in the
hope that they would lessen in fact as they increased in fiction. But in
spite of the disapproval sometimes expressed for fables on the ground of
their inherent untruth, idealistic romances were generally justified as
mirrors of all desirable virtues. Pious Mrs. Penelope Aubin wrote no
other kind of fiction, though she sometimes admitted a deep-dyed villain
for the sake of showing his condign punishment at the hands of
providence. It was perhaps due to the sale of this lady's novels,
largely advertised toward the end of 1727 and apparently very
successful, that Mrs. Haywood was encouraged to desert her favorite
field of exemplary novels showing the dangerous effects of passion for
an excursion into pure romance. That she found the attempt neither
congenial nor profitable may be inferred from the fact that it was not
repeated.

If the highly imaginary romances suffered from an excess of delicacy,
certain other tales by Mrs. Haywood overleaped decency as far on the
other side. The tendency of fiction before Richardson was not toward
refinement. The models, French and Spanish, which writers in England
found profit in imitating, racked sensationalism to the utmost degree by
stories of horrible and perverted lust. All the excitement that could be
obtained from incest, threatened, narrowly averted, or actually
committed, was offered to eager readers. Usually, as in Defoe's "Moll
Flanders" or Fielding's "Tom Jones," ignorance of birth was an essential
element in the plot. A story of this type in which the catastrophe is
prevented by a timely discovery of the hero's parentage, is "The Force
of Nature: or, the Lucky Disappointment" (1725).

Felisinda, daughter of Don Alvario of Valladolid, falls in love with a
dependent of her father's named Fernando, who returns her passion, but
when by a dropped letter she reveals their mutual tenderness, her father
becomes exceedingly disordered and threatens to marry her out of hand to
Don Carlos, who had long solicited the match. That generous lover,
however, refuses to marry her against her will. The disappointment
proves mortal to Don Alvario, who leaves his estate to Felisinda and
Fernando equally, provided they do not marry each other. Felisinda is
committed to the care of an abbess named Berinthia, but by the aid of a
probationer, Alantha, the lovers manage to correspond. They agree that
Fernando shall convert his moiety to ready money, convey it to Brussels,
and there await Felisinda, whose escape he entrusts to a friend,
Cleomas. Alantha, meantime, has fallen in love with Fernando, and
substitutes herself for Felisinda. Cleomas in conducting the supposed
mistress of his friend to the nearest port falls under the influence of
her beauty and attempts to betray her, but is prevented and slain by a
chance passenger, who turns out to be Carlos. He brings Alantha to a
better mind, and conducts her in search of Fernando, but they discover
in Brussels that he has set out again for Spain. When Fernando reaches
Valladolid to inquire what has become of Cleomas and his lady, he is
arrested on the charge of abducting Alantha. At the trial he is accused
of having made away with her, and is sentenced to death, whereupon
Berinthia, the abbess, faints, and being revived, owns him for her son
by Alvario, and "in tears and blessings pours out all the mother on
him." At the proper moment Carlos comes in with Alantha to prove
Fernando's innocence. Felisinda rewards the constancy of Carlos, and
Fernando can do no less than marry Alantha.

Incest is almost the only crime not to be found in the extraordinary
series of barefaced and infamous intrigues crowded into the pages of
"The Injur'd Husband: or, the Mistaken Resentment" (1723). The author
naively remarks in the dedication that "The Subject of the Trifle I
presume to offer, is, The Worst of Women," and she has indeed
out-villained the blackest of her male villains in the character of the
wicked Baroness.

The doting Baron de Tortillee marries the lascivious and extravagant
Mademoiselle La Motte, who promotes the villainous Du Lache to be the
instrument of her vile pleasures. After enjoying several lovers of his
procuring, she fixes her affections upon the worthy Beauclair. Du Lache
despairs of ensnaring him, because he is about to marry the lovely
Montamour, but by a series of base expedients he manages to blacken the
character of that lady in her lover's eyes, and to put the charms of the
Baroness in such a light that Beauclair is at length drawn in to pay his
court to her. For some time she thus successfully deludes her husband,
but when the despicable La Branche openly boasts of her favors and
allows some of her letters to fall into the hands of one of her numerous
lovers, her perfidy is soon completely exposed. To add to her confusion
she hears that the Baron, whom she had drugged into idiocy and sent into
the country, has been cured by a skilful physician and is about to
return. Du Lache despatches two assassins to murder him on the road, but
the Baron by a lucky chance escapes the murderers, forces them to
confess, and sets out to punish his guilty wife. Meanwhile Beauclair
suspects that he has wronged his innocent lady and endeavors to see her,
but she at first refuses to see him, and when by a ruse he gains access
to her presence, will not listen to him or give him any grounds for
hope. In despair he returns to Paris and meets the young Vrayment. He
discovers the infamous Du Lache hiding in a convent. To save his life
the wretch offers to reveal the frauds he had put in practice against
Montamour, but while he is doing so, the Baron meets them, and
concluding that Beauclair is in collusion with the villain, attacks them
both. Beauclair disarms his antagonist and is about to return him his
weapon, when Du Lache stabs the Baron in the back. Vrayment has
witnessed the quarrel and summoned assistance. Beauclair and Du Lache
are haled before a magistrate and are about to be condemned equally for
the crime, when Vrayment reveals herself as Montamour disguised as a
man, and persuades the judge that Beauclair is innocent. Du Lache and
his accomplices are broken on the wheel, the Baroness takes poison, and
Beauclair is united to his faithful Montamour.

In the conduct of the story the writer shows no deficiency in expressing
the passions, but rather a want of measure, for thrill follows thrill so
fast that the reader can hardly realize what is happening. And as if the
lusts and crimes of the Baroness did not furnish enough sensational
incidents, the tender romance of Beauclair and Montamour is superadded.
The hero is a common romantic type, easily inconstant, but rewarded
above his merits by a faithful mistress. A woman disguised as a man was
a favorite device with Mrs. Haywood as well as with other writers of
love stories, but one need read only the brazen Mrs. Charke's memoirs or
Defoe's realistic "Moll Flanders" to discover that it was a device not
unheard of in real life. The actual occurrence of such disguises,
however, made no difference to the female writers of fiction. Anything
soul-stirring, whether from romances or from plays, was equally grist to
their mills.

In seeking for the most dramatic _denouements_ sensational romancers
were not long in perceiving the suspense that could be produced by
involving the chief characters in a trial for their lives. Mrs. Behn had
by that means considerably protracted the interest in "The Fair Jilt:
or, the Amours of Prince Tarquin and Miranda" (1688), and Mrs. Haywood,
following her example, succeeded in giving a last stimulus to the jaded
nerves of the readers of "The Force of Nature" and "The Injur'd
Husband." And finally the title-page of an anonymous work attributed to
her indicates that the struggling authoress was not insensible to the
popular demand for romances of roguery. A prospective buyer might have
imagined that he was securing a criminal biography in "Memoirs of the
Baron de Brosse, Who was Broke on the Wheel in the Reign of Lewis XIV.
Containing, An Account of his Amours. With Several Particulars relating
to the Wars in those Times," but the promise of the title was
unfulfilled, for Mrs. Haywood was no journalist to make capital out of a
malefactor's exit from the world. The whole book is a chronicle of the
Baron's unsuccessful pursuit of a hard-hearted beauty named Larissa,
mingled with little histories of the Baron's rivals, of a languishing
Madam de Monbray, and of Larissa's mother. The fair charmer finally
marries a count, and her lover, plunged into adequate despair, can
barely exert himself to answer a false accusation trumped up by the
revengeful Monbray. With the verdict in his favor the story ends
abruptly, and the promised continuation was apparently never written. We
read nothing of the wars, nor of the Baron's execution on the wheel.

Tortures, tragedies of blood, and heinous crimes added piquancy to Mrs.
Haywood's love stories, but were not the normal material of her
romances. Her talent was chiefly for "soft things." She preferred the
novel of intrigue and passion in which the characters could be run
through a breathless maze of amatory adventures, with a pause now and
again to relate a digressive episode for variety's sake. Typical of this
sort, the best adapted to the romancer's genius, is "The Agreeable
Caledonian: or, Memoirs of Signiora di Morella, a Roman Lady, Who made
her Escape from a Monastery at Viterbo, for the Love of a Scots
Nobleman. Intermix'd with many other Entertaining little Histories and
Adventures which presented themselves to her in the Course of her
Travels." No moralizing, no romantic idealism disturbs the rapid current
of events. It is a pure "cloak and sword" novel, definitely located in
Italy, with all the machinery of secret assignations, escapes from
convents, adventures on the road and at inns, sudden assaults, duels,
seductions, and revenge characteristic of Spanish fiction.

Don Jaques di Morella determines to marry his daughter, Clementina, to a
certain Cardinal, who has offered to renounce the scarlet hat for love
of her. When she piques her lover by her evident unwillingness to wed,
Don Jaques packs her off to a convent at Viterbo. By picking up a copy
of verses Clementina becomes acquainted with Signiora Miramene, who
relates the history of her correspondence with the Baron Glencairn.

Clementina becomes the instrument of the lovers, but no sooner sees the
lovely North Briton than she herself is captivated. In response to her
proffered affection, Glencairn manages by an extraordinary device to
convey her out of the convent. In spite of the rage of Dan Jaques they
escape to Sienna. The further surprising turns in their affairs to be
later communicated to the public.

Part II. At Sienna the lovers enjoy a season of perfect felicity until
Don Jaques comes to town in pursuit of a defaulting steward, discovers
Clementina, and apprehends the pair. While the two are confined in
separate convents awaiting trial, Clementina's maid, Ismenia (who has
already related her little history), becomes their go-between and serves
her mistress the same trick that Clementina had already played upon her
friend Miramene. Ismenia and the faithless Baron decamp to parts
unknown, while Clementina's father starts back to Rome with his recreant
daughter. In man's clothes she escapes from her parent to seek revenge
upon her lover. At an inn she hears a woman in the next room complaining
of her gallant's desertion, and going in to console her, hears the
moving story of Signiora Vicino and Monsieur Beaumont, told as a warning
to the credulous and unwary sex. The injured fair enters a convent.

Still in pursuit of her lover, Clementina on Montelupe meets the funeral
of a young woman who had been torn to pieces by wolves. The chief
mourner proves to be Glencairn. She is hindered in an attempt to stab
him and thrown into prison, where he visits her and disarms her
resentment by offering to marry her. After the ceremony they proceed to
Paris where each plunges into dissipation. Finally they separate,
Clementina dies of a fever, and the Baron is left free to pursue his
inclinations through a possible third part, which, however, was never
written.

After a slumber of forty years "The Agreeable Caledonian" was reprinted,
as the "Monthly Review" informs us, from a copy corrected by Mrs.
Haywood not long before her death.[16] The review continues, "It is like
the rest of Mrs. Haywood's novels, written in a tawdry style, now
utterly exploded; the romances of these days being reduced much nearer
the standard of nature, and to the manners of the living world." Realism
is, indeed, far to seek in the brief but intricate tissue of incidents
that made the novel of 1728. To a taste accustomed to "Sir Charles
Grandison," and "Peregrine Pickle," and "The Sentimental Journey" the
rehash of Eliza Haywood's novel must have seemed very far even from the
manners of the world of fiction. The judgment of the "Critical Review"
was still more savage in its accuracy.[17] "This is a republication of a
dull, profligate Haywoodian production, in which all the males are
rogues, and all the females whores, without a glimpse of plot, fable, or
sentiment." In its uncompromising literalness the critic's verdict ranks
with the learned Ascham's opinion of the "Morte D'Arthur,"--except that
it has not been superseded. The same animadversion might be urged
against Defoe's "Colonel Jacque" or "The Fortunate Mistress." If Mrs.
Haywood sinned against the standards of the age to come, she was not out
of touch with the spirit of her own generation.

As a writer she knew but one unfailing recipe for popularity: whatever
she touched must be forthwith gilded with passion. The chief _raison
d'etre_ for "The Fair Hebrew: or, a True, but Secret History of Two
Jewish Ladies, Who lately resided in London" (1729) was to gratify the
prejudices of anti-Semitic readers, yet it is hardly distinguishable
from her sentimental love stories.

The young and gay Dorante, going to the synagogue for a lark, is tempted
by the sight of a fair hand to break into the woman's apartment and to
expose himself to the charms of the beautiful Kesiah. He engages her in
a correspondence, but at their first interview she gives him clearly to
understand that he can gain nothing from her but by marriage. Driven by
his unhappy passion, he complies with her demand, and she becomes a
Church of England woman. But once married, Kesiah is too proud to permit
the concealment that prudence demands. Though his father is sure to
disinherit them, she insists upon revealing the marriage.

Dorante entrusts his small stock of money to his wife's brother,
Abimelech, in order to start him in trade. The Jew goes to Holland with
a woman whom he has saved from religious murder at the hands of a
Levite, and nothing further is heard from him or the money. Imprisoned
by his creditors, Dorante is persuaded by his wife to sign away the
entail of his estate in return for a sum of money. Thereupon she departs
with the gold and a new gallant, leaving her unhappy husband to be
rescued from want by the kindness, of a younger brother. After the poor
solace of hearing that Kesiah and her paramour have been lost at sea, he
dies of a broken heart.[18]


Though Eliza Haywood exhausted nearly every possible bit of
sensationalism that could be extracted from tales of passion, she almost
never made use of the heroic feats of arms which constituted a no less
important resource of the French romances. Her heroes are victors in
love but not in war. The sole exception is a little romance of Moorish
chivalry in the eighth century. Though this period had already been
pre-empted by Mrs. Manley's "Memoirs of Europe," there is little doubt
that Mrs. Haywood was responsible for "The Arragonian Queen: A Secret
History" (1724), a peculiar blend of heroic adventures in battle,
bullfight, and tournament, with amorous intrigues of the most involved
kind.

Prince Albaraizor of Arragon goes to assist Omar, King of Valencia,
against a traitorous foe, and with the help of the young general,
Abdelhamar, succeeds in vanquishing the enemy, though the latter youth
is seriously wounded while performing miracles of valor. To reward the
conqueror the hand of the Princess Zephalinda is bestowed upon him, but
she unfortunately is already enamored of Abdelhamar, whom she had
learned to love at a bullfight. But in spite of a repining letter from
her constant lover, and in spite of his appearance before her all pale
and trembling from his wounds, the Princess refuses to deviate from her
duty.

  "The next Day the Marriage was celebrated with all the intended
  Magnificence, and on their return from the Mosque, the Prince and
  Princess repair'd to a stately Scaffold, adorn'd with inventive
  Luxury, whence they might behold a Tournament, the Prize of which was
  a Sword richly embellish'd with Diamonds, to be given by the Princess
  to him that should overcome; the whole Court were there, endeavouring
  to outshine each other in the Costliness of their Apparel--within the
  Barriers were all the Flower of the adjoining Kingdoms, drawn thither
  with a Thirst of Fame, and a Desire to shew their Dexterity. The
  Arragonian Noblemen were the Defenders against all Comers, and were
  like to have carried away the Prize, behaving themselves with the
  utmost Skill and Courage, when there appear'd in the Lists a Knight in
  black Armour, whose whole Air and dexterity in Horsemanship
  immediately attracted the Eyes of the numerous Spectators; the first
  Course he made, confirm'd them in the good opinion they had conceiv'd
  of him: in short, no body was able to stand against him, and he
  remain'd Conqueror, with the universal Applause of the whole Company.
  --He waited for some time, to see if no fresh Challengers would offer
  themselves; but none appearing, he was led to the Princess's Scaffold,
  to receive the Reward he had so well merited: He took it with the
  greatest Submission, but without putting up his Beaver, or discovering
  who he was, and kissing it with profound Respect, retir'd, without so
  much as making any obeisance to the King or Prince; and mixing himself
  with the Crowd of Knights, got off without being discover'd. Every
  body was surpriz'd at the uncourteous Behaviour of so otherwise
  accomplish'd a Cavalier, but none could possibly give the least guess
  at who it should be--the succeeding Diversions soon put him out of
  every body's Thoughts but Zephalinda's; she well knew it could be none
  but Abdelhamar, and trembled lest he should have been discovered,
  fearing his concealing his Recovery, and his disrespectful Carriage
  towards her Father and her Husband, might have given room to Surmises
  prejudicial to her Honour: but when watching him with her Eyes, and
  seeing him get off unfollow'd, or observ'd, she then began afresh to
  pine at Fate, who could render Abdelhamar Conqueror in every Action
  that he undertook, and only vanquish'd when he fought in hopes of
  gaining her."

The Prince and his bride return to their own country to receive the
crown. By the most tender assiduities Albaraizor has almost succeeded in
gaining the love of his wife when Abdelhamar again intrudes as
ambassador to congratulate him on his coronation. Though her old love
returns more strongly than ever, the Queen guards her honor well, and
insists that her lover marry Selyma, a captive Princess. But that lady,
stung by Abdelhamar's indifference, learns to hate him, and out of
revenge persuades the King that his wife is unfaithful to him. An
indiscreet letter from Abdelhamar confirms his suspicions. He orders
both Queen and ambassador cast into prison and by his woes destroys the
happiness of the whole court.

The passages relating the monarch's love and jealousy are described with
a fulness entirely lacking in the tournament scene quoted above, and we
may fairly infer that both writer and reader were more deeply interested
in affairs of the heart than in feats of arms, however glorious. The
emphasis given to love rather than to war in this tale is significant as
a contrast to the opposite tendency in such romances of a century later
as "Ivanhoe," in which a tournament scene very similar in outline to
that in "The Arragonian Queen" is told with the greatest attention to
warlike detail, while the love story, though not allowed to languish, is
kept distinctly subordinate to the narrative of chivalric adventure.
Mrs. Haywood, however, was too warm-blooded a creature to put aside the
interests of the heart for the sake of a barbarous Gothic brawl, and too
experienced a writer not to know that her greatest forte lay in painting
the tender rather than the sterner passions.

In this respect she forms a decided contrast to Defoe, whose men and
women are almost never startled out of their matter-of-fact attitude.
His picaresque characters, though outwardly rogues or their female
counterparts, have at bottom something of the dissenting parson and
cool-headed, middle-aged man of business. Whatever else they may be,
they are never love-sick. Passion is to them a questionable asset, and
if they marry, they are like to have the matter over with in the course
of half a paragraph. Eliza Haywood, however, possessed in excess the one
gift that Defoe lacked. To the scribbling authoress love was the force
that motivated all the world. Crude and conventional as are many of her
repeated attempts to analyze the workings of a mind under the sway of
soft desires, she nevertheless succeeded now and then in actuating her
heroines with genuine emotion. Both romance and realism were woven into
the intricate web of the Richardsonian novel, and the contribution of
Mrs. Haywood deserves to be remembered if only because she supplied the
one element missing in Defoe's masterpieces. Each writer in his day was
considered paramount in his or her particular field.[19]


FOOTNOTES
[1]
_Les Heros de Roman_, 1664, circulated in MS. and printed in 1688
without the consent of the author. Not included in Boileau's _Works_
until 1713.

[2]
The story of Tellisinda, who to avoid the reproach of barrenness imposes
an adopted child upon her husband, but later bearing a son, is obliged
to see a spurious heir inherit her own child's estate, was borrowed with
slight changes from La Belle Assemblee, I, Day 5, and used in Mrs.
Haywood's _Fruitless Enquiry_, (1727).

[3]
_La Pierre philosophale des dames, ou les Caprices de l'amour et du
destin_, by Louis Adrien Duperron de Castera, (1723), 12mo.

[4]
_L'Illustre Parisienne_, (1679), variously attributed to Prechac and to
Mme de Villedieu, had already been translated as _The Illustrious
Parisian Maid, or The Secret Amours of a German Prince_, (1680). A
synopsis is given by H.E. Chatenet, _Le Roman et les Romans d'une femme
de lettres ... Mme de Villedieu_, (Paris, 1911), 253-9.

[5]
I have not seen a copy of the book.

[6]
Mrs. E. Griffith's comment on the work is typical of the tendency to
moralize even the amusements of the day. See _A Collection of Novels_,
(1777), II, 162. "The idea on which this piece is founded, has a good
deal of merit in it; as tending to abate envy, and conciliate content;
by shewing, in a variety of instances, that appearances are frequently
fallacious; that perfect or permanent happiness is not the lot of mortal
life; and that peace of mind and rational enjoyment are only to be found
in bosoms free from guilt, and from intimate connection with the
guilty."

[7]
I have omitted two or three unessential stories in the analysis.

[8]
Act I, sc. ii. In the novel the heroine is shut up by a miserly hunks of
an uncle to force her into a detested mercenary match with his son. In
the play the mistress is the wife of the old and jealous keeper of the
asylum.

[9]
Preface to _The Mercenary Lover_, (1726).

[10]
_The Rash Resolve_, (1724).

[11]
_The Double Marriage_, (1726).

[12]
Lodge's _Rosalynde, ed._ E.C. Baldwin, p. 19. _Philidore and Placentia_
(1727), p. 12.

[13]
Miss C.E. Morgan, _The Novel of Manners_, (1911), 100.

[14]
A companion-piece to the third edition of _The Mercenary Lover_, (1728).

[15]
A companion-piece to _The Fatal Secret: or, Constancy in Distress_.

[16]
_Monthly Review_, XXXVIII, 412, May, 1768. _Clementina; or the History
of an Italian Lady, who made her Escape from a Monastery,_ etc.

[17]
_Critical Review_, XXV, 59.

[18]
In both editions is advertised "Persecuted Virtue: or, the Cruel Lover.
A True Secret History, Writ at the Request of a Lady of Quality," which
was advertised also in the _Daily Post_, 28 Nov. 1728. I have not found
a copy.

[19]
An anonymous poem prefixed to Mrs. Elizabeth Boyd's _The Happy
Unfortunate; or, the Female Page_ (1737) testifies to Mrs. Haywood's
reputation in the following terms:

  "Yeild [_sic_] Heywood yeild, yeild all whose tender Strains,
  Inspire the Dreams of Maids and lovesick Swains;
  Who taint the unripen'd Girl with amorous Fire,
  And hint the first faint Dawnings of Desire:
  Wing each Love-Atom, that in Embryo lies,
  And teach young Parthenissa's Breasts to rise.
  A new Elisa writes," etc., etc.




CHAPTER III


THE DUNCAN CAMPBELL PAMPHLETS

Only once did Eliza Haywood compete with Defoe upon the same ground.
Both novelists were alive to the value of sensational matter, but as we
have seen, appealed to the reader's emotional nature from different
sides. Defoe with his strong interest in practical life looked for
stirring incidents, for strange and surprising adventures on land and
sea, for unusual or uncanny occurrences; whereas Mrs. Haywood, less a
journalist than a romancer, rested her claim to public favor upon the
secure basis of the tender passions. In the books exploiting the deaf
and dumb prophet Duncan Campbell, whose fame, once illustrated by
notices in the "Tatler" and "Spectator,"[1] was becoming a little dimmed
by 1720, each writer chose the kind of material that the natural
propensity and previous experience of each had trained him or her to use
with the greatest success.

Accordingly the "History of the Life and Adventures of Mr. Duncan
Campbell, a gentleman who, though deaf and dumb, writes down any
stranger's name at first sight, with their future contingencies of
fortune: Now living in Exeter Court, over against the Savoy in the
Strand," published by Curll on 30 April, 1720, and written largely by
Defoe, devoted only four chapters directly to the narrative of the
conjuror's life, while four chapters and the Appendix were given over to
disquisitions upon the method of teaching deaf and dumb persons to read
and write; upon the perception of demons, genii, or familiar spirits;
upon the second sight; upon magic in all its branches; and upon the laws
against false diviners and soothsayers. Beside showing the keenness of
his interest in the supernatural, the author deliberately avoided any
occasion for talking gossip or for indulging "persons of airy tempers"
with sentimental love-tales. "Instead of making them a bill of fare out
of patchwork romances and polluting scandal," reads the preface signed
by Duncan Campbell, "the good old gentleman who wrote the adventures of
my life has made it his business to treat them with a great variety of
entertaining passages which always terminate in morals that tend to the
edification of all readers, of whatsoever sex, age, or profession."
Those who came to consult the seer on affairs of the heart, therefore,
received only the scantiest mention from his biographer, and never were
the languishing and sighing of Mr. Campbell's devotees described with
any romantic glamor. On the contrary, Defoe portrayed in terse and
homely phrases the follies and affectations of the dumb man's fair
clients. The young blooming beauty who found little Duncan "wallowing in
the dust" and bribed him with a sugarplum to reveal the name of her
future husband; the "sempstress with an itching desire for a parson";
housekeepers in search of stolen goods; the "widow who bounced" from one
end of the room to the other and finally "scuttled too airily downstairs
for a woman in her clothes"; and the chambermaid disguised as a fine
lady, who by "the toss of her head, the jut of the bum, the sidelong
leer of the eye" proclaimed her real condition--these types are treated
by Defoe in a blunt realistic manner entirely foreign to Eliza Haywood's
vein. Some passages,[2] perhaps, by a sentiment too exalted or by a
description in romantic style suggest the hand of another writer,
possibly Mrs. Haywood, but more probably William Bond, in whose name the
reprint of 1728 was issued.[3] But in the main, the book reflected
Defoe's strong tendency to speculate upon unusual and supernatural
phenomena, and utterly failed to "divulge the secret intrigues and
amours of one part of the sex, to give the other part room to make
favorite scandal the subject of their discourse."[4]

That Defoe had refrained from treating one important aspect of Duncan
Campbell's activities he was well aware. "If I was to tell his
adventures with regard, for instance, to women that came to consult him,
I might, perhaps, have not only written the stories of eleven thousand
virgins that died maids, but have had the relations to give of as many
married women and widows, and the work would have been endless."[5] In
his biography of the Scotch prophet he does not propose to clog the
reader with any adventures save the most remarkable and those in various
ways mysterious.

The "method of swelling distorted and commented trifles into volumes" he
is content to leave to the writers of fable and romance. It was not long
before the press-agents of the dumb presager found a romancer willing to
undertake the task that Defoe neglected. Mrs. Haywood in her association
with Aaron Hill and his circle could hardly have escaped knowing William
Bond, who in 1724 was playing Steele to Hill's Addison in producing the
numbers of the "Plain Dealer." Instigated perhaps by him, the rising
young novelist contributed on 19 March, 1724, the second considerable
work on the fortune-teller, under the caption: "A Spy upon the Conjurer:
or, a Collection of Surprising Stories, with Names, Places, and
particular Circumstances relating to Mr. Duncan Campbell, commonly known
by the Name of the Deaf and Dumb Man; and the astonishing Penetration
and Event of his Predictions. Written to my Lord---- by a Lady, who for
more than Twenty Years past; has made it her Business to observe all
Transactions in the Life and Conversation of Mr. Campbell."[5a]

"As long as Atalantis shall be read," some readers were sure to find
little to their taste in the curious information contained in the first
biography of Campbell, but Mrs. Haywood was not reluctant to gratify an
appetite for scandal when she could profitably cater to it. Developing
the clue afforded her by the announcement in Defoe's "Life and
Adventures" of a forthcoming little pocket volume of original letters
that passed between Mr. Campbell and his correspondents,[6] she composed
a number of epistles as coming from all sorts of applicants to the
prophet. These missives, however, were preceded by a long letter
addressed to an anonymous lord and signed "Justicia," which was chiefly
concocted of anecdotes illustrative of the dumb man's powers. Unlike the
incidents in Defoe's work, the greater number of the stories relate to
love affairs in the course of which one party or the other invoked the
seer's assistance. Although the author was thoroughly acquainted with
the previous history of Mr. Campbell,[7] she was evidently more
interested in the phenomena of passion than in the theory of divination,
A brief discussion of astrology, witchcraft, and dreams easily led her
to a narrative of "Mr. Campbell's sincerity exemplify'd, in the story of
a lady injured in the tenderest part by a pretended friend." A glance
through the table of contents reveals the preponderance of such headings
as "A strange story of a young lady, who came to ask the name of her
husband"; "A whimsical story of an old lady who wanted a husband";
"Reflections on the inconstancy of men. A proof of it in a ruin'd girl,
that came to ask Mr. Campbell's advice"; "A story of my Lady
Love-Puppy"; "A merry story of a lady's chamber-maid, cook-maid, and
coach-man," and so on. Evidences of an attempt to suggest, if not actual
references to, contemporary scandal, are to be found in such items as "A
strange instance of vanity and jealousy in the behaviour of Mrs. F--- ";
"The particulars of the fate of Mrs. J---- L---- "; and "A story of
the Duke of---- 's mistress." It is not surprising that "Memoirs of a
Certain Island" appeared within six months of "A Spy upon the Conjurer."

When "Justicia" refers to her personal relations with the lord to whom
her letter is addressed, her comments are still more in keeping with the
acknowledged forte of the lady novelist. They are permeated with the
tenderest emotions. The author of "Moll Flanders" and "The Fortunate
Mistress" might moralize upon the unhappy consequences of love, but he
was inclined to regard passion with an equal mind. He stated facts
simply. Love, in his opinion, was not a strong motive when uncombined
with interest. But Eliza Haywood held the romantic watchword of all for
love, and her books are a continual illustration of _Amor vincit omnia_.
In the present case her words seem to indicate that the passions of love
and jealousy so often experienced by her characters were not unfamiliar
to her own breast. Even Duncan Campbell's predictions were unable to
alter her destiny.

  "But tho' I was far enough from disbelieving what he said, yet Youth,
  Passion, and Inadvertency render'd his Cautions ineffectual. It was in
  his Hand-Writing I first beheld the dear fatal Name, which has since
  been the utter Destruction of my Peace: It was from him I knew I
  should be undone by Love and the Perfidy of Mankind, before I had the
  least Notion of the one, or had seen any of the other charming enough
  to give me either Pain or Pleasure.... Yet besotted as I was, I had
  neither the Power of defending myself from the Assaults of Love, nor
  Thought sufficient to enable me to make those Preparations which were
  necessary for my future Support, while I had yet the means" ...(p.
  13).

  "Yet so it is with our inconsiderate Sex!--To vent a present Passion,
  --for the short liv'd Ease of railing at the Baseness of an ungrateful
  Lover,--to gain a little Pity,--we proclaim our Folly, and become the
  Jest of all who know us.--A forsaken Woman immediately grows the
  Object of Derision,--rallied by the Men, and pointed at by every
  little Flirt, who fancies herself secure in her own Charms of never
  being so, and thinks 'tis want of Merit only makes a Wretch.

  "For my dear Lord, I am sensible, tho' our Wounds have been a long
  time heal'd, there yet remains a Tenderness, which, if touch'd, will
  smart afresh.--The Darts of Passion, such as we have felt, make too
  indeliable an Impression ever to be quite eraz'd;--they are not
  content with the eternal Sear they leave on the Reputation ..."
  (p.76).

These passages are in substance and style after Eliza Haywood's manner,
while the experiences therein hinted at do not differ essentially from
the circumstances of her own life.

The various aspects of love and jealousy are also the theme of the
second and third parts of "A Spy upon the Conjurer."[8] The two packets
of letters were merely imaginary, unless the pseudonymous signatures of
some of the missives may have aided contemporary readers to "smoke"
allusions to current gossip. At any rate the references are now happily
beyond our power to fathom.

Apparently the taste for Duncan Campbell anecdotes was stimulated by the
piquant sauce of scandal, for beside the several issues of "A Spy upon
the Conjurer" a second and smaller volume of the same sort was published
on 10 May, 1725. This sixpenny pamphlet of forty pages, entitled "The
Dumb Projector: Being a Surprizing Account of a Trip to Holland made by
Mr. Duncan Campbell. With the Manner of his Reception and Behaviour
there. As also the various and diverting Occurrences that happened on
his Departure," was, like the former work, couched in the form of a
letter to a nobleman and signed "Justicia." Both from internal
evidence[9] and from the style it can be assigned with confidence to the
author of "A Spy upon the Conjurer." The story, relating how Mr.
Campbell was induced to go into Holland in the hope of making his
fortune, how he was disappointed, the extraordinary instances of his
power, and his adventures amatory and otherwise, is of little importance
as a narrative. The account differs widely from that of Campbell's trip
to the Netherlands in the "Life and Adventures" of 1720.

Soon after the publication of "The Dumb Projector" Defoe also made a
second contribution to the now considerable Duncan Campbell literature
under the title of "The Friendly Daemon: or, the Generous Apparition.
Being a True Narrative of a Miraculous Cure newly performed upon ... Dr.
Duncan Campbell, by a familiar Spirit, that appeared to him in a white
surplice, like a Cathedral Singing Boy." The quotation of the story from
Glanvil already used by the prophet's original biographer, and the keen
interest in questions of the supernatural displayed by the writer, make
the attribution of this piece to Defoe a practical certainty. Evidently,
then, Eliza Haywood was not the only one to profit by keeping alive the
celebrity of the fortune-teller.

The year 1728 was marked by the reissue of the "Life and Adventures" as
"The Supernatural Philosopher ... by William Bond," whose probable
connection with the work has already been discussed, and by the
publication in the "Craftsman"[10] of a letter, signed "Fidelia,"
describing a visit to Duncan Campbell. The writer, who professes an
intense admiration for Mr. Caleb D'Anvers and all his works, relates how
the dumb oracle, after writing down her name, had prophesied that the
Craftsman would certainly gain his point in 1729. She concludes with
praise of Mr. Campbell, and an offer to conduct Caleb to visit him on
the ensuing Saturday. That the communication was not to be regarded as a
companion-piece to the letter from Dulcibela Thankley in the "Spectator"
(No. 474), was the purport of the editorial statement which introduced
it: "I shall make no other Apology for the Vanity, which I may seem
guilty of in publishing the following Letter, than assuring the Reader
it is _genuine_, and that I do it in Complyance with the repeated
Importunity of a _fair Correspondent_." The style of the letter does not
strongly suggest that of "A Spy upon the Conjurer," though the
concluding sentence, "_Love_ shall be there too, who waits forever upon
_Wit_," is a sentiment after Eliza's heart. And moreover, though
"Fidelia" and "Justicia" may be one and the same persons, Mr. D'Anvers'
assurances that the letter is genuine are not to be relied upon with too
much confidence, for had he wished to praise himself, he would naturally
have resorted to some such device.

The last volume relating to the Scotch wizard did not appear until 1732,
two years after Campbell's death. "Secret Memoirs of the late Mr. Duncan
Campbel, The famous Deaf and Dumb Gentleman. Written by Himself, who
ordered they should be publish'd after his Decease," consisted of 164
pages devoted to miscellaneous anecdotes of the prophet, a reprint of
Defoe's "Friendly Daemon" (p. 166), "Original Letters sent to Mr.
Campbel by his Consulters" (p. 196), and "An Appendix, By Way of
Vindication of Mr. Duncan Campbel, Against That groundless Aspersion
cast upon him, That he but pretended to be Deaf and Dumb. By a Friend of
the Deceased" (p. 225). The authorship of this book has received but
slight attention from students of Defoe, and still remains something of
a puzzle. No external evidence on the point has yet come to light, but
some probable conclusions may be reached through an examination of the
substance and style.

In the first place, there is no probability--the statement on the
title-page notwithstanding--that Mr. Campbell himself had anything to do
with the composition of the "Memoirs." Since the magician had taken no
part in the literary exploitation of his fame during his lifetime, it is
fair to infer that he did not begin to do so two years after his death.
Moreover, each of the three writers, Bond, Defoe, and Eliza Haywood,
already identified with the Campbell pamphlets was perfectly capable of
passing off fiction as feigned biography. Both the author of "Memoirs of
a Cavalier" and the scribbler of secret histories had repeatedly used
the device. There is no evidence, however, that William Bond had any
connection with the present work, but a large share of it was almost
certainly done by Defoe and Mrs. Haywood.

The former had died full of years on 26 April, 1731, about a year before
the "Secret Memoirs" was published. It is possible, however, that he may
have assembled most of the material for the book and composed a number
of pages. The inclusion of his "Friendly Daemon" makes this suspicion
not unlikely. And furthermore, certain anecdotes told in the first
section, particularly in the first eighty pages, are such stories as
would have appealed to Defoe's penchant for the uncanny, and might well
have been selected by him. The style is not different from that of
pieces known to be his.

But that the author of "Robinson Crusoe" would have told the "little
History" of the young woman without a fortune who obtains the husband
she desires by means of a magic cake (p. 86) is scarcely probable, for
the story is a sentimental tale that would have appealed to love-sick
Lydia Languishes. As far as we know, Defoe remained hard-headed to the
last. But Mrs. Haywood when she was not a scandal-monger, was a
sentimentalist. The story would have suited her temperament and the
tastes of her readers. It is told so much in her manner that one could
swear that the originator of the anecdote was _aut Eliza, aut diabola_.
A few pages further on (p. 104) appears the incident of a swaggerer who
enters the royal vault of Westminster Abbey at dead of night on a wager,
and having the tail of his coat twitched by the knife he has stuck in
the ground, is frightened into a faint--a story which Mrs. Haywood later
retold in different words in her "Female Spectator."[11] The "Secret
Memoirs" further informs us by a casual remark of Mr. Campbell's that
Eliza Haywood was well acquainted with the seer.

  "Sometimes, when surrounded by my Friends, such as Anthony Hammond,
  Esq; Mr. Philip Horneck, Mr. Philips, Mr.----, Mrs. Centlivre, Mrs.
  Fowk, Mrs. Eliza Haywood, and other celebrated Wits, of which my
  House, for some Years has been the general Rendezvous, a good Bowl of
  Punch before me, and the Glass going round in a constant Circle of
  Mirth and Good Humour, I have, in a Moment, beheld Sights which has
  froze my very Blood, and put me into Agonies that disordered the whole
  Company" (p. 131).

The last anecdote in the first section is a repetition at some length of
the story of Campbell's adventures in Holland, not as related in Defoe's
"Life and Adventures," but according to the version in Mrs Haywood's
"Dumb Projector." The beginning, which has to do with a grave old
gentleman who was bit by a viper, is told in almost the same words;
indeed some letters that passed between the characters are identically
the same, and the end, though much abbreviated, contains a number of
sentences taken word for word from the earlier telling of the story.
Finally, Mrs. Haywood was the first and hitherto the only writer of the
Campbell pamphlets who had printed letters supposedly addressed to the
prophet by his clients. The device was peculiarly hers. The "Original
Letters sent to Mr. Campbel by his Consulters" in the "Secret Memoirs"
are similar to those already composed by her for "A Spy upon the
Conjurer." There is no reason to think that she did not invent the later
epistles as well as the former.

If, then, a number of anecdotes in the "Secret Memoirs" are suggestive
of Mrs. Haywood's known writings, and if one of them remained in her
memory thirteen years later; if the pamphlet carefully alludes to Eliza
Haywood as one of the dumb seer's particular friends, and if it repeats
in slightly different form her peculiar account of the dumb projector's
journey into Holland; and if, finally, the book contains a series of
letters to Campbell from fictitious correspondents fashioned on the last
already used by her, we may conclude that in all likelihood the
authoress whose name had previously been associated with Duncan Campbell
literature was again concerned in writing or revising this latest work.
At least a cautious critic can say that there is no inherent
improbability in the theory that Defoe with journalistic instinct,
thinking that Campbell's death in 1730 might stimulate public interest
in the wizard, had drafted in the rough the manuscript of a new
biography, but was prevented by the troubles of his last days from
completing it; that after his death the manuscript fell into the hands
of Mrs. Haywood, or perhaps was given to her by the publishers Millan
and Chrichley to finish; that she revised the material already written,
supplemented it with new and old matter of her own, composed a packet of
Original Letters, and sent the volume to press. The origin of the
"Appendix, by Way of Vindication of Mr. Duncan Campbel" remains unknown,
and any theory about the authorship of the "Secret Memoirs" must be
regarded in last analysis as largely conjectural.[11a]

Though the author of the original "Life and Adventures" has received
most of the credit due to Campbell's biographer, Mrs. Haywood, as we
have seen, was not less active in exploiting the deaf and dumb
gentleman. Her "Spy upon the Conjurer" was fubbed off upon the public as
often as Defoe's earlier volume, and neither writer could claim any
advantage over the other from his second and slighter contribution. Each
held successfully his own coign of vantage. Eliza Haywood, in
contemporary opinion, outranked Defoe almost as far as an interpreter of
the heart as he surpassed her in concocting an account of a new marvel
or a tale of strange adventure. The arbitress of the passions indeed
wrote nothing to compare in popularity with "Robinson Crusoe," but
before 1740 her "Love in Excess" ran through as many editions as "Moll
Flanders" and its abridgments, while "Idalia: or, the Unfortunate
Mistress" had been reprinted three times separately and twice with her
collected novels before a reissue of Defoe's "Fortunate Mistress" was
undertaken. When in 1740 Applebee published a new edition of "Roxana,"
he had it supplemented by "a continuation of nearly one hundred and
fifty pages, many of which are filled with rubbish about women named
Cleomira and Belinda."[12] Here again Mrs. Haywood's red herring crossed
the trail of Defoe, for oddly enough the sheets thus accurately
characterized were transcribed word for word from Eliza's second novel,
"The British Recluse." At the point where the heroine swallows a
sleeping potion supposing it poison, faints, and is thought to be dead,
the narrative breaks off abruptly with the words:

  "Though the History of Cleomira and Belinda's Misfortunes, may be
  thought foreign to my Affairs ... yet it is absolutely necessary I
  should give it a Place, because it is the Source, or Spring, of many
  strange and uncommon Scenes, which happened to me during the remaining
  Part of my Life, and which I cannot give an Account of without"
  ...[13]

The pages which follow relate how Roxana became reconciled to her
daughter, died in peace, and was buried at Hornsey. The curious reader
finds, however, no further mention of Belinda and her friend. Evidently
Applebee's hack simply stole as much copy as he needed from an almost
forgotten book, trusting to receive his money before the fraud was
discovered. The volumes of Eliza Haywood were indeed a mine of emotional
scenes, and those who wished to read of warm desires or palpitating
passions had to turn to her romances or do without. Wretched as her work
seems in comparison to the modern novel, it was for the time being the
nearest approach to idealistic fiction and to the analysis of human
feelings. Defoe's romances of incident were the triumphant culmination
of the picaresque type; Mrs. Haywood's sentimental tales were in many
respects mere vague inchoations of a form as yet to be produced. But
when freed from the impurities of intrigue and from the taint of
scandal, the novel of heart interest became the dominant type of English
fiction. Unfortunately, however, Eliza Haywood was too practical a
writer to outrun her generation. The success of "A Spy upon the
Conjurer" may have convinced her that a ready market awaited stories of
amorous adventure and hinted libel. At any rate, she soon set out to
gratify the craving for books of that nature in a series of writings
which redounded little to her credit, though they brought her wide
notoriety.

FOOTNOTES
[1]
_Tatler_, No. 14; _Spectator_, Nos. 323, 474, 560.

[2]
Particularly the incongruous description of Duncan Campbell's first
appearance in London, where the writer finds the "heavenly youth" seated
like a young Adonis in the "center of an angelic tribe" of "the most
beautiful females that ever my eyes beheld," etc. G.A. Aitken's edition
of _The Life and Adventures of Mr. Duncan Campbell_, 87-9.

[3]
_The Supernatural Philosopher_ ... by William Bond, of Bury St. Edmonds
[Transcriber's note: sic], Suffolk. The preface signed by Campbell to
Defoe's _Life and Adventures_ states that the book was revised by "a
young gentleman of my acquaintance." Professor Trent, however, includes
Mrs. Haywood with Bond as a possible assistant in the revision. See _The
Cambridge History of English Literature_, IX, 23.

[4]
Neither Defoe nor Mrs. Haywood contributed to the little budget of
miscellaneous matter prefixed to the second issue of the _Life and
Adventures_ (August, 1720) and sometimes found separately under the
title: _Mr. Campbell's Pacquet, for the Entertainment of Gentlemen and
Ladies. Containing I. Verses to Mr. Campbell, Occasioned by the History
of his Life and Adventures. By Mrs. Fowke, Mr. Philips, &c. II. The
Parallel, a Poem. Comparing the Poetical Productions of Mr. Pope, with
the Prophetical Predictions of Mr. Campbell. By Capt. Stanhope_, [i. e.
W. Bond.] _III. An Account of a most surprizing Apparition; sent from
Launceston in Cornwall. Attested by the Rev. Mr. Ruddie, Minister
there._ London: For T. Bickerton. 1720. See W. Lee, _Daniel Defoe_,
322-8.

[5]
_Life and Adventures of Mr. Duncan Campbell_, 171.

[5a]
This volume was announced in the _British Journal_ as early as Dec. 15,
1722.

[6]
She or Bond may have inserted the passage to advertise a projected work.
Mr. Spectator had already remarked of the letters that came to his
office:  "I know some Authors, who would pick up a _Secret History_ out
of such materials, and make a Bookseller an Alderman by the Copy." (No.
619.)

[7]
Defoe's _Life and Adventures_ is mentioned on pp. 17 (with a quotation),
61, 111, 246, 257.

[8]
Part II. Being a Collection of Letters found in Mr. Campbell's Closet.
By the Lady who wrote the foregoing sheets. Part III. Containing some
Letters from Persons of Mr. Campbell's more particular Acquaintance.

[9]
"The Pleasure with which you received my _Spy_ on the Conjurer,
encourages me to offer you a little Supplement to it, having since my
finishing that Book, had the opportunity of discovering something
concerning Mr. Campbell, which I believe your Lordship will allow to be
infinitely more surprizing than any Thing I have yet related." _The Dumb
Projector_, 5. Mr. G. A. Aitken, in his introduction to Defoe's _Life
and Adventures_, gives the two pieces unhesitatingly to Mrs. Haywood,
while other students of Defoe,--Leslie Stephen, Lee, Wright, and
Professor Trent,--are unanimous in their opinion that the first
exploiter of the dumb wizard could have had no hand in the writing of
these amplifications. The latest bibliographer of romances and tales,
Mr. Arundell Esdaile, however, follows the B.M. catalogue in listing
_The Dumb Projector_ under the convenient name of Defoe.

[10]
No. 125, Saturday. 23 November, 1728.

[11]
_The Female Spectator_, 1745, II, 246.

[11a]
In 1734 appeared a compilation of tables for computing Easter, etc.,
entitled _Time's Telescope Universal and Perpetual, Fitted for all
Countries and Capacities_ ... By _Duncan Campbell_. What connection, if
any, this book had with the fortune-teller or with any of the persons
connected with his biography appears not to have been determined.

[12]
G.A. Aitken, Introduction to _The Fortunate Mistress_, viii.

[13]
_The Fortunate Mistress; or, a History of the Life and Vast Variety of
Fortunes of Mademoiselle de Beleau_.... London: Printed for E. Applebee.
1740. p. 359. Pp. 300-59 are taken from _The British Recluse_.





CHAPTER IV


SECRET HISTORIES AND SCANDAL NOVELS

Some tentative experiments in the way of scandal-mongering may be found
in Mrs. Haywood's work even before the first of her Duncan Campbell
pamphlets. Many of the short romances discussed in the second chapter
were described on the title-page as secret histories, while others
apparently indistinguishable from them in kind were denominated novels.
"Love in Excess" and "The Unequal Conflict," for instance, were given
the latter title, but a tale like "Fantomina," evidently imaginary,
purported to be the "Secret History of an Amour between two Persons of
Condition." "The British Recluse" was in sub-title the "Secret History
of Cleomira," and "Cleomelia: or, the Generous Mistress" claimed to be
the "Secret History of a Lady Lately arriv'd from Bengall." The writer
attached no particular significance to her use of the term, but employed
it as a means of stimulating a meretricious interest in her stories. In
fact she goes out of her way in the Preface to "The Injur'd Husband" to
defend herself and at the same time to suggest the possibility that her
novel might contain references to English contemporaries. The defence is
carefully worded so that it does not constitute an absolute denial, but
rather whets the curiosity.

  "It is not, therefore, to excuse my Want of Judgment in the Conduct,
  or my Deficiency of Expressing the Passions I have endeavour'd to
  represent, but to clear myself of an Accusation, which, I am inform'd,
  is already contrived and prepared to thunder out against me, as soon
  as this is publish'd, that I take this Pains. A Gentleman, who
  applies the little Ingenuity he is Master of to no other Study than
  that of sowing Dissention among those who are so unhappy, and indeed
  unwise, as to entertain him, either imagines, or pretends to do so,
  that tho' I have laid the Scene in Paris, I mean that the Adventure
  shou'd be thought to have happen'd in London; and that in the
  Character of a French Baroness I have attempted to expose the
  Reputation of an English Woman of Quality. I shou'd be sorry to think
  the Actions of any of our Ladies such as you'd give room for a
  Conjecture of the Reality of what he wou'd suggest. But suppose there
  were indeed an Affinity between the Vices I have describ'd, and those
  of some Woman he knows (for doubtless if there be, she must be of his
  Acquaintance) I leave the World to judge to whom she is indebted for
  becoming the Subject of Ridicule, to me for drawing a Picture whose
  Original is unknown, or to him who writes her Name at the Bottom of
  it.

  "However, if I had design'd this as a Satyr on any Person whose Crimes
  I had thought worthy of it, I shou'd not have thought the Resentment
  of such a one considerable enough to have obliged me to deny it. But
  as I have only related a Story, which a particular Friend of mine
  assures me is Matter of Fact, and happen'd at the Time when he was in
  Paris: I wou'd not have it made Use of as an Umbrage for the Tongue of
  Scandal to blast the Character of any one, a Stranger to such detested
  Guilt."

Before long the term "secret history" fell into disrepute, so that
writers found it necessary to make a special plea for the veracity of
their work. "The Double Marriage," "The Mercenary Lover," and
"Persecuted Virtue" were distinguished as "true secret histories," and
in the Preface to "The Pair Hebrew: or, a True, but Secret History of
Two Jewish Ladies, Who lately resided in London" Mrs. Haywood at once
confessed the general truth of the charge against the type and defended
the accuracy of her own production.

  "There are so many Things, meerly the Effect of Invention, which have
  been published, of late, under the Title of SECRET HISTORIES, that, to
  distinguish this, I am obliged to inform my Reader, that I have not
  inserted one Incident which was not related to me by a Person nearly
  concerned in the Family of that unfortunate Gentleman, who had no
  other Consideration in the Choice of a Wife, than to gratify a present
  Passion for the Enjoyment of her Beauty."

About 1729 Eliza Haywood seems to have found the word "Life" or
"Memoirs" on the title-page a more effective means for gaining the
credence of her readers, and after that time she wrote, in name at
least, no more secret histories. The fictions so denominated in "Secret
Histories, Novels and Poems" were in no way different from her novels,
and had only the slightest, if any, foundation in fact.

A novel actually based upon a real occurrence, however, is "Dalinda, or
the Double Marriage. Being the Genuine History of a very Recent, and
Interesting Adventure" (1749), not certainly known to have been written
by Mrs. Haywood, but bearing in the turns of expression, the letters,
and the moralized ending, almost indubitable marks of her handiwork. One
at least of her favorite quotations comes in at an appropriate point,
and the Preface to the Reader states that the author's sole design is to
show the danger of inadvertently giving way to the passions--a stock
phrase with the author of "Love in Excess." The "Monthly Review" informs
us that the story is "the affair betwixt Mr. Cresswell and Miss Scrope,
thrown into the form of a novel."[1] The situation is somewhat similar
to that described in "The Mercenary Lover."

Dalinda's unhappy passion for Malvolio incites him to ruin her, and
though he deludes her with an unregistered marriage at the Fleet, he has
no scruples against marrying the rich Flavilla. Wishing to possess both
Flavilla's fortune and Dalinda's charms, he effects a reconciliation
with the latter by promising to own their prior contract, but when he
comes out into the open and proposes to entertain her as a mistress, she
indignantly returns to her grandmother's house, where she summons her
brother and her faithful lover, Leander, to force her perfidious husband
to do her justice. The latter half of the novel is a tissue of intrigue
upon intrigue, with a complication of lawsuits and letters in which
Malvolio's villainy is fully exposed, and he is forced to separate from
Flavilla, but is unable to exert his claims upon Dalinda. She in turn
cannot wring from him any compensation, nor can she in conscience
recompense the faithful love of Leander while her husband is living.
Thus all parties are sufficiently unhappy to make their ways a warning
to the youth of both sexes.

Evidently the history, though indeed founded on fact, differs from the
works of Mrs. Haywood's imagination only in the tedious length of the
legal proceedings and the uncertainty of the outcome. The only reason
for basing the story on the villainy of Mr. Cresswell was to take
advantage of the momentary excitement over the scandal. A similar appeal
to the passion for diving into the intrigues of the great is apparent in
the title of a novel of 1744, "The Fortunate Foundlings: Being the
Genuine History of Colonel M----rs, and his Sister, Madame du P----y,
the issue of the Hon. Ch----es M----rs. Son of the late Duke of R----
L----D. Containing many wonderful Accidents that befel them in their
Travels, and interspersed with the Characters and Adventures of Several
Persons of Condition, in the most polite Courts of Europe." The Preface
after the usual assurances that the work is compiled from original
documents and is therefore more veracious than "the many Fictions which
have been lately imposed upon the World, under the specious Titles of
Secret Histories, Memoirs, &c," informs us that the purpose of the
publication is to encourage virtue in both sexes by showing the
amiableness of it in real characters. Instead of exposing vice in the
actions of particular persons, the book is a highly moral laudation of
those scions of the house of Manners whose names are adumbrated in the
title. It cannot, therefore, be classed as a scandal novel or secret
history.

The latter term, though loosely applied to the short tale of passion for
the purpose of stimulating public curiosity, meant strictly only that
type of pseudo-historical romance which interpreted actual history in
the light of court intrigue. In France a flood of histories, annals,
anecdotes, and memoirs,--secret, gallant, and above all true,--had been
pouring from the press since 1665. The writers of these works proceeded
upon the ostensible theory that secret history in recognizing woman's
influence upon the destiny of nations was more true than "pure" history,
which took into account only religious, political, social, or moral
factors in judging the conduct of kings and statesmen. Did not Anthony
suffer the world to slip from his fingers for the love of Cleopatra?
Although the grand romances had a little exhausted the vein of classical
material, Mme Durand-Bedacier and Mme de Villedieu compiled sundry
annals of Grecian and Roman gallantry.[2] But the cycle of French secret
history was much more extensive. Romancing historians ferreted out a
prodigious amount of intrigue in every court from that of Childeric to
Louis XIV, and set out to remodel the chronicle of the realm from the
standpoint of the heart. Nearly every reign and every romantic hero was
the subject of one or more "monographs," among which Mme de La Fayette's
"Princesse de Cleves" takes a prominent place. The thesaurus and omnium
gatherum of the genus was Sauval's "Intrigues galantes de la cour de
France" (1695), of which Dunlop remarks that "to a passion, which has,
no doubt, especially in France, had considerable effect in state
affairs, there is assigned ... a paramount influence." But romancers
with a nose for gallantry had no difficulty in finding material for
their pens in England during the times of Henry VIII, Elizabeth, and
Henrietta Maria. But most frequently of all was chosen the life of the
Queen of Scots.

From fifteen or sixteen French biographies of the romantic Mary[3] Mrs.
Haywood drew materials for an English work of two hundred and forty
pages. "Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots: Being the Secret History of her
Life, and the Real Causes of all Her Misfortunes. Containing a Relation
of many particular Transactions in her Reign; never yet Published in any
Collection" (1725) is distinguishable from her true fiction only by the
larger proportion of events between set scenes of burning passion which
formed the chief constituent of Eliza's romances. As history it is
worthless, and its significance as fiction lies merely in its attempt to
incorporate imaginative love scenes with historical fact. It was
apparently compiled hastily to compete with a rival volume, "The History
of the Life and Reign of Mary Stuart," published a week earlier, and it
enjoyed but a languid sale. Early in 1726 it passed into a second
edition, which continued to be advertised as late as 1743.

"Mary Stuart" is the only one of Mrs. Haywood's romances that strictly
deserves the name of secret history. But late in 1749 a little romance
that satisfied nearly all the conditions of the type insinuated itself
into the pamphlet shops without the agency of any publisher. "A Letter
from H--G--g, Esq. One of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber to the Young
Chevalier, and the only Person of his own Retinue that attended him from
Avignon, in his late Journey through Germany, and elsewhere; Containing
Many remarkable and affecting Occurrences which happened to the P----
during the course of his mysterious Progress" has been assigned to Mrs.
Haywood by the late Mr. Andrew Lang,[4] perhaps on the authority of the
notice in the "Monthly Review" already quoted.

The pretended author of the letter was a certain Henry Goring, a
gentleman known to be in attendance upon the last of the Stuarts. The
preface gives a commonplace explanation of how the letter fell into the
hands of the editor through a similarity of names. Apparently the
pamphlet was thought seditious because it eulogized the Young Chevalier,
hinting how advantageous it would be to have him on the throne. As the
secret journey progresses, the Prince has a chance to expose his
admirable political tenets in conversation with a nobleman of exalted
rank; in rescuing a young woman from a fire, caring for her in distress,
and refusing to take advantage of her passion for him, he gives evidence
of a morality not accorded him by history and proves "how fit he is to
govern others, who knows so well how to govern himself"; and when
assaulted by hired assassins, he manifests courage and coolness, killing
one of the bravos with his own hand. It is unnecessary to review the
various stages in the Pretender's travels, which are related with a
great air of mystery, but amount to nothing. The upshot is that the
Prince has not renounced all thoughts of filling the throne of his
ancestors, but has ends in view which the world knows nothing of and
which will surprise them all some day. Had the Prince shown himself more
susceptible to the charms of the merchants' daughters who fell in his
way, this bit of romancing might claim the doubtful distinction of being
Mrs. Haywood's only original secret history, but as it stands, no part
of the story has the necessary motivation by passion. The intrigue is
entirely political.

There would seem to be little dangerous stuff in this performance even
five years after the insurrection of 1745, but if as the "Monthly
Review" ill-naturedly hints, Eliza Haywood really suffered for her
supposed connection with it, the lesson was at any rate effectual, for
the small references to the P---- occasionally noticeable in her
previous works suddenly ceased, and thereafter the novelist scrupulously
refrained from mingling fiction and politics. Previously, however, she
had at least once attempted to write a political satire elaborately
disguised as a romance. In July, 1736, according to the list of books in
the "Gentleman's Magazine," numerous duodecimo volumes emanated from the
shop of S. Baker and were sold under the title of "Adventures of Eovaai,
Princess of Ijaveo. A Pre-Adamitical History. Interspersed with a great
Number of remarkable Occurrences, which happened, and may again happen,
to several Empires, Kingdoms, Republicks, and particular Great Men ...
Written originally in the Language of Nature, (of later Years but little
understood.) First translated into Chinese ... and now retranslated into
English, by the Son of a Mandarin, residing in London."[5]

After the introduction has given a fantastic account of the
Pre-Adamitical world, and explained with elaborate unconvincingness how
the manuscript of the book came into existence, the tale commences like
a moral allegory, but soon lapses into mere extravagant adventure.
Capable at all times of using a _deus ex machina_ as the readiest way of
solving a situation, Mrs. Haywood here makes immoderate use of magic
elements.

Eojaeu, King of Ijaveo, leaves to his daughter, Eovaai, a precious
jewel, upon the keeping of which her happiness depends. One day as she
is gazing at it in the garden, it slips from its setting and is carried
away by a little bird. Immediately the princess is forsaken by her
quarreling subjects and abandoned by her suitors, save only the wicked
Ochihatou, prime minister of the neighboring kingdom of Hypotofa, who
has gained ascendancy over his sovereign by black magic, caused the
promising young prince to be banished, and used his power to promote his
ambitions and lusts. By infernal agencies he conveys Eovaai to the
Hypotofan court, where he corrupts her mind and is about to triumph in
her charms when he is summoned to quell a political disturbance. The
princess, left languishing in a bower, is saved by her good Genius, who
enables her to discern the true deformity of her betrayer and to escape
to the castle of the good Alhahuza, and ultimately into the kingdom of
Oozoff, where Ochihatou's magic has no power over her. During her stay
there she listens to much political theorizing of a republican trend.
Ochihatou succeeds in kidnapping her, and she is only saved from his
loathed embraces by discovering one of his former mistresses in the form
of a monkey whom she manages to change back into human shape and
substitutes in her stead. While the statesman is employed as a lover,
the populace led by Alhahuza storm the palace. Ochihatou discovers the
trick that has been played upon him, hastily transforms his unlucky
mistress into a rat, and conveys himself and Eovaai through the air into
a kingdom near at hand, where he hopes to make head against the rebels.
His pretensions are encouraged, but learning by his magic that the
Hypotofan monarch has been freed from the power of his spells, he
persuades the princess to return to Ijaveo with him in hopes of
regaining her kingdom. He transforms her into a dove, himself into a
vulture, and flies with her to a wood near the Ijavean court. There he
restores their natural shapes and makes a base attack upon her honor. In
the struggle she manages to break his wand, and he in a fury hangs her
up by the hair and is about to scourge her to death, when she is rescued
by a glorious young stranger. The wicked Ochihatou dashes his brains out
against an oak. Her deliverer turns out to be the banished prince of
Hypotofa, who restores to her the lost jewel, weds her, and prosperously
governs their united realms.

The fantastic story, however, was probably little calculated to sell the
book. It was addressed to those who could read between the lines well
enough to discern particular personages in the characters of the
fiction, and especially a certain great man in the figure of the evil
prime minister.

In 1736 when Eliza's novel first appeared, Walpole's defeated Excise
Bill of 1733-4 and his policy of non-interference on the Continent had
made him cordially disliked by the people, and by 1741 his unpopular
ministry, like Lady Mary Montagu's stairs, was "in a declining way." Sir
Robert had never shown himself a friend to letters, and there were not a
few writers, among them one so illustrious as Henry Fielding, who were
ready to seize upon any pretext for attacking him.[6] There can be no
doubt that in the character of the villainous, corrupt, greedy, vain,
lascivious, but plausible Ochihatou Mrs. Haywood intended her readers to
recognize a semblance of the English minister. "Of all the statesmen who
have held high office, it would be impossible to find one who has been
more systematically abused and more unjustly treated than Sir Robert
Walpole.... He is the 'Father of Parliamentary Corruption,' the 'foe to
English liberty,' the 'man who maintained his power by the basest and
most venal tactics'.... Whenever his administration is alluded to in
Parliament a shudder runs through the House ... at the very thought that
one so sordid, so interested, so schemingly selfish, should have
attained to the position of Prime Minister, and have commanded a
following. If we read the pamphlet literature of the eighteenth century,
we see Walpole represented as the meanest and most corrupt of
mankind."[7] Lord Chesterfield says of him: "His prevailing weakness was
to be thought to have a polite and happy turn to gallantry, of which he
had undoubtedly less than any man living; it was his favorite and
frequent subject of conversation, which proved, to those who had any
penetration, that it was his prevailing weakness, and they applied to it
with success."[8] And Lord Hervey reports that the Queen remarked of
Walpole's mistress, "dear Molly Skerritt": "She must be a clever
gentlewoman to have made him believe she cares for him on any other
score [but his money]; and to show you what fools we all are in some
point or other, she has certainly told him some fine story or other of
her love and her passion, and that poor man--_avec ce gros corps, ces
jambes enflees, et ce vilain ventre_--believes her. Ah! what is human
nature!"[9]

With this sketch of Walpole compare the account of Ochihatou, Prime
Minister of Hypotofa. "This great Man was born of a mean Extraction, and
so deformed in his own Person, that not even his own Parents cou'd look
on him with Satisfaction.... As he was extremely amorous, and had so
little in him to inspire the tender Passion, the first Proof he gave of
his Art, was to ... cast such a Delusion before the Eyes of all who saw
him, that he appeared to them such as he wished to be, a most comely and
graceful Man.

"With this Advantage, join'd to the most soothing and insinuating
Behaviour, he came to Court, and, by his Artifices, so wound himself
into the Favour of some great Officers, that he was not long without
being put into a considerable Post. This he discharged so well, that he
was soon promoted to a better, and at length to those of the highest
Trust and Honour in the Kingdom. But that which was most remarkable in
him, and very much contributed to endear him to all Sorts of People, was
that his Elevation did not seem to have made the least Change in his
Sentiments. His natural Pride, his Lust, his exorbitant Ambition, were
disguised under the Appearance of Sweetness of Disposition, Chastity,
and even more Condescension, than was consistent with the Rank he then
possest. By this Behaviour, he render'd himself so far from exciting
Envy, that those, by whose Recommendation he had obtained what he
enjoy'd, and with some of whom he was now on more than an Equality,
wish'd rather to see an Augmentation, than Diminution of a Power he so
well knew to use; and so successful was his Hypocrisy, that the most
Discerning saw not into his Designs, till he found means to accomplish
them, to the almost total Ruin of both King and People."[10] Ochihatou
worms his way into the favor of the king, and after gaining complete
ascendancy over his royal master, uses the power for his own ends. He
fills the positions at court with wretches subservient to his own
interests. "He next proceeded to seize the publick Treasure into his own
Hands, which he converted not to Works of Justice or Charity, or any
Uses for the Honour of the Kingdom, but in building stately Palaces for
himself, his Wives, and Concubines, and enriching his mean Family, and
others who adhered to him, and assisted in his Enterprizes." Lest this
reference should not be plain enough in its application to Walpole's
extravagances at Houghton, Mrs. Haywood adds in a footnote, "Our Author
might have saved himself the Trouble of particularizing in what manner
Ochihatou apply'd the Nation's Money; since he had said enough in
saying, he was a _Prime Minister_, to make the Reader acquainted with
his Conduct in that Point." Further allusions to a standing army of
mercenaries and to an odious tribe of tax-collectors--two of the most
popular grievances against Walpole--give additional force to the satire.
There is a suspicion that in the character of the young prince banished
by Ochihatou readers of a right turn of mind were intended to perceive a
cautious allusion to the Pretender.
[Transcriber's note: Quotes in paragraph in original, not block quote.]

That Walpole not only perceived, but actively resented the affront, we
may infer, though evidence is lacking, from the six years of silence
that followed the publication of the satire. Perhaps the government saw
fit to buy off the troublesome author by a small appointment, but such
indulgent measures were not usually applied to similar cases. More
probably Eliza found it wise to seek in France or some neighboring
country the safety from the malignant power of the Prime Minister that
her heroine sought in the kingdom of Oozoff.

The "Adventures of Eovaai" contains almost the last of the dedications
written in a servile tone to a patron whose favor Mrs. Haywood hoped to
curry. Henceforward she was to be more truly a woman of letters in that
her books appealed ostensibly at least only to the reading public. The
victim of her final eulogy was the redoubtable Sarah, Duchess Dowager of
Marlborough, who, when finding herself addressed as "O most illustrious
Wife, and Parent of the Greatest, Best, and Loveliest! it was not
sufficient for you to adorn Posterity with the Amiableness of every
Virtue," etc., etc., may perhaps have recalled how her shining character
had been blackened some twelve years before in a licentious volume
called "Memoirs of a Certain Island adjacent to the Kingdom of
Utopia."[11] Had her Grace been aware that the reputed author of that
comprehensive lampoon was none other than the woman who now outdid
herself in praise, Eliza Haywood would probably have profited little by
her panegyric. For though the "Memoirs of a Certain Island" like the
"Adventures of Eovaai" made a pretence of being translated into English
from the work of a celebrated Utopian author, the British public found
no difficulty in attributing it by popular acclaim to Mrs. Haywood, and
she reaped immense notoriety from it. In prefaces to some of her
subsequent works she complained of the readiness of the world to pick
meanings in whatever was published by a struggling woman, or protested
that she had no persons or families in view in writing her stories, but
she never disclaimed the authorship of this production. Undoubtedly the
world was right in "smoking" the writer.[12]

If before she had retailed secret histories of late amours singly, Mrs.
Haywood dealt in them now by the wholesale, and any reader curious to
know the identity of the personages hidden under such fictitious names
as Romanus, Beaujune, Orainos, Davilla, Flirtillaria, or Saloida could
obtain the information by consulting a convenient "key" affixed to each
of the two volumes. In this respect, as in the general scheme of her
work, Mrs. Haywood was following the model set by the celebrated Mrs.
Manley in her "New Atalantis." She in turn had derived her method from
the French _romans a clef_ or romances in which contemporary scandal was
reported in a fictitious disguise. The imitation written by Mrs. Haywood
became only less notorious than her original, and was still well enough
known in 1760 to be included in the convenient list of novels prefixed
to the elder Colman's "Polly Honeycombe." It consists of a tissue of
anecdotes which, if retold, would (in Fuller's words) "stain through the
cleanest language I can wrap them in," all set in an allegorical
framework of a commonplace kind.

A noble youth arrives upon the shores of a happy island [England], where
he encounters the God of Love, who conveys him to a spacious court in
the midst of the city. There Pecunia and Fortuna, served by their high
priest Lucitario [J. Craggs, the elder] preside over an Enchanted Well
[South Sea Company] while all degrees of humanity stand about in
expectation of some wonderful event. From amid the throng the God of
Love selects certain persons as examples of perverted love. The stories
he relates about them range from mere anecdotes to elaborate histories
containing several love-letters. In substance these tales consist of the
grossest scandal that could be collected from the gossip of profligate
society. After hearing more than a satiety of these illustrations, the
youth beholds the Genius of the Isle, supported by Astrea and Reason,
exposing the fraud of the Enchanted Well to the dismay of the greedy
rabble. The young stranger then sinks to rest in a perfumed bower, while
the God of Love and the Genius of the Isle set about a much needed
reformation of manners.

None of the skimmings of contemporary gossip poured out in the two
volumes deserves the least consideration, save such as reveal the fair
writer's relations with other authors. In return for Savage's eulogy of
her "Love in Excess" and "Rash Resolve" the scribbling dame included in
her scandal novel the story of his noble parentage substantially as it
had already been told by Aaron Hill in the "Plain Dealer" for 24 June,
1724. But in addition she prefaced the account with a highly colored
narrative of the amours of Masonia and Riverius.[13] However much the
author of "The Bastard" may have desired to prove his noble origin, he
might easily have resented a too open flaunting of his mother's
disgrace. Moreover, Mrs. Haywood hinted that his unfeeling mother was
not the only woman whom the poet had to fear. By the insinuations of a
female fury, a pretender to the art of poetry, for whom Eliza has no
words too black--in fact some of her epithets are too shady to be
quoted--he has been led into actions, mean, unjust, and wicked. The vile
woman, it seems, has been guilty of defaming the reputations of others.

"The Monster whose Soul is wholly compos'd of Hipocrisy, Envy, and Lust,
can ill endure another Woman should be esteem'd Mistress of those
Virtues she has acted with too barefaced an Impudence to pretend to, and
is never so happy as when by some horrid Stratagem she finds the means
to traduce and blast the Character of the Worthy.... With how much
readiness the easily deceiv'd Riverius [Savage] has obliged her in
spreading those Reports, coin'd in the hellish Mint of her own Brain, I
am sorry to say.... It cannot be doubted but that he has lost many
Friends on her account, in particular one there was who bore him a
singular Respect, tho' no otherways capacitated to serve him than by
good Wishes.--This Person receiv'd a more than common Injury from him,
thro' the Instigations of that female Fury; but yet continuing to
acknowledge his good Qualities, and pitying his falling into the
contrary, took no other Revenge than writing a little Satire, which his
having publish'd some admirable fine things in the praise of Friendship
and Honour, gave a handsome opportunity for." (Vol. I, p. 184.)

From the exceptional animus displayed by Eliza Haywood in describing her
colleague in the school for scandal, one may suspect that the lightning
had struck fairly near home. One is almost forced to believe that
Savage's well-wisher, the writer of the little satire, "To the Ingenious
Riverius, on his writing in the Praise of Friendship," was none other
than Eliza herself.[14] Exactly what injury she had sustained from him
and his Siren is not known, but although he still stood high in her
esteem, she was implacable against that "worse than Lais" whom in a long
and pungent description she satirized under the name of Gloatitia.

  "Behold another ... in every thing as ridiculous, in some more vile--
  that big-bone'd, buxom, brown Woman.... Of all the Gods there is none
  she acknowledges but Phoebus, him she frequently implores for
  assistance, to charm her Lovers with the Spirit of Poetry.... She
  pretends, however, to have an intimate acquaintance with the Muses--
  has judgment enough to know that _ease_ and _please_ make a Rhyme, and
  to count ten Syllables on her Fingers.--This is the Stock with which
  she sets up for a Wit, and among some ignorant Wretches passes for
  such; but with People of true Understanding, nothing affords more
  subject of ridicule, than that incoherent Stuff which she calls
  Verses.--She bribed, with all the Favours she is capable of
  conferring, a Bookseller [Curll] (famous for publishing soft things)
  to print some of her Works, ["The Amours of Clio and Strephon," 1719]
  on which she is not a little vain: tho' she might very well have
  spared herself the trouble. Few Men, of any rank whatsoever, but have
  been honour'd with the receipt of some of her Letters both in Prose
  and Measure--few Coffee-Houses but have been the Repository of
  them."[15]

The student of contemporary secret history does not need to refer to the
"key" to discover that the woman whose power to charm Savage was so
destructive to Eliza's peace of mind was that universal mistress of
minor poets, the Mira of Thomson, the Clio of Dyer and Hill, the famous
Martha Fowke, who at the time happened to have fixed the scandal of her
affections upon the Volunteer Laureate.[16] That the poet's opinion of
her remained unchanged by Mrs. Haywood's vituperation may be inferred
from some lines in her praise in a satire called "The Authors of the
Town," printed soon after the publication of "Memoirs of a Certain
Island."[17]

  "Clio, descending Angels sweep thy Lyre,
  Prompt thy soft Lays, and breathe Seraphic Fire.
  Tears fall, Sighs rise, obedient to thy Strains,
  And the Blood dances in the mazy Veins!....
  In social Spirits, lead thy Hours along,
  Thou Life of Loveliness, thou Soul of Song!"

But not content with singing the praises of her rival, Savage cast a
slur upon Mrs. Haywood's works and even upon the unfortunate dame
herself.

  "First, let me view what noxious Nonsense reigns,
  While yet I loiter on Prosaic Plains;
  If Pens impartial active Annals trace,
  Others, with secret Histr'y, Truth deface:
  Views and Reviews, and wild Memoirs appear,
  And Slander darkens each recorded year."

After relating at some length the typical absurdities of the _chronique
scandaleuse_--deaths by poison, the inevitably dropped letter, and
intrigues of passion and jealousy--he became more specific in describing
various authors. Among others

  "A cast-off Dame, who of Intrigues can judge,
  Writes Scandal in Romance--A Printer's Drudge!
  Flush'd with Success, for Stage-Renown she pants,
  And melts, and swells, and pens luxurious Rants."

The first two lines might apply to the notorious Mrs. Manley, lately
deceased, who had for some time been living as a hack writer for
Alderman Barber, but she had written no plays since "Lucius" in 1717.
Mrs. Haywood, however, equally a cast-off dame and a printer's drudge,
had recently produced her "Fair Captive," a most luxurious rant. The
passage, then, may probably refer to her.

If, as is possible, the poem was circulated in manuscript before its
publication, this intended insult may be the injury complained of by
Mrs. Haywood in "Memoirs of a Certain Island." Though she was content to
retaliate only by heaping coals of fire upon the poet's bays, and though
she even heightens the pathos of his story by relating how he had
refused the moiety of a small pension from his mother upon hearing that
she had suffered losses in the collapse of the South Sea scheme, Savage
remained henceforth her implacable enemy. Perhaps her abuse of the
divine Clio, the suspected instigator of his attacks upon her, may have
been an unforgivable offense.

No need to particularize further. We need not vex the shade of Addison
by repeating what Eliza records of his wild kinsman, Eustace Budgell
(Bellario). No other person of literary note save Aaron Hill, favorably
mentioned as Lauranus, appears in all the dreary two volumes. The vogue
of the book was not due to its merits as fiction, which are slight, but
to the spiciness of personal allusions. That such reading was
appreciated even in the highest circles is shown by young Lady Mary
Pierrepont's defence of Mrs. Manley's "New Atalantis."[18] In the
history of the novel, however, the _roman a clef_ deserves perhaps more
recognition than has hitherto been accorded it. Specific delineation was
necessary to make effective the satire, and though the presence of the
"key" made broad caricature possible, since each picture was labeled,
yet the writers of scandal novels usually drew their portraits with an
amount of detail foreign to the method of the romancers.[19] While the
tale of passion developed the novelist's power to make the emotions seem
convincing, the _chronique scandaleuse_ emphasized the necessity of
accurate observation of real men and women. But satire and libel, though
necessitating detailed description, did not, like burlesque or parody,
lead to the creation of character. In that respect the "Memoirs of a
Certain Island" and all its tribe are notably deficient.

A less comprehensive survey of current tittle-tattle, perhaps modeled on
Mrs. Manley's "Court Intrigues" (1711), stole forth anonymously on 16
October, 1724, under the caption, "Bath-Intrigues: in four Letters to a
Friend in London," a title which sufficiently indicates the nature of
the work. Like the "Memoirs of a Certain Island" these letters consist
of mere jottings of scandal. Most probably both productions were from
the same pen, though "Bath-Intrigues" has been attributed to Mrs.
Manley.[20] Opposite the title-page Roberts, the publisher, advertised
"The Masqueraders," "The Fatal Secret," and "The Surprise" as by the
same author. One of Mrs. Haywood's favorite quotations, used by her
later as a motto for the third volume of "The Female Spectator," stands
with naive appropriateness on the title-page:

  "There is a Lust in Man, no Awe can tame,
  Of loudly publishing his Neighbor's Shame."

The writer of "Bath-Intrigues," moreover, did not hesitate to recommend
Eliza's earlier novels to the good graces of scandal-loving readers, for
she describes a certain letter as "amorous as Mrs. O--- F---d's Eyes,
or the Writings of the Author of Love in Excess." Most curious of all is
the fact that the composer of the four letters, who signs herself J.B.,
refers _en passant_ to Belinda's inconstancy to Sir Thomas Worthly, an
allusion to the story of the second part of "The British Recluse." This
reference would indicate either that there was some basis of actuality
in the earlier fiction, or that Mrs. Haywood was using imaginary scandal
to pad her collection. However that may be, this second _chronique
scandaleuse_ was apparently no less successful, though less renowned,
than the first, for a third edition was imprinted during the following
March.

The scribbling dame again used the feigned letter as a vehicle for
mildly infamous gossip in "Letters from the Palace of Fame. Written by a
First Minister in the Regions of Air, to an Inhabitant of this World.
Translated from an Arabian Manuscript."[21] Its pretended source and the
sham Oriental disguise make the work an unworthy member of that group of
feigned Oriental letters begun by G.P. Marana with "L'Espion turc" in
1684, continued by Dufresny and his imitator, T. Brown, raised to a
philosophic level by Addison and Steele, and finally culminant in
Montesquieu's "Lettres Persanes" (1721) and Goldsmith's "Citizen of the
World" (1760).[22] The fourth letter is a well-told Eastern adventure,
dealing with the revenge of Forzio who seduces the wife of his enemy,
Ben-hamar, through the agency of a Christian slave, but in general the
"Letters" are valuable only as they add an atom of evidence to the
popularity of pseudo-Oriental material. Eliza Haywood was anxious to
give the public what it wanted. She had found a ready market for
scandal, and knew that the piquancy of slander was enhanced and the
writer protected from disagreeable consequences if her stories were cast
in some sort of a disguise. She had already used the obvious ruse of an
allegory in the "Memoirs of a Certain Island" and had just completed a
feigned history in the "Court of Carimania." The well known "Turkish
Spy" and its imitations, or perhaps the recent but untranslated "Lettres
Persanes," may have suggested to her the possibility of combining bits
of gossip in letters purporting to be translated from the Arabic and
written by some supermundane being. The latter part of the device had
already been used by Defoe in "The Consolidator." Mrs. Haywood merely
added the suggestion of a mysterious Oriental source. She makes no
attempt to satirize contemporary society, but is content to retail vague
bits of town talk to customers who might be deluded into imagining them
of importance. "The new created Vizier," the airy correspondent reports,
"might have succeeded better in another Post, than in this, which with
so much earnestness he has sollicited. For, notwithstanding the Plaudits
he has received from our Princess, and the natural Propensity to
State-Affairs, given him by his Saturnine Genius; his Significator Mars
promis'd him greater Honours in the Field, than he can possibly attain
to in the Cabinet." And so on. Both "Bath-Intrigues" and "Letters from
the Palace of Fame" may be classed as _romans a clef_ although no "key"
for either has yet been found. In all other respects they conform to
type.

The only one of Mrs. Haywood's scandal novels that rivaled the fame of
her "Memoirs of a Certain Island" was the notorious "Secret History of
the Present Intrigues of the Court of Carimania" (1727), a feigned
history on a more coherent plan than the allegorical hodge-podge of the
former compilation. The incidents in this book are all loosely connected
with the amours of Theodore, Prince of Carimania, with various beauties
of this court. The chronicle minutely records the means he employed to
overcome their scruples, to stifle their jealousies and their
reproaches, and finally to extricate himself from affairs of gallantry
grown tedious. Nearly all the changes are rung on the theme of amorous
adventure in describing the progress of the royal rake and his
associates. The "key"[23] at the end identifies the characters with
various noble personages at the court of George II when Prince of Wales.
The melting Lutetia, for instance, represented "Mrs. Baladin" or more
accurately Mary Bellenden, maid of honor to the Princess, to whose
charms Prince George was in fact not insensible. Barsina and Arilla were
also maids of honor: the former became the second wife of John, Duke of
Argyle (Aridanor), while the latter was that sister of Sir Sidney
Meadows celebrated by Pope for her prudence. Although the "key"
discreetly refrained from identifying the amorous Theodore, no great
penetration was necessary to see in his character a picture of the royal
George himself. A tradition not well authenticated but extremely
probable states that printer and publisher were taken up in consequence
of this daring scandal.

But more important in its effect upon the author's fortunes than any
action of the outraged government was the resentment which her
defamation of certain illustrious persons awakened in the breast of the
dictator of letters. In chosing [Transcriber's note: sic] to expose in
the character of her chief heroine, Ismonda, the foibles of Mrs.
Henrietta Howard, the neighbor of Pope, the friend of Swift and
Arbuthnot, and the admired of Lord Peterborough, Mrs. Haywood made
herself offensive in the nostrils of the literary trio. The King's
mistress, later the Countess of Suffolk, conducted herself with such
propriety that her friends affected to believe that her relations with
her royal lover were purely platonic, and they naturally failed to
welcome the chronicle of her amours and the revelation of the slights
which George II delighted to inflict upon her. Swift described the
writer of the scandal as a "stupid, infamous, scribbling woman";[24]
Peterborough writing to Lady Mary Montagu in behalf of his friend, the
English Homer, sneered at the "four remarkable poetesses and scribblers,
Mrs. Centlivre, Mrs. Haywood, Mrs. Manley, and Mrs. Ben [_sic_]";[25]
and Pope himself pilloried the offender to all time in his greatest
satire.


FOOTNOTES
[1]
_Monthly Review_, I, 238. July, 1749.

[2]
Mme de Villedieu, _Annales galantes de Grece_ and _Les exiles de la cour
d'Auguste_. Mme Durand-Bedacier, _Les belles Grecques, ou l'histoire des
plus fameuses courtisanes de la Grece._

[3]
B.M. Catalogue.

[4]
A. Lang, _History of English Literature_ (1912), 458. See _ante_, p. 25.

[5]
Re-issued as _The Unfortunate Princess, or, the Ambitious Statesman_,
1741.

[6]
J.E. Wells, _Fielding's Political Purpose in Jonathan Wilde_, PMLA,
XXVIII, No. I, pp. 1-55. March, 1913. See also _The Secret History of
Mama Oello_, 1733. "The Curaca Robilda's Character [i.e. Sir Robert
Walpole's] will inform you that there were Evil Ministers even amongst
the simple Indians" ... and _The Statesman's Progress: Or, Memoirs of
the Life, Administration, and Fall of Houly Chan, Primier Minister to
Abensader, Emperor of China_ (1733).

[7]
A.C. Ewald, _Sir Robert Walpole_ (1878), 444.

[8]
A.C. Ewald, _Sir Robert Walpole_, 450.

[9]
Lord Hervey's _Memoirs_, London, 1884, II, 143.

[10]
_The Unfortunate Princess_, 18, etc.

[11]
_Memoirs of a Certain Island_, II, 249. "Marama [the Duchess of
Marlborough] has been for many Years a Grandmother; but Age is the
smallest of her Imperfections:--She is of a Disposition so perverse and
peevish, so designing, mercenary, proud, cruel, and revengeful, that it
has been a matter of debate, if she were really Woman, or if some Fiend
had not assumed that Shape on purpose to affront the Sex, and fright
Mankind from Marriage."

[12]
J. Nichols, _Literary Anecdotes_, III, 649, records the tradition that
Chapman was the publisher of Mrs. Haywood's _Utopia_.

[13]
Anne Mason, formerly Lady Macclesfield, and the Earl of Rivers, whom
Savage claimed as his father.

[14]
She had a way of rechristening her friends by romantic titles. See her
poem, "To Mr. Walter Bowman ... Occasion'd by his objecting against my
giving the Name of Hillarius to Aaron Hill, Esq."

[15]
_Memoirs of a Certain Island_, I, 43-7 condensed.

[16]
For an account of Clio see an article by Bolton Corney, "James Thomson
and David Mallet," _Athenaeum_, II, 78, 1859. And Miss Dorothy Brewster,
_Aaron Hill_, 188. Her unsavory biography entitled _Clio, or a Secret
History of the Amours of Mrs. S-n--m_, was still known at the time of
_Polly Honeycombe_, 1760.

[17]
_The Authors of the Town; a Satire. Inscribed to the Author of the
Universal Passion_. For J. Roberts, 1725. A number of lines from this
poem appear later in Savage's "On False Historians," _Poems_ (Cooke's
ed.), II, 189.

[18]
_Letters from the Lady Mary Wortley Montagu_, Everyman edition, 4.

[19]
Compare the picture of Gloatitia, for instance, with the following of a
lady in _La Belle Assemblee_, I, 22. "To form any Idea of what she was,
one must imagine all that can be conceived of Perfection--the most
blooming Youth, the most delicate Complection, Eyes that had in them all
the Fire of Wit, and Tenderness of Love, a Shape easy, and fine
proportion'd Limbs; and to all this, a thousand unutterable Graces
accompanying every Air and little Motion."

[20]
Miss C.E. Morgan, _The Novel of Manners_, 221. _Bath-Intrigues_ was
included in Mrs. Haywood's Works, 1727. Another work contained in the
same two volumes, _The Perplex'd Duchess; or, Treachery Rewarded: Being
some Memoirs of the Court of Malfy. In a Letter from a Sicilian
Nobleman, who had his Residence there, to his Friend in London_ (1728),
may be a scandal novel, though the title suggests a reworking of
Webster's _Duchess of Malfi_. I have not seen the book.

[21]
Ascribed to Mrs. Haywood in the advertisements of her additional
_Works_, 1727. The B.M. copy, catalogued under "Ariel," contains only a
fragment of 24 pages.

[22]
Miss M.P. Conant, _The Oriental Tale in England in the Eighteenth
Century (1908), passim._

[23]
The "key" is almost the sole contribution to Mrs. Haywood's bibliography
in Bohn's Lowndes. Most of the personages mentioned are described in the
notes of John Wilson Croker's _Letters to and from the Countess of
Suffolk_ (1824).

[24]
The Correspondence of Jonathan Swift, ed. by F. Elrington Ball (1913),
Vol. IV, 264, 266. The Countess of Suffolk, in a playful attack on
Swift, wrote (25 Sept. 1731) ... "I should not have despaired, that ...
this Irish patriot ... should have closed the scene under suspicions of
having a violent passion for Mrs. Barber, and Lady M---- [Montagu] or
Mrs. Haywood have writ the progress of it." In reply Swift wrote (26
Oct. 1731) that he could not guess who was intended by Lady M---- and
that he had heard Mrs. Haywood characterized in the terms quoted above.

[25]
Elwin and Courthope's _Pope_, III, 279.






CHAPTER V


THE HEROINE OF "THE DUNCIAD"


Mr. Pope's devious efforts to make the gratification of his personal
animosities seem due to public-spirited indignation have been generally
exposed. Beside the overwhelming desire to spite Theobald for his
presumption in publishing "Shakespeare Restored" the aggrieved poet was
actuated by numerous petty grudges against the inhabitants of Grub
Street, all of which he masked behind a pretence of righteous zeal.
According to the official explanation "The Dunciad" was composed with
the most laudable motive of damaging those writers of "abusive
falsehoods and scurrilities" who "had aspersed almost all the great
characters of the age; and this with impunity, their own persons and
names being utterly secret and obscure." He intended to seize the
"opportunity of doing some good, by detecting and dragging into light
these common enemies of mankind; since to invalidate this universal
slander, it sufficed to show what contemptible men were the authors of
it. He was not without hopes, that by manifesting the dulness of those
who had only malice to recommend them, either the booksellers would not
find their account in employing them, or the men themselves, when
discovered, would want courage to proceed in so unlawful an occupation.
This it was that gave birth to the 'Dunciad,' and he thought it a
happiness, that by the late flood of slander on himself, he had acquired
such a peculiar right over their names as was necessary to this
design."[1] But gentlemanly reproof and delicate satire would be wasted
on "libellers and common nuisances." They must be met upon their own
ground and overwhelmed with filth. "Thus the politest men are obliged
sometimes to swear when they have to do with porters and
oyster-wenches." Moreover, those unexceptionable models, Homer, Virgil,
and Dryden had all admitted certain nasty expressions, and in comparison
with them "our author ... tosses about his dung with an air of
majesty."[2] In the episode devoted to the "authoress of those most
scandalous books called the Court of Carimania, and the new Utopia,"
remarks the annotator of "The Dunciad, Variorum," "is exposed, in the
most contemptuous manner, the profligate licentiousness of those
shameless scribblers (for the most part of that sex, which ought least
to be capable of such malice or impudence) who in libellous Memoirs and
Novels, reveal the faults and misfortunes of both sexes, to the ruin of
public fame, or disturbance of private happiness. Our good poet (by the
whole cast of his work being obliged not to take off the irony) where he
could not show his indignation, hath shewn his contempt, as much as
possible; having here drawn as vile a picture as could be represented in
the colours of Epic poesy."[3] On these grounds Pope justified the
coarseness of his allusions to Mrs. Thomas (Corinna) and Eliza Haywood.
But a statement of high moral purpose from the author of "The Dunciad"
was almost inevitably the stalking-horse of an unworthy action. Mr.
Pope's reasons, real and professed, for giving Mrs. Haywood a
particularly obnoxious place in his epic of dullness afford a curious
illustration of his unmatched capacity ostensibly to chastise the vices
of the age, while in fact hitting an opponent below the belt.

The scourge of dunces had, as we have seen, a legitimate cause to resent
the licentious attack upon certain court ladies, especially his friend
Mrs. Howard, in a scandalous fiction of which Eliza Haywood was the
reputed author. Besides she had allied herself with Bond, Defoe, and
other inelegant pretenders in the domain of letters, and was known to be
the friend of Aaron Hill, Esq., who stood not high in Pope Alexander's
good graces. And finally Pope may have honestly believed that she was
responsible for a lampoon upon him in person. In "A List of Books,
Papers, and Verses, in which our Author was Abused, Before the
Publication of the Dunciad; with the True Names of the Authors,"
appended to "The Dunciad, Variorum" of 1729, Mrs. Haywood was credited
with an anonymous "Memoirs of Lilliput, octavo, printed in 1727."[4] The
full title of the work in question reads, "Memoirs of the Court of
Lilliput. Written by Captain Gulliver. Containing an Account of the
Intrigues, and some other particular Transactions of that Nation,
omitted in the two Volumes of his Travels. Published by Lucas Bennet,
with a Preface, shewing how these Papers fell into his hands." The
title, indeed, is suggestive of such productions as "The Court of
Carimania." In the Preface Mr. Lucas Bennet describes himself as a
schoolfellow and friend of Captain Gulliver, which is reason enough to
make us doubt his own actuality. But whether a real personage or a
pseudonym for some other author, he was probably not Mrs. Haywood, for
the style of the book is unlike that of her known works, and the
historian of Lilliput indulges in some mild sarcasms at the expense of
women who "set up for Writers, before they have well learned their
Alphabet," Either before or after composing his lines on Eliza, however,
Pope chose to attribute the volume to her. The passage which doubtless
provoked his noble rage against shameless scribblers was part of a
debate between Lilliputian Court ladies who were anxious lest their
having been seen by Gulliver in a delicate situation should reflect on
their reputations. The speaker undertakes to reassure her companions.

  "And besides, the inequality of our Stature rightly consider'd, ought
  to be  for us as full a Security from Slander, as that between Mr.
  P--pe, and those  _great_ Ladies who do nothing without him; admit him
  to their Closets, their  Bed-sides, consult him in the choice of their
  Servents, their Garments, and  make no scruple of putting them on or
  off before him: Every body knows they  are Women of strict Virtue, and
  he a Harmless Creature, who has neither the  Will, nor Power of doing
  any farther Mischief than with his Pen, and that he  seldom draws, but
  in defense of their Beauty; or to second their Revenge  against some
  presuming Prude, who boasts a Superiority of Charms: or in  privately
  transcribing and passing for his own, the elaborate Studies of some
  more learned Genius."[5]

Such an attack upon the sensitive poet's person and pride did not go
unnoticed. More than a year later he returned the slur with interest
upon the head of the supposed author. The lines on Eliza, which still
remain the coarsest in the satire, were in the original "Dunciad" even
more brutal.[6] Nothing short of childish personal animus could account
for the filthy malignity of Pope's revenge.

  "See in the circle next, Eliza plac'd;
  Two babes of love close clinging to her waste;
  Fair as before her works she stands confess'd
  In flow'r'd brocade by bounteous _Kirkall_ dress'd,
  Pearls on her neck, and roses in her hair,
  And her fore-buttocks to the navel bare."[7]

The Goddess of Dullness offers "yon Juno of majestic size" as the chief
prize in the booksellers' games. "Chetwood and Curll accept this
glorious strife," the latter, as always, wins the obscene contest, "and
the pleas'd dame soft-smiling leads away." Nearly all of this account is
impudent slander, but Mr. Pope's imputations may have had enough truth
in them to sting. His description of Eliza is a savage caricature of her
portrait by Kirkall prefixed to the first edition of her collected
novels, plays, and poems (1724).[8] Curll's "Key to the Dunciad," quoted
with evident relish by Pope in the Variorum notes, recorded on the
authority of contemporary scandal that the "two babes of love" were the
offspring of a poet[9] and a bookseller. This bit of libel meant no more
than that Mrs. Haywood's relations with Savage and other minor writers
had been injudiciously unconventional. As for the booksellers, Curll had
not been professionally connected with the authoress before the
publication of "The Dunciad," and the part he played in the games may be
regarded as due entirely to Pope's malice. W. R. Chetwood was indeed the
first publisher of Eliza's effusions, but his name was even more
strongly associated with the prize which actually fell to his lot.[10]
In 1735 Chapman was substituted for Chetwood, and in the last revision
Thomas Osborne, then the object of Pope's private antipathy, gained a
permanent place as Curll's opponent. Taken all in all, the chief
virulence of the abuse was directed more against the booksellers than
against Mrs. Haywood.

The second mention of Eliza was also in connection with Corinna in a
passage now canceled.

  "See next two slip-shod _Muses_ traipse along,
  In lofty madness meditating song,
  With tresses staring from poetic dreams
  And never wash'd, but in _Castalia's_ streams.
  H---- and I----, glories of their race!"[11]

The first initial is written in the manuscript "Heywood," and the second
was doubtless intended for Mrs. Thomas. But in this case the very
catholicity of Pope's malice defeated its own aim. Originally the first
line stood: "See Pix and slip-shod W---- [Wortley?] traipse along." In
1729 the place of the abused Corinna was given to Mrs. Centlivre, then
five years dead, in retaliation for a verse satire called "The Catholic
Poet, or Protestant Barnaby's Sorrowful Lamentation: a Ballad about
Homer's Iliad," (1715).[12] Evidently abuse equally applicable to any
one or more of five women writers could not be either specific or
strikingly personal. Nothing can be inferred from the lines except that
Pope despised the whole race of female wits and bore particular malice
against certain of their number. Eliza Haywood sustained the largest
share of anathema, for not only was she vilified in the poem, but
"Haywood's Novels" and the offensive "Court of Carimania" occupied a
conspicuous position in the cargo of books carried by the "ass laden
with authors" which formed the well-known vignette to the quarto edition
of 1729.

In the universal howl raised against the persecutor by the afflicted
dunces the treble part was but weakly sustained. Mrs. Thomas indeed
produced a small sixpenny octavo, written for, and perhaps in
conjunction with Curll, entitled "Codrus; or the Dunciad dissected. To
which is added Farmer Pope and his Son" (1729), but Mrs. Haywood's
contribution was probably on her part unintentional, and was due
entirely to the activity of the same infamous bookseller, who was among
the first to get his replies and counter-slanders into print.[13] The
"Key to the Dunciad" already mentioned ran through three editions in
competition with an authorized key. "The Popiad" and "The Curliad" were
rapidly huddled together and placed upon the market. Close upon the
heels of these publications came "The Female Dunciad," containing beside
the "Metamorphosis of P. into a Stinging Nettle" by Mr. Foxton, a novel
called "Irish Artifice; or, the History of Clarina" by Mrs. Eliza
Haywood. In a short introduction to the piece, Curll explained how it
happened to fall into his hands.

  "I am likewise to inform my _Female Criticks_, that they stand
  indebted to the entertaining Pen of Mrs. _Eliza Haywood_ for the
  following _History_ of Clarina. It was sent to me, by herself, on
  communicating to some of my Friends the Design I had of writing a
  Weekly Paper, under the title of the ROVER, the Scope of which is in
  some Measure explain'd in her Address to me, and this   Project I may
  yet perhaps put in Execution."

The novelette submitted to Curll for inclusion in his projected
periodical relates how an Irish housekeeper named Aglaura craftily
promotes a runaway match between her son Merovius and the young heiress
Clarina, who, deserted by her husband and disowned by her father, falls
into the utmost misery. The story has no possible bearing either on Pope
or on "The Dunciad," but was evidently seized by the shifty publisher as
the nearest thing to hand when he came to patch up another pamphlet
against Pope. Nothing could be more characteristic of Curll than his
willingness to make capital out of his own disgrace. So hurried was the
compilation of "The Female Dunciad" that he even printed the letter
designed to introduce Mrs. Haywood's tale to the readers of the "Rover."
Pope, who assiduously read all the libels directed against himself,
hastened to use the writer's confession of her own shortcomings in a
note to "The Dunciad, Variorum" of 1729.[14]

Mrs. Haywood admires at some length the Rover's intention of "laying a
Foundation for a Fabrick, whose spacious Circumference shall at once
display the beautiful Images of Virtue in in all her proper Shapes, and
the Deformities of Vice in its various Appearances.... An Endeavour for
a Reformation of Manners, (in an Age, where Folly is so much the
Fashion, that to have run thro' all the courses of Debauchery, seem
requisite to complete the fine Gentleman) is an Attempt as _daring_ as
it is _noble_; and while it engages the Admiration and Applause of the
worthy and judicious _Few_, will certainly draw on you the Ridicule and
Hatred of that _unnumber'd Crowd_, who justly dread the Lash of a
Satire, which their own dissolute Behaviour has given sting to. But I,
who am perfectly acquainted with the Sweetness of your Disposition, and
that Tenderness with which you consider the Errors of your Fellow
Creatures, need not be inform'd, that while you expose the Foulness of
those Facts, which renders them deservedly Objects of Reproach, you will
[not] forget to pity the Weakness of Humanity and Lethargy of Reason,
which at some unguarded Hours, steals on the Souls of even the wisest
Men; and tho' I shou'd find, in the Course of your Papers, all the
little Inadvertencies of my own Life recorded, I am sensible it will be
done in such a Manner as I cannot but approve."

No particular intimacy between the author and the bookseller can be
inferred from this extravagant but conventional flattery. The
interpretation of what Mrs. Haywood terms inadvertencies--a word almost
invariably used in her writings as a euphemism--is a more difficult
problem, for definite evidence of the authoress' gallantries is entirely
lacking. But however damaging to herself her frankness may have been,
there was little in the production to arouse the ire of Pope. The only
instance in which the maligned novelist may have intended to show her
resentment was in the Preface to her tragedy "Frederick, Duke of
Brunswick-Lunenburgh" (1729) where with veiled sarcasm she confessed
herself "below the Censure of the Gyant-Criticks of this Age."

Although Mrs. Haywood was evidently not responsible for the inclusion of
her tale in "The Female Dunciad," and although the piece itself was
entirely innocuous, her daring to raise her head even by accident
brought down upon her another scurrilous rebuke, not this time from the
poet himself, but from her former admirer, Richard Savage. In "An Author
to be Let" (1732) Pope's jackal directed against the members of a
supposed club of dunces, presided over by James Moore-Smith and
including Theobald, Welsted, Curll, Dennis, Cooke, and Bezaleel Morris,
a tirade of abuse, in which "the divine Eliza" came in for her full
share of vituperation.

  "When Mrs. Haywood ceas'd to be a Strolling Actress, why might not the
  Lady (tho' once a Theatrical Queen) have subsisted by turning
  Washer-woman? Has not the Fall of Greatness been a frequent Distress
  in all Ages? She might have caught a beautiful Bubble as it arose from
  the Suds of her Tub, blown it in Air, seen it glitter, and then break!
  Even in this low Condition, she had play'd with a Bubble, and what
  more, is the Vanity of human Greatness? She might also have consider'd
  the sullied Linnen growing white in her pretty red Hands, as an Emblem
  of her Soul, were it well scoured by Repentance for the Sins of her
  Youth: But she rather chooses starving by writing Novels of Intrigue,
  to teach young Heiresses the Art of running away with
  Fortune-hunters, and scandalizing Persons of the highest Worth and
  Distinction."

Savage's mention of eloping heiresses shows that he had been looking for
exceptionable material in "Irish Artifice," but finding little to his
purpose there, had reverted to the stock objections to the scandal
novels, where he was upon safe but not original ground. In the body of
the pamphlet he returned to assault the same breach. The supposed
writer, Iscariot Hackney, in stating his qualifications for membership
in the Dunces' Club, claims to be "very deeply read in all Pieces of
Scandal, Obscenity, and Prophaneness, particularly in the Writings of
Mrs. _Haywood, Henley, Welsted, Morley, Foxton, Cooke, D'Foe, Norton,
Woolston, Dennis, Nedward, Concanen, Journalist-Pit_, and the Author of
the _Rival Modes_. From these I propose to compile a very grand Work,
which shall not be inferior to _Utopia, Carimania, Guttiverania, Art of
Flogging, Daily Journal_, Epigrams on the _Dunciad_, or _Oratory
Transactions_." ... Although the author of "Utopia" and "Carimania" was
pilloried in good company, she suffered more than she deserved. She was
indeed a friend of Theobald's, for a copy of "The Dunciad: with Notes
Variorum, and the Prolegomena of Scriblerus," bearing on the fly-leaf
the following inscription:

  "Lewis Theobald to Mrs Heywood, as a testimony of his esteem, presents
  this book called _The Dunciad_, and acquaints her that Mr. Pope, by
  the profits of its publication, saved his library, _wherein unpawned
  much learned lumber lay_."[15]

shows that the two victims of Pope's most bitter satire felt a sort of
companionship in misfortune. But there is no evidence to show that Eliza
took any part in the War of the Dunces.

But that the immortal infamy heaped upon her by "The Dunciad" injured
her prospects cannot be doubted. She was far from being a "signal
illustration of the powerlessness of this attack upon the immediate
fortunes of those assailed," as Professor Lounsbury describes her.[16]
It is true that she continued to write, though with less frequency than
before, and that some of her best-sellers were produced at a time when
Pope's influence was at its height, but that the author was obliged to
take extreme measures to avoid the ill consequences of the lampoon upon
her may be proved by comparing the title-pages of her earlier and later
novels.

Before the publication of "The Dunciad" the adventuress in letters had
enjoyed a large share of popularity. Most of her legitimate works were
advertised as "Written by Mrs. Eliza Haywood" and bore her name in full
prominently displayed on the title-page. That her signature possessed a
distinct commercial value in selling popular fiction was amusingly
illustrated by a bit of literary rascality practiced in 1727, when
Arthur Bettesworth, the bookseller, issued a chapbook called "The
Pleasant and Delightful History of Gillian of Croydon." After a long
summary of the contents in small type came the statement, "The Whole
done much after the same Method as those celebrated Novels, By Mrs.
ELIZA HAYWOOD," the forged author's name being emphasized in the largest
possible type in the hope that a cursory glance at the title-page might
deceive a prospective buyer.[17] Of her forty publications before 1728
only fifteen, of which five from their libelous nature could not be
acknowledged, failed to sail openly under her colors. Only once did she
employ any sort of pseudonym, and only in one case was her signature
relegated to the end of the dedication.[18] A word of scorn from the
literary dictator, however, was enough to turn the taste of the town,
not indeed away from sensational and scandalous fictions, but away from
the hitherto popular writer of them. Eliza Haywood was no longer a name
to conjure with; her reputation was irretrievably gone. It was no
unusual thing in those days for ladies in semi-public life to outlive
several reputations. The quondam Clio had already found the notoriety of
that name too strong for her comfort, and had been rechristened Mira by
the dapper Mr. Mallet.[19] Instead of adopting some such expedient Mrs.
Haywood found it more convenient simply to lapse into anonymity. Of the
four novels published within a year after "The Dunciad" none bore her
name on the title-page, though two had signed dedications and the others
were advertised as by her. Not one of them was re-issued. The tragedy
"Frederick, Duke of Brunswick-Lunenburgh," known to be of her make, was
a complete failure, and "Love-Letters on All Occasions" (1730) with
"Collected by Mrs. Eliza Haywood" on the title-page never reached a
second edition. Both her translations from the French, "L'Entretien des
Beaux Esprits" (1734) and "The Virtuous Villager" (1742), were
acknowledged at the end of the dedications, and both were unsuccessful,
although the anonymous predecessor of the former, "La Belle Assemblee"
(1725), ran through eight editions. The single occurrence of Mrs.
Haywood's name on a title-page after 1730, if we except the two reprints
of "Secret Histories," was when the unacknowledged "Adventures of
Eovaai" (1736) re-appeared five years later as "The Unfortunate
Princess" with what seems to be a "fubbed" title-page for which the
author was probably not responsible. And the successful works referred
to by Professor Lounsbury were all either issued without any signature
or under such designations as "the Author of the Fortunate Foundlings,"
or "Mira, one of the Authors of the Female Spectator," or
"Exploralibus," so that even the reviewers sometimes appeared to be
ignorant of the writer's identity.

Moreover, Mrs. Haywood's re-establishment as an anonymous author seems
to have been a work of some difficulty, necessitating a ten years'
struggle against adversity. Between 1731 and 1741 she produced fewer
books than during any single year of her activity after the publication
of "Idalia" and before "The Dunciad." Her probable share in the "Secret
Memoirs of Mr. Duncan Campbel" was merely that of a hack writer, her
contributions to the "Opera of Operas" were of the most trifling nature,
and the two volumes of "L'Entretien des Beaux Esprits" were not
original. For six years after the "Adventures of Eovaai" she sent to
press no work now known to be hers, and not until the catch-penny
"Present for a Servant-Maid" (1743) and the anonymous "Fortunate
Foundlings" (1744) did her wares again attain the popularity of several
editions. All due credit must be allowed Mrs. Haywood for her persistent
efforts to regain her footing as a woman of letters, for during this
time she had little encouragement. Pope's attack did destroy her best
asset, her growing reputation as an author, but instead of following
Savage's ill-natured advice to turn washerwoman, she remained loyal to
her profession and in her later novels gained greater success than she
had ever before enjoyed. But it was only her dexterity that saved her
from literary annihilation.[20]

The lesson of her hard usage at the hands of Pope and his allies,
however, was not lost upon the adaptable dame. After her years of
silence Mrs. Haywood seems to have returned to the production of
perishable literature with less inclination for gallantry than she had
evinced in her early romances. Warm-blooded creature though she was,
Eliza could not be insensible to the cooling effect of age, and perhaps,
too, she perceived the more sober moral taste of the new generation. "In
the numerous volumes which she gave to the world towards the latter part
of her life," says the "Biographia Dramatica," somewhat hastily, "no
author has appeared more the votary of virtue, nor are there any novels
in which a stricter purity, or a greater delicacy of sentiment, has been
preserved." Without discussing here the comparative decency of Mrs.
Haywood's later novels, we may admit at once, with few allowances for
change of standard, the moral excellence of such works as "The Female
Spectator" and "Epistles for the Ladies." Certainly if the penance paid
by the reader is any test, the novelist was successful in her effort to
atone for the looseness of her early writings, when she left the
province of fiction for that of the periodical essay.

FOOTNOTES
[1]
Elwin and Courthope's _Pope_, IV, 4.

[2]
Elwin and Courthope's _Pope_, IV, 135, note 3.

[3]
Elwin and Courthope's _Pope_, IV, 141.

[4]
Elwin and Courthope 's Pope, IV, 232. Professor Lounsbury has apparently
confused this work with _A Cursory View of the History of Lilliput For
these last forty three Years_, 8vo,1727, a political satire containing
no allusion to Pope. See _The Text of Shakespeare_, 287.

[5]
_Memoirs of the Court of Lilliput_, 16.

[6]
_The Dunciad_. 1728. Book II, lines 137-48, and 170; Book III, lines
149-53.

[7]
Elwin and Courthope 's _Pope_, IV, 282.

[8]
A second engraving by Vertue after Parmentier formed the frontispiece of
_Secret Histories, Novels, and Poems_.

[9]
E. Curll, _Key to the Dunciad_, 12. Some copies apparently read "peer"
for "poet." See Elwin and Courthope's _Pope_, IV, 330, note pp.; and Sir
Sidney Lee, article _Haywood_ in the D.N.B.

[10]
Elwin and Courthope's _Pope_, IV, 330, note ss.

[11]
Elwin and Courthope's _Pope_, IV, 294.

[12]
Elwin and Courthope's _Pope_, IV, 232. See also 159, note I.

[13]
T.E. Lounsbury, _The Text of Shakespeare_, 281. "'The Popiad' which
appeared in July, and 'The Female Dunciad' which followed the month
after ... were essentially miscellanies devoted to attacks upon the
poet, and for them authors were not so much responsible as publishers."

[14]
Elwin and Courthope's _Pope_, IV, 141, note 5.

[15]
Notes and Queries, Ser. I, X, 110. The words italicized by me refer to
Pope's description of Theobald's library, _The Dunciad_, (1728), Book I,
line 106.

[16]
T. R. Lounsbury, _The Text of Shakespeare_, 275. "But the attack upon
Mrs. Haywood exceeded all bounds of decency. To the credit of the
English race nothing so dastardly and vulgar can be found elsewhere in
English literature. If the influence of 'The Dunciad' was so
all-powerful as to ruin the prospects of any one it satirized, it ought
certainly to have crushed her beyond hope of any revival. As a matter of
fact Mrs. Haywood's most successful and popular writings were produced
after the publication of that poem, and that too at a period when Pope's
predominance was far higher than it was at the time the satire itself
appeared."

[17]
A. Esdaile, _English Tales and Romances_, Introduction, xxviii.

[18]
_The Mercenary Lover.... Written by the Author of Memoirs of the said
Island_ [Utopia] and described on the half-title as by E. H. and _The
Fair Captive_, a tragedy not originally written by her.

[19]
_Philobillon Soc. Misc._, IV, 12. "Clio must be allowed to be a most
complete poetess, if she really wrote those poems that bear her name;
but it has of late been so abused and scandalized, that I am informed
she has lately changed it for that of Myra." Quoted from the _British
Journal_, 24 September, 1726. I am indebted to Miss Dorothy Brewster's
_Aaron Hill_, 189, for this reference.

[20]
See Clara Reeve, _The Progress of Romance_ (1785), I, 121.
[I have re-arranged the passage for the sake of brevity.]

  "_Soph._ I have heard it often said that Mr. Pope was too severe in
  his treatment of this lady: it was supposed that she had given some
  private offence, which he resented publicly, as was too much his way.

  "_Euph._ Mr. Pope was severe in his castigations, but let us be just
  to merit of every kind. Mrs. _Heywood_ had the singular good fortune
  to recover a lost reputation and the yet greater honour to atone for
  her errors.--She devoted the remainder of her life and labours to the
  service of virtue.... Those works by which she is most likely to be
  known to posterity, are the _Female Spectator_, and the _Invisible
  Spy_...."





CHAPTER VI


LETTERS AND ESSAYS

The works of Mrs. Haywood's maturity most renowned for their pious
intent were not of the tribe of novels, but rather in the shape of
letters or periodical essays such as "Epistles for the Ladies" (1749)
and "The Female Spectator" (1746). Each of these forms, as practiced
during the eighteenth century, permitted the introduction of short
romantic stories either for the purpose of illustrating a moral or to
make the didacticism more palatable. Even as a votary of virtue Eliza
did not neglect to mingle a liberal portion of _dulce_ with her _utile_;
indeed in the first of the productions mentioned she manifested an
occasional tendency to revert to the letter of amorous intrigue
characteristic of her earlier efforts. In her latest and soberest
writings, the conduct books called "The Wife" and "The Husband" (1756),
she frequently yielded to the temptation to turn from dry precept to
picturing the foibles of either sex. Her long training in the school of
romance had made gallantry the natural object of Eliza Haywood's
thoughts.

During the time that she was incessantly occupied with short tales of
passion she had experimented in both the letter and the essay form,
using the former especially as an adjunct to her stories. One of her
first attempts, also, to find her proper vein as an author was a
translation from the French of the "Letters from a Lady of Quality to a
Chevalier," with a "Discourse concerning Writings of this Nature, by Way
of Essay" for which the translator was responsible. In "The Tea-Table"
(1725), which never advanced beyond the second part, and "Reflections on
the Various Effects of Love" (1726) the then well-known novelist
returned to the essay form, and a comprehensive volume of "Love-Letters
on All Occasions" (1730) closed the first period of her literary
activity. But none of these departures was noticeably different in tone
from her staple romances.

The sweets of love were perhaps most convincingly revealed in the
amorous billets of which "Love in Excess" and many of Eliza's subsequent
pieces of fiction contained a plentiful supply. Letters languishing with
various degrees of desire or burning with jealous rage were introduced
into the story upon any pretext. Writing them was evidently the author's
forte, and perusing them apparently a pleasure to her readers, for they
remained a conspicuous part of Mrs. Haywood's sentimental paraphernalia.
As in the French romances of the Scudery type the missives were quoted
at length and labeled with such headings as, "The Despairing D'Elmont to
his Repenting Charmer," or "To the never enough Admir'd Count D'Elmont,"
and signed with some such formula as, "Your most passionate and tender,
but ('till she receives a favorable Answer) your unknown Adorer." The
custom of inserting letters in the course of the story was, as has
already been indicated, a heritage from the times of Gomberville, La
Calprenede, and the Scuderys when miscellaneous material of all sorts
from poetry to prosy conversations was habitually used to diversify the
narrative. Mrs. Haywood, however, employed the letter not to ornament
but to intensify. Her _billets-doux_ like the lyrics in a play represent
moments of supreme emotion. In seeking vividness she too often fell into
exaggeration, as in the following specimen of absolute passion.

  "Torture--Distraction--Hell--what will become of me--I cannot--I will
  not survive the Knowledge that you are mine no more--Yet this Suspence
  is worse than all yet ever bore the Name of Horror--Let me not linger
  in it, if you have Humanity--declare my Doom at once--be kind in
  Cruelty at least, and let one Death conclude the thousand, thousand
  Deaths which every Minute of Uncertainty brings with it, to

                      The Miserable, but
                                  Still Adoring
                                            Melantha.

  P.S. I have order'd the Messenger to bring an Answer; if he comes
  without, depend I will murder him, and then myself."[1]

Such remnants of the romantic tradition as the verses on "The
Unfortunate Camilla's Complaint to the Moon, for the Absence of her dear
Henricus Frankville" in "Love in Excess" were soon discarded, but the
letters, though they encumbered the progress of the narrative, made it
more realistic by giving an opportunity for the display of passion at
first hand. Their continued vogue was undoubtedly due in large measure
to the popularity of the celebrated "Letters of a Portuguese Nun"
(1669), which, with a note of sincerity till then unknown, aided the
return to naturalness.[2]

The "Lettres Nouvelles de Monsieur Boursault ... Avec Treize Lettres
Amoureuses d'une Dame a un Cavalier," loosely translated by Mrs. Haywood
as "Letters from a Lady of Quality to a Chevalier" (1721),[3] was one of
the numerous imitations of the Portuguese Letters. Like most of the
other imitations it echoed the mannerisms rather than the fervor of its
original. The lady's epistles do not reveal a story, but describe in
detail the doubts, disappointments, fears, jealousies, and raptures of a
married woman for a lover who in the last three letters has left France
for England. Except for this remove there is no change in the situation
of the characters. The lover apparently remains constant to the end. The
reader is even left in some doubt as to the exact nature of their
relationship. The lady at one time calls it a "criminal Conversation,"
but later resents an attempt upon her honor, and seems generally to
believe that "a distant Conversation, if it is less sweet, will be, not
only more pure, but also more durable."

But perhaps it is only fair to let the author speak for herself.

  "The Lady, whose Letters I have taken the liberty to translate, tho
  she has been cautious enough in expressing any thing (even in those
  the most tender among them) which can give the Reader an Assurance she
  had forfeited her Virtue; yet there is not one, but what sufficiently
  proves how impossible it is to maintain such a Correspondence, without
  an Anxiety and continual Perturbation of Mind, which I think a Woman
  must have bid farewell to her Understanding, before she could resolve
  to endure.

  "In the very first she plainly discovers the Agitation of her Spirits,
  confesses she knows herself in the wrong, and that every Expression
  her Tenderness forces from her, is a Stab to her Peace; she dreads the
  Effects of her Lover's too powerful Attractions, doubts her own
  Strength of resisting such united Charms as she finds in him, and
  trembles at the Apprehensions, that by some unlucky Accident the
  Secret should be known. Every thing alarms her ... 'Tis impossible to
  be conscious of any thing we wish to conceal, without suspecting the
  most undesigning Words and Actions as Snares laid to entrap us ... So
  this unfortunate Lady, divided between Excess of Love, and Nicety of
  Honour, could neither resolve to give a loose to the one, nor entirely
  obey the Precepts of the other, but suffered herself to be tossed
  alternately by both. And tho the Person she loved was most certainly
  (if such a thing can be) deserving all the Condescensions a Woman
  could make, by his Assiduity, Constancy, and Gratitude, yet it must be
  a good while before she could receive those Proofs; and the Disquiets
  she suffered in that time of Probation, were, I think, if no worse
  ensued, too dear a Price for the Pleasure of being beloved by the most
  engaging and most charming of his Sex."

The "Discourse concerning Writings of this Nature," from which the above
quotation is taken, makes no attempt to consider other series of amorous
letters, but proceeds to enforce by platitudes and scraps of poetry the
only too obvious moral of the lady of quality's correspondence. The
author remembers how "a Lady of my Acquaintance, perhaps not without
reason, fell one day, as she was sitting with me, into this Poetical
Exclamation:

  'The Pen can furrow a fond Female's Heart,
  And pierce it more than Cupid's talk'd-of Dart:
  Letters, a kind of Magick Virtue have,
  And, like strong Philters, human Souls enslave!'"

After thirty pages of moralizing the writer comes to a conclusion with
the reflection, a commonplace of her novels, that "if the little I have
done, may give occasion to some abler Pen to expose [such indiscretions]
more effectually, I shall think myself happy in having given a hint,
which improv'd, may be of so general a Service to my Sex." But the
impression left by this and others of Mrs. Haywood's works is that the
fair novelist was not so much interested in preventing the
inadvertencies of her sex as in exposing them.

The tender passion was still the theme in "Love-Letters on All Occasions
Lately passed between Persons of Distinction," which contains a number
of letters, mainly disconnected, devoted to the warmer phases of
gallantry. Some are essays in little on definite subjects: levity,
sincerity, the pleasures of conjugal affection, insensibility, and so
on. Most of them, however, are occasional: "Strephon to Dalinda, on her
forbidding him to speak of Love," "Orontes to Deanira, entreating her to
give him a meeting," and many others in which both the proper names and
the situations suggest the artificial romances. None of the missives
reveals emotions of any but the most tawdry romantic kind, warm desires
extravagantly uttered, conventional doubts, causeless jealousies, and
petty quarrels. Like Mrs. Behn's correspondence with the amorous Van
Bruin these epistles have nothing to distinguish them except their
excessive hyperbole. There is one series of twenty-four connected
letters on the model of "Letters from a Lady of Quality to a Chevalier,"
relating the love story of Theano and Elismonda, but in the course of
the whole correspondence nothing more momentous occurs than the lover's
leaving town. Indeed so imperceptible is the narrative element in Mrs.
Haywood's epistolary sequences that they can make no claim to share with
the anonymous love story in letters entitled "Love's Posy" (1686), with
the "Letters Written By Mrs. Manley" (1696),[4] or with Tom Brown's
"Adventures of Lindamira" (1702) in twenty-four letters, the honor of
having anticipated Richardson's method of telling a story in epistolary
form.[5]

Even after the publication of "Pamela" and "Clarissa" Mrs. Haywood
failed to realize the narrative possibilities of consecutive letters,
for "Epistles for the Ladies" (1749) hardly contains three missives on
any one theme. Though the collection is not free from letters in the
vein of gallantry, the emphasis on the whole is decidedly changed. There
are few attempts to exploit the emotions by describing the palpitations
of injured beauty or the expostulations and vows of love-sick cavaliers.
Instead Aminta is praised for enduring with unusual self-possession the
treachery of her lover and her most intimate friend. Sophronia
encourages Palmira to persist in her resolution of living apart from her
husband until she is convinced of the reformation of his manners, and
Isabinda sends to Elvira a copy of a modest epithalamium on her sister's
marriage. Occasionally a romantic love story runs through three or four
letters, but any deviation from the strictest principles of delicacy--
and there are not many--is sure to be followed by a fitting catastrophe.
Some reprobation of the licentious manners of the age is permitted, but
no catering to degenerate taste and no breath of scandal. The aim of the
epistles, which were apparently not intended as models, was to convey
moral precepts in an agreeably alleviated form, but the balance inclines
rather heavily toward sober piety. A mother recommends poetry and
history for the reading of her twelve year old daughter, though allowing
an occasional indulgence in "well wrote Novels." Eusebia discusses the
power of divine music with the Bishop of ***. Berinthia writes to
Berenice to urge her to make the necessary preparations for futurity.
Philenia assures the Reverend Doctor *** that she is a true penitent,
and beseeches his assistance to strengthen her pious resolutions.
Hillaria laments to Clio that she is unable to think seriously on death,
and Aristander edifies Melissa by proving from the principles of reason
and philosophy the certainty of a future existence, and the absurdity
and meanness of those people's notions, who degrade the dignity of their
species, and put human nature on a level with that of the brute
creation. In all this devotion there was no doubt something of Mrs.
Howe. "Epistles for the Ladies" was not the first "attempt to employ the
ornaments of romance in the decoration of religion"[6] nor the best, but
along with the pious substance the author sometimes adopts an almost
Johnsonian weightiness of style, as when Ciamara gives to Sophronia an
account of the finishing of a fine building she had been at an infinite
expense in erecting, with some moral reflections on the vanity and
disappointment of all sub-lunary expectations.

In her essays, even the most serious, Mrs. Haywood was a follower of
Addison rather than Johnson. The first of them, if we disregard the
slight discourse appended to the "Letters from a Lady of Quality to a
Chevalier," was "The Tea-Table: or, A Conversation between some Polite
Persons of both Sexes, at a Lady's Visiting Day. Wherein are represented
the Various Foibles, and Affectations, which form the Character of an
Accomplish'd Beau, or Modern Fine Lady. Interspersed with several
Entertaining and Instructive Stories,"[7] (1725), which most resembles a
"day" detached from the interminable "La Belle Assemblee" of Mme de
Gomez, translated by Mrs. Haywood a few months before. There is the same
polite conversation, the debate between love and reason, the poem,[8]
and the story. But the moral reflections upon tea-tables, the
description of Amiana's, where only wit and good humor prevail, and the
satirical portraits of a titled coxcomb and a bevy of fine ladies, are
all in the manner of the "Tatler." The manuscript novel read by one of
the company savors of nothing but Mrs. Haywood, who was evidently unable
to slight her favorite theme of passion. Her comment on contemporary
manners soon gives place to "Beraldus and Celemena: or the Punishment of
Mutability," a tale of court intrigue in her warmest vein. The authors
of the "Tatler" and "Spectator" had, of course, set a precedent for the
inclusion of short romantic stories in the essay of manners, and even
the essays with no distinct element of fiction were preparing for the
novelist the powerful tool of characterization. Writers of fiction were
slow to apply the new art to their proper materials. In the present
instance an experienced novelist employed the essay form to depict the
follies and affectations of a beau and fine ladies, and immediately
turned back to a story in which characterization is almost entirely
neglected for incident. It is interesting to find the same writer using
the realistic sketch of manners and the romantic tale of intrigue and
passion without any thought of combining the two elements. In the second
part of "The Tea-Table" Mrs. Haywood made no attempt to diversify the
patchwork of verse and prose with any narrative, save one small incident
illustrating pride. The sole point of interest is the long and laudatory
tribute to her friend Aaron Hill in "A Pastoral Dialogue, between Alexis
and Clarinda; Occasioned by Hillarius's intending a Voyage to America."

The "Reflections on the Various Effects of Love" (1726), however, takes
full advantage of the looseness of the essay form to become a mere
tissue of short narratives illustrating the consequences of passion. The
stories of Celia and Evandra, one cursing her betrayer, the other
wishing him always happy, exemplify revengeful and generous love. There
are two model epistles from Climene to Mirtillo, the first upon his
absence, the second upon his desertion of her. Soon the trite remarks
degenerate into a scandal novel, relating the history of Sophiana,
abandoned by Aranthus and sought by Martius, with many of her letters
describing her gradual change of heart in favor of the beseeching lover.
In the midst of exposing Hibonio's sudden infatuation for a
gutter-nymph, the essay abruptly ends with the exclamation, "More of
this in our next." Though there was no lack of slander at the end of
Mrs. Haywood's pen, she never attempted to continue the "Reflections."

But almost twenty years later she made a more noteworthy excursion into
the field of the periodical essay. "The Female Spectator," begun in
April, 1744, and continued in monthly parts until May, 1746, bid fair to
become the best known and most approved of her works. The twenty-four
numbers (two months being omitted) were bound in four volumes upon the
completion of the series and sold with such vigor that an edition
labeled the third was issued at Dublin in 1747. In 1771 the seventh and
last English edition was printed. As in the original "Spectator" the
essays are supposed to be the product of a Club, in this case composed
of four women. After drawing her own character in the terms already
quoted,[9] Mrs. Haywood mentions as her coadjutors in the enterprise
"Mira, a Lady descended from a Family to which Wit seems hereditary,
married to a Gentleman every way worthy of so excellent a Wife.... The
next is a Widow of Quality" who has not "buried her Vivacity in the Tomb
of her Lord.... The Third is the Daughter of a wealthy Merchant,
charming as an Angel.... This fine young Creature I shall call
Euphrosine." The suspiciously representative character of these
assistants may well make us doubt their actuality; and from the style of
the lucubrations, at least, no evidence of a plurality of authors can
readily be perceived. Indeed after the first few numbers we hear nothing
more of them. "Mira" was the pseudonym used by Mrs. Haywood in "The
Wife" (1756), while a periodical called "The Young Lady" began to appear
just before her death under the pen-name of Euphrosine.

Whether written by a Female Spectator Club or by a single authoress, the
essays in purpose, method, and style are evidently imitated from their
famous model. The loose plan and general intention to rectify the
manners of the age allowed the greatest latitude in the choice of
subject matter. In a single paper are jumbled together topics so diverse
as the degradation of the stage, the immoderate use of tea, and the
proper choice of lovers. The duty of periodical essayists to castigate
the follies of the time is graphically represented in the frontispiece
to the second volume, where Apollo, seated on some substantial clouds
and holding in his hand "The Female Spectator," despatches a flying
Mercury, who in spite of the efforts of two beaux with drawn swords and
a belle in _deshabille_, chastises a female figure of Luxuria lolling in
a chariot pulled by one inadequate grasshopper. In the essays themselves
the same purpose led to the censure of gambling, lying, affectation of
youth by the aged, jilts, "Anti-Eternitarians," scandal bearing, and
other petty sins and sinners. For political readers a gentleman
contributes a conversation between a Hanoverian and an English lady, in
which the latter has the best of the argument. An account of Topsy-Turvy
Land satirizes illogical practices in a manner familiar to the readers
of "The Bab Ballads." The few literary papers are concerned with true
and false taste, the delights of reading, Mr. Akenside's "Pleasures of
the Imagination" and the horrors of the same, the outwearing of romance,
and love-letters passed between Augustus Caesar and Livia Drusilla,
which last Mrs. Haywood was qualified to judge as an expert. Essays on
religion and the future life reveal something of the sober touch and
moral earnestness of Johnson, but nothing of his compact and weighty
style. As in the "Spectator," topics are often introduced by a scrap of
conversation by way of a text or by a letter from a correspondent
setting forth some particular grievance. The discussion is frequently
illustrated by anecdotes or even by stories, though the author makes
comparatively small use of her talent for fiction. Indeed she records at
one point that "Many of the Subscribers to this Undertaking ... complain
that ... I moralize too much, and that I give them too few Tales." The
Oriental setting used by Addison with signal success is never attempted
and even scandal stories are frowned upon. Instead of the elaborate and
elegantly turned illustrative narratives of the "Spectator," Mrs.
Haywood generally relates anecdotes which in spite of the disguised
names savor of crude realism. They are examples rather than
illustrations of life.

One of the most lively is a story told to show the inevitable
unhappiness of a marriage between persons of different sects. The
husband, a High Church man, and the wife, of Presbyterian persuasion,
were happy enough during the first months of married life, "tho' he
sometimes expressed a Dissatisfaction at being denied the Pleasure of
leading her to Westminster-Abbey, for he would hear no Divine Service
out of a Cathedral, and she was no less troubled that she could not
prevail with him to make his Appearance with her at the Conventicle."
Consequently when their first child was born, they were unable to agree
how the boy was to be baptized. "All their Discourse was larded with the
most piquant Reflections," but to no purpose. The father insisted upon
having his own way, but Amonia, as his consort was not inappropriately
named, was no less stubborn in her detestation of lawn sleeves, and on
the eve of the christening had the ceremony privately performed by her
own minister. When the bishop and the guests were assembled, she
announced with "splenetic Satisfaction" that the child had already been
"made a Christian" and that his name was John. The astonished husband
lapsed into an "adequate rage," and though restrained by the company
from doing an immediate violence to his help-mate, was permanently
estranged from her through his resentment. Two other stories from "The
Female Spectator" were quoted by Dr. Nathan Drake in his "Gleaner."

In her bold attempt to rival Addison upon his own ground Mrs. Haywood
was more than moderately successful in the estimation of many of her
contemporaries. Rambling and trite as are the essays in her periodical,
their excellent intentions, at least, gained them a degree of
popularity. A writer in the "Gentleman's Magazine" for December, 1744,
applauding the conspicuous merit of the "fair philosophers in virtue's
cause," declared that

  "Were your great predecessor yet on earth,
  He'd be the first to speak your page's worth,
  There all the foibles of the fair you trace;
  There do you shew your sex's truest grace;
  There are the various wiles of man display'd,
  In gentle warnings to the cred'lous maid;
  Politely pictur'd, wrote with strength and ease,
  And while the wand'rer you reclaim, you please....
  Women, the heart of women best can reach;
  While men from maxims--you from practice teach."

The latter part of the panegyric shows that the fair romancer had not
been entirely smothered in the fair philosopher and moral essayist.

Perhaps encouraged by the success of "The Female Spectator" to publish
more frequently, or actuated by a desire to appeal to the public
interest in the political excitement of 1745-6, Mrs. Haywood next
attempted to combine the periodical essay with the news-letter, but the
innovation evidently failed to please. "The Parrot, with a Compendium of
the Times" ran only from 2 August to 4 October, 1746. The numbers
consisted commonly of two parts: the first being moralizings on life and
manners by a miraculous parrot; and the second a digest of whatever
happenings the author could scrape together. The news of the day was
concerned chiefly with the fate of the rebels in the last Stuart
uprising and with rumors of the Pretender's movements. From many
indications Eliza Haywood would seem to have taken a lively interest in
the Stuart cause, but certainly she had no exceptional facilities for
reporting the course of events, and consequently her budget of
information was often stale or filled with vague surmises. But she did
not overlook the opportunity to narrate _con amore_ such pathetic
incidents as the death of Jemmy Dawson's sweetheart at the moment of his
execution, later the subject of Shenstone's ballad. The vaporizings of
the parrot were also largely inspired by the trials of the rebels, but
the sagacious bird frequently drew upon such stock subjects as the
follies of the gay world, the character of women, the unreliability of
venal praise and interested personal satire, and the advantages of
making one's will--the latter illustrated by a story. Somewhat more
unusual was a letter from an American Poll, representing how much it was
to the interest of England to preserve, protect, and encourage her
plantations in the New World, and complaining of the tyranny of
arbitrary governors. But the essay parts of "The Parrot" are not even
equal to "The Female Spectator" and deserve no lightening of the deep
and speedy oblivion cast upon them.

Besides her periodical essays Mrs. Haywood wrote during her declining
years several conduct books, which, beyond showing the adaptability of
her pen to any species of writing, have but small importance. One of
them, though inheriting something from Defoe, owed most to the interest
in the servant girl heroine excited by Richardson's first novel. No
sociologist has yet made a study of the effect of "Pamela" upon the
condition of domestics, but the many excellent maxims on the servant
question uttered by Lord B---- and his lady can hardly have been without
influence upon the persons of the first quality who pored over the
volumes. In popular novels, at any rate, abigails and scullions reigned
supreme. In 1752 the "Monthly Review" remarked of a recent work of
fiction, "The History of Betty Barnes," that it seemed "chiefly
calculated for the amusement of a class of people, to whom the
_Apprentice's Monitor_, or the _Present for a servant maid_ might be
recommended to much better purpose," but the reviewer's censure failed
to quell the demand for romances of the kitchen. Mrs. Haywood, however,
might have approved of his recommendation, since she happened to be the
author of the little manual of household science especially urged upon
the females below stairs.

"A Present for a Servant-Maid. Or, the Sure Means of Gaining Love and
Esteem" was frequently reprinted both in London and Dublin during the
years 1743-4, and as late as 1772 a revision was mentioned in the
"Monthly Review" as a "well-designed and valuable tract."[10] The work
is a compendium of instructions for possible Pamelas, teaching them in
brief how to wash, to market, to dress any sort of meat, to cook, to
pickle, and to preserve their virtue. The maids are cautioned against
such female errors as sluttishness, tale-bearing, staying on errands,
telling family affairs, aping the fashion, and giving saucy answers.
They are forbidden to play with fire or candles, to quarrel with fellow
domestics, to waste victuals or to give them away. A fine example of the
morality of scruples inculcated by the tract is the passage on the duty
of religious observance. A maidservant should not neglect to go to
church at least every other Sunday, and should never spend the time
allowed her for that purpose walking in the fields or drinking tea with
an acquaintance. "Never say you have been at Church unless you have, but
if you have gone out with that Intention, and been diverted from it by
any Accident or Persuasions, confess the Truth, if asked." Girls so
unhappy as to live with people who "have no Devotion themselves" should
entreat permission to go to church, and if it is refused them, rather
leave their place than be deprived of sacred consolation. "If you lose
_one_, that God, for whose sake you have left it, will doubtless provide
another, and perhaps a better for you." Scarcely more edifying are the
considerations of self-interest which should guide a maidservant into
the paths of virtue. "Industry and Frugality are two very amiable Parts
of a Woman's Character, and I know no readier Way than attaining them,
to procure you the Esteem of Mankind, and get yourselves good Husbands.
Consider, my dear Girls, that you have no Portions, and endeavour to
supply the Deficiencies of Fortune by Mind." And in pure Pamela vein is
the advice offered to those maids whose honor is assailed. If the
temptation come from the master, it will be well to reflect whether he
is a single or a married man and act accordingly. One cannot expect the
master's son to keep a promise of marriage without great difficulty, but
the case may be different with a gentleman lodger, especially if he be
old and doting. And the moral of all is: Don't sell yourselves too
cheap. Finally to complete the usefulness of the pamphlet were added,
"Directions for going to Market: Also, for Dressing any Common Dish,
whether Flesh, Fish or Fowl. With some Rules for Washing, &c. The whole
calculated for making both the Mistress and the Maid happy."

More especially intended to promote the happiness of the mistress of the
family, "The Wife, by Mira, One of the Authors of the Female Spectator,
and Epistles for Ladies" (1756) contains advice to married women on how
to behave toward their husbands in every conceivable situation,
beginning with the first few weeks after marriage "vulgarly call'd the
honey-moon," and ending with "How a Woman ought to behave when in a
state of Separation from her Husband"--a subject upon which Mrs. Haywood
could speak from first-hand knowledge. Indeed it must be confessed that
the writer seems to be chiefly interested in the infelicities of married
life, and continually alleviates the rigor of her didactic pasages
[Transcriber's note: sic] with lively pictures of domestic jars, such as
the following:

  "The happy day which had join'd this pair was scarce six weeks
  elapsed, when lo! behold a most terrible reverse;--the hurry of their
  fond passion was over;--dalliance was no more,--kisses and embraces
  were now succeeded by fighting, scratching, and endeavouring to tear
  out each other's eyes;--the lips that before could utter only,--my
  dear,--my life,--my soul,--my treasure, now pour'd forth nothing but
  invectives;--they took as little care to conceal the proofs of their
  animosity as they had done to moderate those of a contrary emotion;--
  they were continually quarreling;--their house was a Babel of
  confusion;--no servant would stay with them a week;--they were shunn'd
  by their most intimate friends, and despis'd by all their
  acquaintance; till at last they mutually resolv'd to agree in one
  point, which was, to be separated for ever from each other" (p. 16).

So the author discusses a wife's behavior toward a husband when laboring
under disappointment or vexatious accidents; sleeping in different beds;
how a woman should act when finding that her husband harbors unjust
suspicions of her virtue; the great indiscretion of taking too much
notice of the unmeaning or transient gallantries of a husband; the
methods which a wife is justified to take after supporting for a long
time a complication of all manner of ill-usage from a husband; and other
causes or effects of marital infelicity. Though marriage almost
inevitably terminates in a "brulee," the wife should spare no efforts to
ameliorate her husband's faults.

  "If addicted to drinking, she must take care to have his cellar well
  stor'd with the best and richest wines, and never seem averse to any
  company he shall think fit to entertain:--If fond of women, she must
  endeavour to convince him that the virtuous part of the sex are
  capable of being as agreeable companions as those of the most loose
  principles;--and this, not by arguments, for those he will not listen
  to;--but by getting often to her house, the most witty, gay, and
  spirituous of her acquaintance, who will sing, dance, tell pleasant
  stories, and take all the freedoms that innocence allows" (p. 163).

Occasionally the advice to married women is very practical, as the
following deterrent from gluttony shows:

  "I dined one day with a lady, who the whole time she employ'd her
  knife and fork with incredible swiftness in dispatching a load of
  turkey and chine she had heap'd upon her plate, still kept a keen
  regard on what she had left behind, greedily devouring with her eyes
  all that remain'd in the dish, and throwing a look of envy on every
  one who put in for the smallest share.--My advice to such a one is,
  that she would have a great looking-glass fix'd opposite the seat she
  takes at table; and I am much mistaken, if the sight of herself in
  those grim attitudes I have mention'd, will not very much contribute
  to bring her to more moderation" (p. 276).

The method of "The Husband, in Answer to the Wife" (1756) is similar to
that of its companion-piece; in fact, much of the same advice is merely
modified or amplified to suit the other sex. The husband is warned to
avoid drinking to excess and some other particulars which may happen to
be displeasing to his spouse, such as using too much freedom in his
wife's presence with any of her female acquaintance. He is instructed in
the manner in which it will be most proper for a married man to carry
himself towards the maidservants of his family, and also the manner of
behavior best becoming a husband on a full detection of his wife's
infidelity. As in "The Wife" the path of marriage leads but to divorce.
One is forcibly reminded of Hogarth's "Marriage a la Mode."

Not altogether different is the conception of wedlock in Mrs. Haywood's
novels of domestic life written at about the same period, but the
pictures there shown are painted in incomparably greater detail, with a
fuller appreciation of character, and without that pious didacticism
which even the most lively exertions of Eliza Haywood's romancing genius
failed to leaven in her essays.

FOOTNOTES
[1]
_Memoirs of a Certain Island_, I, 141. The letter is one of a packet
conveyed away by Sylphs much resembling those in _The Rape of the Lock_.

[2]
Miss C.E. Morgan, _The Novel of Manners_, 72.

[3]
The author herself describes it in the Preface as "more properly ... a
Paraphrase than a Translation."

[4]
Later _A Stage-Coach Journey to Exeter_, 1725.

[5]
A. Esdaile, _English Tales and Romances_, Introduction, xxxiii.
B.
[6]
Robert Boyle's _Martyrdom of Theodora_, 1687, is thus described by Dr.
Johnson. Boswell's _Johnson_, Oxford ed., I, 208.

[7]
Not to be confused with a periodical entitled _The Tea-Table. To be
continued every Monday and Friday_. No. 1-36, 21 February to 22 June,
1724. B.M. (P.P. 5306).

[8]
_Ximene fearing to be forsaken by Palemon, desires he would kill her._
Quoted by Dyce, _Specimens of British Poetesses_, 1827, p. 186.

[9]
See _ante_, p. 24.

[10]
_Monthly Review_, XLVI, 463. April, 1772.




CHAPTER VII


LATER FICTION: THE DOMESTIC NOVEL

No such homogeneity as marked the works of Mrs. Haywood's first decade
of authorship can be discovered in the productions of her last fifteen
years. The vogue of the short romantic tale was then all but exhausted,
her stock of scandal was no longer new, and accordingly she was obliged
to grope her way toward fresh fields, even to the barren ground of the
moral essay. But besides the letters, essays, and conduct books, and the
anonymous pamphlets of doubtful character that may have occupied her pen
during this period, she engaged in several experiments in legitimate
prose fiction of various sorts, which have little in common except their
more considerable length. Although the name of Mrs. Eliza Haywood was
not displayed upon the title-pages nor mentioned in the reviews of these
novels, the authorship was not carefully concealed and was probably
known to the curious. The titles of nearly all of them were mentioned by
the "Biographia Dramatica" in the list of the novelist's meritorious
works.

The earliest and the only one to bear the signature of Eliza Haywood at
the end of the dedication was borrowed from the multifarious and
unremarkable literary wares of Charles de Fieux, Chevalier de Mouhy.
"The Virtuous Villager, or Virgin's Victory: Being The Memoirs of a very
Great Lady at the Court of France. Written by Herself. In which the
Artifices of designing Men are fully detected and exposed; and the
Calamities they bring on credulous believing Woman, are particularly
related," was given to the English public in 1742 as a work suited to
inculcate the principles of virtue, and probably owed its being to the
previous success of "Pamela."[1] In the original a dull and spiritless
imitation of Marivaux, the work was not improved by translation, and met
naturally the reception due its slender merits. But along with the
English versions of Le Sage, Marivaux, and the Abbe Prevost, "The
Virtuous Villager" helped to accustom the readers of fiction to two
volume novels and to pave the way for the numerous pages of Richardson.

Not more than a year from the time when the four duodecimos of "Pamela"
introduced kitchen morality into the polite world, the generosity of
prominent men and women was directed toward a charity recently
established after long agitation.[2] To furnish suitable decorations for
the Foundling Hospital in Lamb's Conduit, Hogarth contributed the unsold
lottery tickets for his "March to Finchley," and other well-known
painters lent their services. Handel, a patron of the institution, gave
the organ it still possesses, and society followed the lead of the men
of genius. The grounds of the Foundling Hospital became in Georgian days
a "fashionable morning lounge." Writers of ephemeral literature were not
slow to perceive how the wind lay and to take advantage of the interest
aroused by the new foundation. The exposed infant, one of the oldest
literary devices, was copiously revived, and during the decade when the
Hospital was being constructed mention of foundlings on title-pages
became especially common. A pamphlet called "The Political Foundling"
was followed by the well-known "Foundling Hospital for Wit and Humour"
(1743), by Mrs. Haywood's "Fortunate Foundlings" (1744), by Moore's
popular comedy, "The Foundling" (1748), and last and greatest by "The
History of Tom Jones, a Foundling" (1749), not to mention "The Female
Foundling" (1750).

Eliza Haywood's contribution to foundling literature relates the history
of twins, brother and sister, found by a benevolent gentleman named
Dorilaus in the memorable year 1688. Louisa is of the tribe of Marianne,
Pamela, and Henrietta, nor do her experiences differ materially from the
course usually run by such heroines. Reared a model of virtue, she is
obliged to fly from the house of her guardian to avoid his
importunities. After serving as a milliner's apprentice long enough to
demonstrate the inviolability of her principles, she becomes mistress of
the rules of politeness at the leading courts of Europe as the companion
of the gay Melanthe. Saved from an atrocious rake by an honorable lover,
whom she is unwilling to accept because of the humbleness of her
station, she takes refuge in a convent where she soon becomes so popular
that the abbess lays a plot to induce her to become a nun. But escaping
the religious snare, she goes back to Paris to be claimed by Dorilaus as
his real daughter. Thus every obstacle to her union with her lover is
happily removed.

Horatio, meanwhile, after leaving Westminster School to serve as a
volunteer in Flanders, has encountered fewer amorous and more military
adventures than usually fell to the lot of Haywoodian heroes. His
promising career under Marlborough is terminated when he is taken
captive by the French, but he is subsequently released to enter the
service of the Chevalier. He then becomes enamored of the beautiful
Charlotta de Palfoy, and in the hope of making his fortune equal to
hers, resolves to cast his lot with the Swedish monarch. In the Saxon
campaign he wins a commission as colonel of horse and a comfortable
share of the spoils, but later is taken prisoner by the Russians and
condemned to languish in a dungeon at St. Petersburg. After many
hardships he makes his way to Paris to be welcomed as a son by Dorilaus
and as a husband by his adored Charlotta.

In describing Horatio's martial exploits Mrs. Haywood may well have
learned some lessons from the "Memoirs of a Cavalier." The narrative is
direct and rapid, and diversified by the mingling of private escapades
with history. Too much is made, of course, of the hero's personal
relations with Charles XII, but that is a fault which few historical
novelists have known how to avoid. The geographical background, as well
as the historical setting, is laid out with a precision unusual in her
fiction. The whole map of Europe is the scene of action, and the author
speaks as one familiar with foreign travel, though her passing
references to Paris, Venice, Vienna, and other cities have not the full
vigor of the descriptions in "Peregrine Pickle."

From the standpoint of structure, too, "The Fortunate Foundlings" is an
improvement over the haphazard plots of Mrs. Haywood's early romances,
though the double-barreled story necessitated by twin hero and heroine
could hardly be told without awkward interruptions in the sequence of
one part of the narrative in order to forward the other. But the author
doubtless felt that the reader's interest would be freshened by turning
from the amorous adventures of Louisa to the daring deeds of Horatio,
while a protagonist of each sex enabled her to exhibit at once examples
of both male and female virtue. And in spite of inherent difficulties,
she succeeded to some extent in showing an interrelation of plots, as
where Dorilaus by going to the north of Ireland to hear the dying
confession of the mother of his children, thereby misses Horatio's
appeal for a ransom, and thus prevents him from rejoining Marlborough's
standard. But there is nothing like Fielding's ingenious linking of
events and careful preparation for the catastrophe, nor did Mrs. Haywood
make much out of the hint of unconscious incest and the foundling motif
which her book has in common with "Tom Jones." Occasionally also she
cannot refrain from inserting a bit of court gossip or an amorous page
in her warmest manner, but the number of intercalated stories is small
indeed compared to that in a romance like "Love in Excess," and they are
usually dismissed in a few paragraphs. Here for the first time the
author has shown some ability to subordinate sensational incident to the
needs of the main plot.

When Mrs. Haywood's inclination or necessities led her back to the novel
four years later, she produced a work upon a still more consistent, if
also more artificial plan than any of her previous attempts. "Life's
Progress through the Passions: or, the Adventures of Natura" avowedly
aims to trace the workings of human emotion. The author's purpose is to
examine in "what manner the passions operate in every stage of life, and
how far the constitution of the _outward frame_ is concerned in the
emotions of the _internal faculties_," for actions which we might admire
or abhor "would lose much of their _eclat_ either way, were the secret
springs that give them motion, seen into with the eyes of philosophy and
reflection." Natura, a sort of Everyman exposed to the variations of
passion, is not the faultless hero of romance, but a mere ordinary
mortal. Indeed, the writer declares that she is "an enemy to all
_romances, novels_, and whatever carries the air of them ... and as it
is a _real_, not _fictitious_ character I am about to present, I think
myself obliged ... to draw him such as he was, not such as some sanguine
imaginations might wish him to have been."

The survey of the passions begins with an account of Natura's birth of
well-to-do but not extraordinary parents, his mother's death, and his
father's second marriage, his attack of the small-pox, his education at
Eton, and his boyish love for his little play-mate, Delia. Later he
becomes more seriously compromised with a woman of the streets, who
lures him into financial engagements. Though locked up by his displeased
father, he manages to escape, finds his lady entertaining another
gallant, and in despair becomes a regular vagabond. Just as he is about
to leave England, his father discovers him and sends him to make the
grand tour under a competent tutor.

In Paris the tutor dies, and the young man is left to the exercise of
his own discretion. Benighted in a wood, he finds shelter in a monastery
of noble ladies, where both the abbess and her sister fall in love with
him. After fluctuating between the two, he tries to elope with the
sister, is foiled by the abbess, and sets off again upon his travels. In
Italy he hears of his father's difficulties and starts for home, but
enters the French service instead. He is involved with a nobleman in an
attempt to abduct a lady from a nunnery, and would have been tortured
had not the jailor's wife eloped with him to England. There he enters
Parliament and is about to contract a fortunate marriage when he
incautiously defends the Chevalier in conversation, fights a duel, and,
although his antagonist is only wounded, he finds his reputation
blighted by the stigma of Jacobitism. After a long illness at Vienna
where he is pestered by Catholic priests, he recovers his health at Spa,
and falls in love with a young English girl. Her parents gladly give
their consent, but Maria seems unaccountably averse to the match. And
when our hero is assaulted by a jealous footman, he perceives that the
lady has fixed her affections on a lower object. Natura on his return to
England prospers and marries happily, but his joy is soon destroyed by
the death of his father and of his wife in giving birth to a son.
Consumed by ambition, the widower then marries the niece of a statesman,
only to discover what misery there is in a luxurious and unvirtuous
wife.

Natura soon experiences the passions of melancholy, grief, and revenge.
His son dies, and his wife's conduct forces him to divorce her. In the
hope of preventing his brother from inheriting his estate he is about to
marry a healthy country girl when he hears that his brother is dead and
that his sister's son is now his heir. Thereupon he buys off his
intended bride. At his sister's house he meets a young matron named
Charlotte, for whom he long entertains a platonic affection, but finally
marries her and has three sons. Thereafter he sinks into a calm and
natural decline and dies in his sixty-third year.

  "Thus I have attempted to trace nature in all her mazy windings, and
  shew life's progress through the passions, from the cradle to the
  grave.--The various adventures which happened to Natura, I thought,
  afforded a more ample field, than those of any one man I ever heard,
  or read of; and flatter myself, that the reader will find many
  instances, that may contribute to rectify his own conduct, by pointing
  out those things which ought to be avoided, or at least most carefully
  guarded against, and those which are worthy to be improved and
  imitated."

The obvious and conventional moral ending and the shreds of romance that
still adhere to the story need not blind us to its unusual features.
Besides insisting upon the necessity for psychological analysis of a
sort, the author here for the first time becomes a genuine novelist in
the sense that her confessed purpose is to depict the actual conditions
of life, not to glorify or idealize them. As Fielding was to do in "Tom
Jones," Mrs. Haywood proclaims the mediocrity of her hero as his most
remarkable quality. Had she been able to make him more than a lay figure
distorted by various passions, she might have produced a real character.
Although at times he seems to be in danger of acquiring the romantic
faculty of causing every woman he meets to fall in love with him, yet
the glamor of his youth is obscured by a peaceful and ordinary old age.
Artificial in design and stilted in execution as the work is, it
nevertheless marks Eliza Haywood's emancipation from the traditions of
the romance.[3]

In "The History of Miss Betsy Thoughtless" (1751) she reached the full
fruition of her powers as a novelist. Her heroine, like Natura, is
little more than a "humour" character, whose prevailing fault is denoted
by her surname.[4] Though not fundamentally vicious, her heedless
vanity, inquisitiveness, and vivacity lead her into all sorts of follies
and embarrassments upon her first entry into fashionable life in London.
Among all the suitors who strive to make an impression upon her heart
Mr. Trueworth alone succeeds, but her levity and her disregard of
appearances force him to think her unworthy of his attentions. Meanwhile
her guardian's wife, Lady Mellasin, has been turned out of the house for
an egregious infidelity, and Betsy is left to her own scant discretion.
After somewhat annoying her brothers by receiving men at her lodgings,
she elects under family pressure to marry a Mr. Munden, who quickly
shows himself all that a husband should not be. Eventually she has to
abandon him, but demonstrates her wifely devotion by going back to nurse
him through his last illness. Mr. Trueworth's mate in the interim has
conveniently managed to succumb, his old passion revives, and exactly
upon the anniversary of Mr. Munden's death he arrives in a chariot and
six to claim the fair widow, whose youthful levity has been chastened by
the severe discipline of her unfortunate marriage. Told in an easy and
dilatory style and interspersed with the inevitable little histories and
impassioned letters, the story attained the conventional bulk of four
duodecimo volumes.

As Mr. Austin Dobson has pointed out,[5] Mrs. Haywood's novel is
remarkable for its scant allusions to actual places and persons. Once
mention is made of an appointment "at General Tatten's bench, opposite
Rosamond's pond, in St. James's Park," and once a character refers to
Cuper's Gardens, but except for an outburst of unexplained virulence
directed against Fielding,[6] there is hardly a thought of the
novelist's contemporaries. Here is a change indeed from the method of
the _chronique scandaleuse_, and a restraint to be wondered at when we
remember the worthies caricatured by so eminent a writer as Smollett.
But even more remarkable is the difference of spirit between "Betsy
Thoughtless" and Mrs. Haywood's earlier and briefer romances. The young
_romanciere_ who in 1725 could write, "Love is a Topick which I believe
few are ignorant of ... a shady Grove and purling Stream are all Things
that's necessary to give us an Idea of the tender Passion,"[7] had in a
quarter of a century learned much worldly wisdom, and her heroine
likewise is too sophisticated to be moved by the style of love-making
that warmed the susceptible bosoms of Anadea, Filenia, or Placentia. One
of Betsy's suitors, indeed, ventured upon the romantic vein with no very
favorable results.

  "'The deity of soft desires,' said he, 'flies the confused glare of
  pomp and public shews;--'tis in the shady bowers, or on the banks of a
  sweet purling stream, he spreads his downy wings, and wafts his
  thousand nameless pleasures on the fond--the innocent and the happy
  pair.'

  "He was going on, but she interrupted him with a loud laugh. 'Hold,
  hold,' cried she; 'was there ever such a romantick description? I
  wonder how such silly ideas come into your head--"shady bowers! and
  purling streams!"--Heavens, how insipid! Well' (continued she), 'you
  may be the Strephon of the woods, if you think fit; but I shall never
  envy the happiness of the Chloe that accompanies you in these fine
  recesses. What! to be cooped up like a tame dove, only to coo, and
  bill, and breed? O, it would be a delicious life, indeed!'"[8]

Thus completely metamorphosed were the heroines of Mrs. Haywood's
maturest fiction. Betsy Thoughtless is not even the innocent, lovely,
and pliable girl typified in Fielding's Sophia Western. She is eminently
hard-headed, inquisitive, and practical, and is justly described by Sir
Walter Raleigh as "own cousin to Roderick Random."[9]

Whether she may be considered also the ancestor of Evelina must briefly
be considered. Dunlop, who apparently originated the idea that "Betsy
Thoughtless" might have suggested the plan of Miss Burney's novel,
worked out an elaborate parallel between the plots and some of the chief
characters of the two compositions.[10] Both, as he pointed out, begin
with the launching of a young girl on the great and busy stage of life
in London. Each heroine has much to endure from the vulgar manners of a
Lady Mellasin or a Madam Duval, and each is annoyed by the malice and
impertinence of a Miss Flora or the Misses Branghton. Through their
inexperience in the manners of the world and their heedlessness or
ignorance of ceremony both young ladies are mortified by falling into
embarrassing and awkward predicaments. Both in the same way alarm the
delicacy and almost alienate the affections of their chosen lovers. "The
chief perplexity of Mr. Trueworth, the admirer of Miss Thoughtless,
arose from meeting her in company with Miss Forward, who had been her
companion at a boarding-school, and of whose infamous character she was
ignorant. In like manner the delicacy of Lord Orville is wounded, and
his attachment shaken, by meeting his Evelina in similar society at
Vauxhall. The subsequent visit and counsel of the lovers to their
mistresses is seen, however, in a very different point of view by the
heroines." The likeness between the plots of the two novels is indeed
sufficiently striking to attract the attention of an experienced hunter
for literary parallels, but unfortunately there is no external evidence
to show that Miss Burney ever read her predecessor's work. One need only
compare any two parallel characters, the common profligate, Lady
Mellasin, for instance, with the delightfully coarse Madam Duval, to see
how little the author of "Evelina" could have learned from the pages of
Mrs. Haywood.

But if it deserves scant credit as a model for Miss Burney's infinitely
more delicate art, "Betsy Thoughtless" should still be noticed as an
early attempt to use the substance of everyday life as material for
fiction. It has been called with some justice the first domestic novel
in the language. Although the exact definition of a domestic novel
nowhere appears, the term may be understood--by expanding the French
_roman a la tasse de the_--as meaning a realistic piece of fiction in
which the heroine serves as chief protagonist, and which can be read
with a teacup in one hand without danger of spilling the tea. Mrs.
Haywood indeed drew upon her old stock of love scenes tender or
importunate, duels, marital disputes, and elopements to lend interest to
her story, but except for the mock-marriage with a scoundrelly valet
from which the imprudent Betsy is rescued in the nick of time by her
former lover, no passage in the four volumes recommends itself
particularly either to sense or to sensibility. There are few high
lights in "Betsy Thoughtless"; the story keeps the even and loquacious
tenor of its way after a fashion called insipid by the "Monthly Review,"
though the critic finally acknowledges the difficulty of the task, if
not the success of the writer. "In justice to [our author], however,
this may be further observed, that no other hand would, probably, have
more happily finished a work begun on such a plan, as that of the
history of a young inconsiderate girl, whose little foibles, without any
natural vices of the mind, involve her in difficulties and distresses,
which, by correcting, make her wiser, and deservedly happy in the end. A
heroine like this, cannot but lay her historian under much disadvantage;
for tho' such an example may afford lessons of prudence, yet how can we
greatly interest ourselves in the fortune of one, whose character and
conduct are neither amiable nor infamous, and which we can neither
admire, nor love, nor pity, nor be diverted with? Great spirit in the
writer, and uncommon beauties in the expression, are certainly necessary
to supply the deficiency of such a barren foundation."[11] Neither of
the latter qualities was at the command of the "female pen" that
composed "Betsy Thoughtless," but in spite of the handicap imposed by
the plan of her work and the deficiencies of her genius, she produced a
novel at once realistic and readable. Without resorting to the dramatic
but inherently improbable plots by which Richardson made his writings at
once "the joy of the chambermaids of all nations"[12] and something of a
laughing stock to persons capable of detecting their absurdities, Mrs.
Haywood preserved his method of minute fidelity to actual life and still
made her book entertaining to such a connoisseur of fiction as Lady Mary
Wortley Montagu.[13]Though rarely mentioned with entire approbation,
"Betsy Thoughtless" was widely read for fifty years after its
publication,[14] and undoubtedly deserves its place among the best of
the minor novels collected in Harrison's "Novelist's Library."

In the same useful repertory of eighteenth century fiction is the second
of Mrs. Haywood's domestic novels, only less famous than its
predecessor. Like her earlier effort, too, "The History of Jemmy and
Jenny Jessamy" (1753) contains a great number of letters quoted at full
length, though the narrative is usually retarded rather than developed
by these effusions. Yet all the letters, together with numerous
digressions and inserted narratives, serve only to fill out three
volumes in twelves. To readers whose taste for fiction has been cloyed
by novels full of incident, movement, and compression, nothing could be
more maddening than the leisurely footpace at which the story drags its
slow length along. No wonder, then, that Scott recorded his abhorrence
of the "whole Jemmy and Jenny Jessamy tribe," while to Coleridge and
Thackeray "Jemmy Jessamy stuff" was a favorite synonym for the emotional
inane.[15] But Mrs. Haywood made no pretense of interesting such
readers. In the running fire of comment on the narrative contained in
the lengthy chapter headings she confesses that her book "treats only on
such matters as, it is highly probable, some readers will be apt to say
might have been recited in a more laconick manner, if not totally
omitted; but as there are others, the author imagines much the greater
number, who may be of a different opinion, it is judged proper that the
majority should be obliged." She has no hesitation either in
recommending parts of the story that "cannot fail of giving an agreeable
sensation to every honest and good-natured reader," or in sparing him a
"digression of no consequence to the history" which may be "read or
omitted at discretion." But those who love to "read in an easy-chair,
either soon after dinner, or at night just going to rest," will find in
the tale "such things as the author is pretty well convinced, from a
long series of observations on the human mind, will afford more pleasure
than offence."

We have every reason to believe that what the novelist terms her
"distressful narrative" succeeded in its appeal to the Martha Buskbodys
of the generation, for even Goethe's Charlotte took a heartfelt interest
in the fortunes of Miss Jenny.[18] It was indeed so far calculated to
stir the sensibilities that a most touching turn in the lovers' affairs
is labeled "not fit to be read by those who have tender hearts or watry
eyes." But though popular with sentimental readers, the new production
was not wholly approved by the critic of the "Monthly Review."[17] He
finds the character and conduct of Miss Jessamy more interesting to the
reader than those of Miss Thoughtless, but he does not fail to point out
that the fable is equally deficient in plot and in natural incidents.
The history, in fact, though it does not want a hero, having like "The
Fortunate Foundlings" double the usual number of protagonists, has a
more uncommon want, that of a story.

When the novel begins, Jemmy, son of a landed gentleman, and his cousin
Jenny, daughter of a wealthy merchant, have long been affianced by their
respective parents, but each is left an orphan before their union can be
accomplished. Thereupon Jemmy leaves Oxford and comes up to London,
where he and Jenny indulge innocently, but with keen relish, in the
pleasures of the town.

But the numerous instances of marital levity and unhappiness that come
to their notice, make them decide to defer their marriage until they
have gained more knowledge of the world and of their own sentiments. In
pursuance of this delicate experiment each communicates to the other his
observations on the jealousy, discontent, and misery attending marriage.
Jenny notes how Mrs. Marlove's partiality for her froward maid promotes
discord in the family, and Jemmy is shocked to find the fair Liberia so
fond of cards that "though at present a profest enemy to religion, she
would be the greatest devotee imaginable, were she once persuaded there
were gaming-tables in heaven."

While the two lovers are thus engaged in a pleasant but indecisive daily
round of amusement, Bellpine, a false friend, tries to turn Jemmy's
affection to the fair musician, Miss Chit, in order to win Jenny for
himself, but failing in that, circulates rumors of Jemmy's attachment to
Miss Chit in hopes of alienating the lovers' regard. Emboldened by these
reports of Jemmy's change of heart, Sir Robert Manley pays his court to
Jenny on her way to Bath with her friends Miss Wingman and Lady Speck,
but she gently repulses him and will believe nothing to Jemmy's
disadvantage. She is saved from the rudeness of Celandine by the
intrusion of the gallant's jealous mistress, who faints when foiled in
her attempt to stab Jenny, but later relates the story of her ruin. This
narrative is enough to disgust Lady Speck with her foppish admirer and
to make her sensible of the merits of Mr. Lovegrove. In spite of
Bellpine's industrious slander and in spite of seemingly
incontrovertible proof of Jemmy's inconstancy, Jenny's faith in her
lover remains unshaken. After tedious delays he finally rejoins her in
London, but learning the full extent of Bellpine's treachery, he wounds
him seriously in a duel and is obliged to seek safety in France. After
causing the lovers untold anxiety, the injured man recovers, and Jenny
forestalls her lover's return by joining her friends on their wedding
journey to Paris. There she finds her adored Jessamy now fully sensible
of the merits of his treasure. He does not fail to press for a speedy
termination to their delays, and Jenny is not unwilling to crown his
love by a "happy catastrophe."

Besides being unwarrantably expanded by a wealth of tedious detail, the
novel has little merit as a piece of realism. The society of Lord
Humphreys and Lady Specks was not that in which Eliza Haywood commonly
moved, but she had lived upon the skirts of gay life long enough to
imitate its appearances. Although she exhibits the diamond tassels
sparkling in St. James's sun or the musk and amber that perfume the
Mall, she never penetrates beyond externalities. The sentiments of her
characters are as inflated as those of a Grandison and her picture of
refined society as ridiculously stilted as Richardson's own. The scene
whether in London, Bath, Oxford, or Paris, is described with more
attention to specific detail than appeared in her early romances, but
compared with the setting of "Humphrey Clinker" her glittering world
appears pale and unreal. Mrs. Haywood had so framed her style to suit
the short, rapid tale of passion that she never moved easily in the
unwieldy novel form. Consequently her best narrative is to be found in
the digressions, a chapter or two long, which are equivalent to little
histories upon the old model. In them the progress of the action is
unimpeded, compressed, and at times even sprightly.

Recognizing, perhaps, her inability to cope with a plot of any extent,
Mrs. Haywood adopted in her next novel a plan that permitted her to
include a pot-pourri of short narratives, conversations, letters,
reflections, and miscellaneous material without damaging the
comprehensive scheme of her story. Except that it lacks the consistent
purpose of traducing the fair fame of her contemporaries,[18] "The
Invisible Spy" (1755), written under the pseudonym of "Exploralibus," is
not essentially different in structure from the "Memoirs of a Certain
Island." Love is still the theme of most of the anecdotes, no longer the
gross passion that proves every woman at heart a rake, but rather a
romantic tenderness that inclines lovely woman to stoop to folly. From
the world of Lady Mellasin, Harriot Loveit, Mr. Trueworth, Lord Huntley,
Miss Wingman, and other Georgian fashionables that filled the pages of
"Betsy Thoughtless" and "Jemmy and Jenny Jessamy" we are transported
again to the pale company of Celadon, Alinda, Placentia, Adario,
Melanthe. A framework analogous to that in Le Sage's "Le Diable Boiteux"
takes the place of a plot. With a belt of invisibility and a recording
tablet, Exploralibus is able to collect whatever is affecting,
ludicrous, vicious, or otherwise noteworthy in the conversation,
actions, and manners of society. But the shadowy nature of the observer
fails to give to the necessarily disconnected incidents even the slight
unity possible in the adventures of a lap-dog, a cat, a mouse, a flea,
or a guinea. The contents of a single section of "The Invisible Spy" is
enough to show how little thought the author expended upon the sequence
of the narrative.

Book VI. Disguised as her husband, a villain carries off the young
Matilda from a masquerade and ruins her. Alexis sends her away to the
country and endeavors to forget her in the pleasures of the town. The
contents of a lady's pocket:--a catalogue of imaginary books attributed
to the initials of well known persons of quality; two letters, the first
from Philetes to excuse his attendance, and the other from Damon making
an appointment on the spot where the pocket was found. The foppish Miss
Loiter is contrasted with the well trained children of Amadea. Narcissa,
endeavoring to avoid marriage with the detested Oakly, is entrapped by
the brother of her waiting-maid, who though only a common soldier, poses
as Captain Pike.

Though the novel exhibits some pictures of life which at the time were
considered natural,[19] and some bits of satire rather extravagant than
striking, its appearance was a tacit admission of the failing of the
author's powers. Much experience of human nature Mrs. Haywood had
undoubtedly salvaged from her sixty years of buffeting about in the
world, but so rapid and complete had been the development of prose
fiction during her literary life that she was unable quite to comprehend
the magnitude of the change. Her early training in romance writing had
left too indelible a stamp upon her mind. She was never able to
apprehend the full possibilities of the newer fiction, and her success
as a novelist was only an evidence of her ability to create the image of
a literary form without mastering its technique. So at the maturity of
her powers she lacked a vessel worthy of holding the stores of her
experience, and first and last she never exceeded the permutations of
sensationalism possible in the short amatory romance.

Long after Mrs. Haywood's death in 1756 came out the last novel
presumably of her composing. "The History of Leonora Meadowson,"
published in two volumes in 1788, is but a recombination of materials
already familiar to the reading public. Leonora rashly yields to the
wishes of her first lover, weds another, and makes yet a second
experiment in matrimony before she finds her true mate in the faithful
Fleetwood, whom she had thought inconstant. Thus she is a near relation
of the thoughtless Betsy, and possibly a descendant of the much married
heroine of "Cleomelia." Another of Mrs. Haywood's earlier fictions, "The
Agreeable Caledonian," had previously been used as the basis of a
revision entitled "Clementina" (1768). The reviewer of "Leonora" in the
"Critical," though aware of the novel's shortcomings, still laments the
passing of "the author of Betsy Thoughtless, our first guide in these
delusive walks of fiction and fancy."[20]

  "The spirit which dictated Betsy Thoughtless is evaporated; the fire
  of the author scarcely sparkles. Even two meagre volumes could not be
  filled, without a little History of Melinda Fairfax;--without the Tale
  of Cornaro and the Turk,--a tale told twice, in verse and prose,--a
  tale already often published, and as often read. Alas, poor author! we
  catch with regret thy parting breath."


FOOTNOTES
[1]
A rival translation called _The Fortunate Countrymaid_ had already been
published in 1740-1, and may be read in the seventh tome of _The
Novelist's Magazine_ (Harrison). Clara Reeve speaks of both translations
as "well known to the readers of Circulating Libraries." _Progress of
Romance_ (1785), I, 130.

[2]
Austin Dobson, _Eighteenth Century Vignettes_, First Series, 44.
"Captain Coram's Charity."

[3]
In one other respect Natura belongs to the new rather than to the old
school: he takes genuine delight in the wilder beauties of the
landscape. "Whether you climb the craggy mountains or traverse the
flowery vale; whether thick woods set limits to the sight, or the wide
common yields unbounded prospect; whether the ocean rolls in solemn
state before you, or gentle streams run purling by your side, nature in
all her different shapes delights.... The stupendous mountains of the
Alps, after the plains and soft embowered recesses of Avignon, gave
perhaps a no less grateful sensation to the mind of Natura." Such
extraordinary appreciation in an age that regarded mountains as
frightful excrescences upon the face of nature, makes the connoisseur of
the passions a pioneer of the coming age rather than a survival of the
last.

[4]
J. Ireland and J. Nichols, _Hogarth's Works_, Second Series, 31, note.
"Mrs. Haywood's _Betsy Thoughtless_ was in MS entitled _Betsy Careless_;
but, from the infamy at that time annexed to the name, had a new
baptism." The "inimitable Betsy Careless" is sufficiently immortalized
in Fielding's _Amelia_, in Mrs. Charke's _Life_, and in Hogarth's
_Marriage a la Mode_, Plate III.

[5]
Austin Dobson, _Eighteenth Century Vignettes_, Third Series, 99.

[6]
"There were no plays, no operas, no masquerades, no balls, no publick
shews, except at the Little Theatre in the Hay Market, then known by the
name of F----g's scandal shop, because he frequently exhibited there
certain drolls, or, more properly, invectives against the ministry; in
doing which it appears extremely probable that he had two views; the one
to get money, which he very much wanted, from such as delighted in low
humour, and could not distinguish true satire from scurrility; and the
other, in the hope of having some post given him by those he had abused,
in order to silence his dramatick talent. But it is not my business to
point either the merit of that gentleman's performances, or the motives
he had for writing them, as the town is perfectly acquainted both with
his abilities and success, and has since seen him, with astonishment,
wriggle himself into favour, by pretending to cajole those he had not
the power to intimidate." _The Novelist's Magazine_, XIII, 23. Quoted by
Austin Dobson, _Op. cit._, 100.

[7]
Dedication of _The Fatal Secret_.

[8]
_The Novelist's Magazine_, XIII, 106. Quoted by W. Forsyth, _Novels and
Novelists of the Eighteenth Century_ (1871), 211.

[9]
W. Raleigh, _The English Novel_ (Fifth edition, 1910), 139.

[10]
J.C. Dunlop, _History of Prose Fiction_, edited by H. Wilson, II, 568.

[11]
_Monthly Review_, V, 393, October, 1751.

[12]
_Letters from the Lady Mary Wortley Montagu_, Everyman edition, 392.

[13]
_Letters from the Lady Mary Wortley Montagu_, Everyman edition, 457.

[14]
_Notes and Queries_, Series VIII, IX, 366. In Smollett's _Ferdinand
Count Fathom_, Chap. XXXIX, Captain Miniken recommends as "modern
authors that are worth reading" the _Adventures of Loveill, Lady Frail,
Bampfylde Moore Carew, Young Scarron_, and _Miss Betsy Thoughtless_. See
also A.L. Barbauld, _Correspondence of Samuel Richardson_ (1804), IV,
55-6, and the _Autobiography and Correspondence of Mary Granville, Mrs.
Delaney_ (1861), First series, III, 79, 214.

[15]
J.G. Lockhart, _Life of Scott_, Everyman edition, 34. Coleridge's
_Letters_, I, 368.

[16]
W. Scott, _Old Mortality_, Conclusion. Goethe's _Werke_ (E. Schmidt,
Leipsig, 1910), III, 17.

[17]
That the _Monthly's_ review of _Betsy Thoughtless_, complaining of that
novel's lack of "those entertaining introductory chapters, and
digressive essays, which distinguish the works of a _Fielding_, a
_Smollett_, or the author of _Pompey_ the little," rankled in the fair
novelist's memory is illustrated by a retort in her next work, _Jemmy
and Jenny Jessamy_, III, Chap. XVIII, which "contains none of those
beautiful digressions, those remarks or reflections, which a certain
would-be critick pretends are so much distinguished in the writings of
his two favorite authors; yet it is to be hoped, will afford sufficient
to please all those who are willing to be pleased." For the review of
_Jemmy and Jenny Jessamy_, see _Monthly Review_, VIII, 77.

[18]
A possible return to scandal-mongering should be noted. _Letters from
the Lady Mary Wortley Montagu_, Everyman edition, 461. "You should have
given me a key to the Invisible Spy, particularly to the catalogue of
books in it. I know not whether the conjugal happiness of the D. of B.
[Duke of Bedford] is intended as a compliment or an irony."

[19]
_Gentleman's Magazine_, XXIV, 560, December 1754.

[20]
_Critical Review_, LXV; 236, March 1788.





CHAPTER VIII

CONCLUSION


Though Eliza Haywood produced nothing which the world has not willingly
let die, yet at least the obituary of her works deserves to be recorded
in the history of fiction. Of the many kinds of writing attempted by her
during the thirty-six years of her literary adventuring none, considered
absolutely, is superior to the novels of her last period. "Betsy
Thoughtless" contains at once her best developed characters, most
extensive plot, and most nearly realistic setting. But before it was
sent to press in 1751, Richardson, Fielding, and Sarah Fielding had
established themselves in public favor, and Smollett was already known
as their peer. Even in company with "David Simple" Eliza Haywood's most
notable effort could not hope to shine. The value, then, of what is, all
in all, her best work is greatly lessened by the obvious inferiority of
her productions to the masterpieces of the age.  As a writer of amatory
romances and scandal novels, on the contrary, Mrs. Haywood was surpassed
by none of her contemporaries. The immense reputation that she acquired
in her own day has deservedly vanished, for though her tales undoubtedly
helped to frame the novel of manners, they were properly discarded as
useless lumber when once the new species of writing had taken tangible
form. Perhaps they are chiefly significant to the modern student, not as
revealing now and then the first feeble stirrings of realism, but as
showing the last throes of sensational extravagance. The very extreme to
which writers of the Haywoodian type carried breathless adventure, warm
intrigue, and soul-thrilling passion exhausted the possibilities of
their method and made progress possible only in a new direction.

On the technical development of the modern novel the _roman a clef_ can
hardly have exercised a strong influence. Nor can the lampoons in Mrs.
Haywood's anthologies of scandal be valued highly as attempts to
characterize. To draw a portrait from the life is not to create a
character, still less when the lines are distorted by satire. But the
caricaturing of fine ladies and gentlemen cannot have been without
effect as a corrective to the glittering atmosphere of courtly life that
still permeated the pages of the short, debased romances. The characters
of the scandal novels were still princes and courtiers, but their
exploits were more licentious than the lowest pothouse amours of picaros
and their doxies. The chivalrous conventions of the heroic romances had
degenerated into the formalities of gallantry, the exalted modesty of
romantic heroines had sunk into a fearful regard for shaky reputations,
and the picture of genteel life was filled with scenes of fraud,
violence, and vice. As the writers of anti-romances in the previous
century had found a delicately malicious pleasure in exhibiting
characters drawn from humble and rustic life performing the ceremonies
and professing the sentiments of a good breeding foreign to their social
position, so the scandal-mongering authors like Mrs. Haywood helped to
make apparent the hollowness of the aristocratic conventions even as
practiced by the aristocracy and the incongruity of applying exalted
ideals derived from an outworn system of chivalry to everyday ladies and
gentleman of the Georgian age. Undoubtedly the writers of _romans a
clef_ did not bargain for this effect, for they clung to their princes
and court ladies till the last, leaving to more able pens the task of
making heroes and heroines out of cobblers and kitchen wenches. But in
representing people of quality as the "vilest and silliest part of the
nation" Mrs. Haywood and her ilk prepared their readers to welcome
characters drawn from their own station in society, and paved the way
for that "confounding of all ranks and making a jest of order," which,
though deplored by Lady Mary Wortley Montagu,[1] was nevertheless a
condition of progress toward realism.

Quite apart from the slight merit of her writings, the very fact of Mrs.
Haywood's long career as a woman of letters would entitle her to much
consideration. About the middle of the seventeenth century women
romancers, like women poets, were elegant triflers, content to add the
lustre of wit to their other charms. While Mme de La Fayette was gaining
the plaudits of the urbane world for the _delicatesse_ of "La Princesse
de Cleves" and the eccentric Duchess of Newcastle was employing her
genius upon the fantastic, philosophical "Description of a New World,
called the Blazing World" (1668), women of another stamp were beginning
to write fiction. With the advent of Mme de Villedieu in France and her
more celebrated contemporary, Mrs. Behn, in England, literature became a
profession whereby women could command a livelihood. The pioneer
_romancieres_ were commonly adventuresses in life as in letters, needy
widows like Mrs. Behn, Mme de Gomez, and Mrs. Mary Davys, or cast
mistresses like Mme de Villedieu, Mile de La Force, and Mrs. Manley, who
cultivated Minerva when Venus proved unpropitious. But although the
divine Astraea won recognition from easy-going John Dryden and
approbation from the profligate wits of Charles II's court, her memory
was little honored by the coterie about Pope and Swift. When even the
lofty ideals and trenchant style of Mary Astell served as a target for
the ridicule of Mr. Bickerstaff 's friends,[2] it was not remarkable
that such authoresses as Mrs. Manley and Mrs. Haywood should be
dismissed from notice as infamous scribbling women.[3] Inded
[Transcriber's note: sic] the position of women novelists was anything
but assured at the beginning of the eighteenth century. They had to
support the disfavor and even the malign attacks of established men of
letters who scouted the pretensions of the inelegant to literary fame,
and following the lead of Boileau, discredited the romance as absurd and
unclassical. Moreover, the moral soundness of fictitious fables was
questioned by scrupulous readers, and the amatory tales turned out in
profusion by most of the female romancers were not calculated to
reassure the pious, even though prefaced by assertions of didactic aim
and tagged with an exemplary moral. Nevertheless the tribe of women who
earned their living chiefly by the proceeds of their pens rapidly
increased.[4]

Mrs. Haywood, as we have seen, looked to the booksellers for support
when her husband disclaimed her. Of all the amazons of prose fiction who
in a long struggle with neglect and disparagement demonstrated the
fitness of their sex to follow the novelist's calling, none was more
persistent, more adaptable, or more closely identified with the
development of the novel than she. Mrs. Behn and Mrs. Manley must be
given credit as pioneers in fiction, but much of their best work was
written for the stage. Eliza Haywood, on the other hand, added little to
her reputation by her few dramatic performances. She achieved her
successes first and last as a writer of romances and novels, and unlike
Mrs. Aubin and her other rivals continued to maintain her position as a
popular author over a considerable period of time. During the thirty-six
years of her activity the romances of Defoe and of Mrs. Jane Barker gave
place to the novels of Richardson, Fielding, and Smollett, yet the
"female veteran" kept abreast of the changes in the taste of her public
and even contributed slightly to produce them. Nor was her progress
accomplished without numerous difficulties and discouragements. In spite
of all, however, Mrs. Haywood remained devoted to her calling and was
still scribbling when the great Dr. Johnson crowned the brows of Mrs.
Charlotte Lennox to celebrate the publication of "The Life of Harriot
Stuart" (1750). After such recognition a career in letters was open to
women without reproach. Though unlaureled by any lexicographer, and
despised by the virtuous Mrs. Lennox,[5] Mrs. Haywood, nevertheless, had
done yeoman service in preparing the way for modest Fanny Burney and
quiet Jane Austen. Moreover she was the only one of the old tribe of
_romancieres_ who survived to join the new school of lady novelists, and
in her tabloid fiction rather than in the criminal biography, or the
_voyage imaginaire_, or the periodical essay, may best be studied the
obscure but essential link between the "voluminous extravagances" of the
"Parthenissa" kind and the hardly less long-winded histories of "Pamela"
and "Clarissa."


FOOTNOTES
[1]
_Letters from the Lady Mary Wortley Montagu_, Everyman edition, 422.

[2]
_Tatler_, Nos. 32, 59, 63.

[3]
See also Horace Walpole, _Letters_, edited by Mrs. P. Toynbee, I, 354.

[4]
Only rarely did women like Mary Astell or Mrs. Elizabeth Rowe become
authors to demonstrate a theory or to inculcate principles of piety, and
still more seldom did such creditable motives lead to the writing of
fiction. Perhaps the only one of the _romancieres_ not dependent in some
measure upon the sale of her works was Mrs. Penelope Aubin, who in the
Preface to _Charlotta Du Pont_ (dedicated to Mrs. Rowe) declares, "My
Design in writing, is to employ my leisure Hours to some Advantage to my
self and others ... I do not write for Bread."

[5]
The salacious landlady in Mrs. Lennox's _Henrietta_ tries to discourage
the heroine from reading _Joseph Andrews_ by recommending Mrs. Haywood's
works, "... 'there is Mrs. Haywood's Novels, did you ever read them?
Oh! they are the finest love-sick, passionate stories; I assure you,
you'll like them vastly: pray take a volume of Haywood upon my
recommendation.'--'Excuse me,' said Henrietta," etc. _The Novelist's
Magazine_ (Harrison), XXIII, 14.



BIBLIOGRAPHY

A LIST OF MRS. HAYWOOD'S WRITINGS


I. COLLECTED WORKS

A. The Works of Mrs. Eliza Haywood; Consisting of Novels, Letters,
Poems, and Plays.... In Four Volumes. For D. Browne Junr., and S.
Chapman. 1724. 8vo. 4 vols.

  Vol. I. Love in Excess, ed. 5; Vol. II. The British Recluse, ed. 2,
  The Injur'd Husband, ed. 2, The Fair Captive, ed. 2 (ed. I, Chicago);
  Vol. III. Idalia, ed. 2, Letters from a Lady of Quality to a
  Chevalier, ed. 2; Vol. IV. Lasselia, ed. 2, The Rash Resolve, ed. 2, A
  Wife to be Lett, Poems on Several Occasions.
      B.M. (12611. ce. 20). University of Chicago. Daily Journal, 12
      Aug. 1723, 3 vols.; 31 Jan. 1724, 4 vols.

B. Secret Histories, Novels and Poems. In Four Volumes. Written by Mrs.
Eliza Haywood.... For D. Browne, Jun., and S. Chapman. 1725. 12mo. 4
vols.
      Daily Journal, 23 Dec. 1724, "just published."

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For D. Browne, Jun., and S.
  Chapman. 1725. 12mo. 4 vols.
  Vol. I. Love in Excess, ed. 6; Vol. II. The British Recluse, ed. 3,
  The Injur'd Husband, ed. 3, Poems on Several Occasions, ed. 2; Vol.
  III. Idalia, ed. 3, The Surprise, ed. 2, The Fatal Secret, ed. 3.
  Fantomina; Vol. IV. The Rash Resolve, ed. 3, The Masqueraders,
  Lasselia, The Force of Nature.
      B.M. (12612. ce. 8). Yale. Daily Post, 6 Aug. 1725, "lately
      published."

  [Another issue of Vols. II, III.] For D. Browne, jun., and S. Chapman.
  1725. 12mo. 2 vols.
  Vol. I is a duplicate of Vol. III, Vol. II of Vol. II of the preceding
  issue.
      B.M. (12614. c. 14).

  [Another edition.] The Third Edition. For A. Bettesworth and C. Hitch,
  D. Browne, T. Astley, and T. Green. 1732. 12mo. 4 vols.
      B.M. (012612. df. 48).

  [Another edition.] The Fourth Edition. For R. Ware, S. Birt, D.
  Browne, C. Hitch, S. Austen. 1742. 12mo. 4 vols.
      B. M. (12614. e. 13).

C. Secret Histories, Novels, &c. Written or translated by Mrs. Eliza
Haywood. Printed since the Publication of the four Volumes of her Works.
For D. Browne. 2 vols.

  Vol. I. The Distrest Orphan, The City Jilt, The Double Marriage,
  Letters from the Palace of Fame, The Lady's Philosopher's Stone; Vol.
  II. Memoirs of the Baron de Brosse, 2 parts, Bath-Intrigues, The
  Masqueraders, Part II, The Perplex'd Dutchess.
      Daily Post, 2 Nov. 1727.

D. Haywood's (Mrs.) Select Collection of Novels and Histories. Written
by the most celebrated Authors, in several languages. All new translated
from the originals, by several hands. London. 1729. 12mo. 6 vols.
      Sir George Cockrane, Catalogue of the Library at Abbotsford, 1838,
      Maitland Club, Vol. XLV, p. 139. I have not found a copy of this
      work.




II. SINGLE WORKS

1. Adventures of Eovaai, Princess of Ijaveo. A Pre-Adamitical History.
Interspersed with a great Number of remarkable Occurrences, which
happened, and may again happen, to several Empires, Kingdoms,
Republicks, and particular Great Men. With some Account of the Religion,
Laws, Customs, and Policies of those Times. Written originally in the
Language of Nature, (of later Years but little understood.) First
translated into Chinese, at the command of the Emperor, by a Cabal of
Seventy Philosophers; and now retranslated into English, by the Son of a
Mandarin, residing in London. For S. Baker. 1736. 12mo.
Dedicated to the Duchess Dowager of Marlborough.
      Bodl. (250. q. 232). Gentleman's Magazine, July 1736.

  [Another issue.] The Unfortunate Princess, or, the Ambitious
  Statesman. Containing the Life and Surprizing Adventures of the
  Princess of Ijaveo. Interspers'd with several curious and entertaining
  Novels. By Mrs. Eliza Haywood. For T. Wright. 1741. 12mo.
      B.M. (12604. bb. 20). Columbia. Gentleman's Magazine, Nov. 1740.

2. The Agreeable Caledonian: or, Memoirs of Signiora di Morella, a Roman
Lady, Who made her Escape from a Monastery at Viterbo, for the Love of a
Scots Nobleman. Intermix'd with many other Entertaining little Histories
and Adventures which presented themselves to her in the Course of her
Travels, etc. For R. King: And sold by W. Meadows, T. Green, J. Stone,
J. Jackson, and J. Watson. 1728, 1729. 8vo.
The Dedication to Lady Elizabeth Henley is signed Eliza Haywood.
      Bodl. (Godw. Pamph. 2121/6, 7). Peabody Institute, Baltimore. Part
      I. Daily Post, 21 June 1728. Part II. Daily Journal, 10 Jan. 1729.

  [Another issue.] Clementina; or the History of an Italian Lady, who
  made her Escape from a Monastery, for the Love of a Scots Nobleman.
  For Noble. 1768. 12mo.
      Monthly Review, May 1768.

3. The Arragonian Queen. A Secret History. For J. Roberts.
Dedicated to Lady Prances Lumley.
      Daily Journal, 11 Aug. 1724.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For J. Roberts. 1724. 8vo.
      University of Chicago. Daily Post, 16 Oct. 1724.

  [Another edition?] The Second Edition. For D. Browne, and sold by E.
  Nutt.
      Daily Post, 4 Jan. 1727, "lately published, written by Mrs. Eliza
      Haywood."

4. Bath-Intrigues: in four Letters to a Friend in London.... For J.
Roberts. 1725. 8vo.
Letters signed J.B. Included in the two volumes of Mrs. Haywood's
additional Works, 1727.
      B.M. (1080. i. 42). Daily Post, 16 Oct. 1724.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition?

  [Another edition.] The Third Edition. For J. Roberts. 1725.
      Daily Post, 5 March 1725.

5. La Belle Assemblee: or, the Adventures of Six Days. Being a Curious
Collection of Remarkable Incidents which happen'd to some of the First
Quality in France. Written in French for the Entertainment of the King,
and dedicated to him By Madam de Gomez. Translated into English.
Compleat, in Three Parts. For D. Browne, jun., and S. Chapman.
From the French of Madeleine Angelique Poisson de Gomez.
      Part I. Daily Journal, 26 Aug. 1724. Part II. Daily Journal, 26
      Oct. 1724. Part III. Daily Post, 9 Dec. 1724.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. Compleat, in Three Parts. For
  D. Browne junr.; and S. Chapman. 1725. 8vo. 3 vols.
      B.M. (12511. f. 25). Daily Journal, 21 June 1725.

  [Another volume.] The 2d and last volume. For D. Browne, S. Chapman,
  and W. Bickerton.
  The three parts first issued comprise Vol. I, ed. 2.
      Daily Journal, 27 July 1726.

  [Another edition.] La Belle Assemblee; or, the Adventures of Twelve
  Days.... The Second Edition, Adorn'd with Copper-Plates. For D.
  Browne, W. Bickerton, and W. Pote. 1728. 12mo. 2 vols.
      B.M. (635. a. 27, 28). Daily Post, 4 March 1728.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For D. Browne, W. Bickerton, T.
  Astley, and F. Cogan. 1735. 12mo. 4 vols.
      B.M. (12512. c. 12), Vol. IV only.

  [Another edition.] The Third Edition?

  [Another edition.] The Fourth Edition. For J. Brotherton, J. Hazard,
  W. Meadows, T. Cox, W. Hinchcliffe, D. Browne, W. Bickerton, T.
  Astley, S. Austen, L. Gilliver, R. Willock, and F. Cogan. 1736. 12mo.
  4 vols.
      B.M. (12512. c. 12), Vols. I-III only.

  [Another edition.] The Fifth Edition. For D. Browne, etc. 1743. 12mo.
  4 vols.
      Boston Public Library.

  [Another edition.] The Sixth Edition. For D. Browne, J. Brotherton, W.
  Meadows, R. Ware, H. Lintot, T. Cox, T. Astley, S. Austen, J. Hodges,
  and E. Comins. 1749. 12mo. 4 vols.
      Brown University.

  [Another edition.] The Seventh Edition. 1754. 12mo. 4 vols.
      Malkan Catalogue.

  [Another edition.] The Eighth Edition. For H. Woodfall, W. Strahan, J.
  Rivington, E. Horsfield, G. Keith, W. Nichol, C. and R. Ware, M.
  Richardson, J. and T. Pote, and T. Burnet. 1765. 12mo. 4 vols.
      B.M. (12330. f. 17). Boston Public Library.

6. The British Recluse: or, the Secret History of Cleomira, Suppos'd
Dead. A Novel.... By Mrs. Eliza Haywood, Author of Love in Excess; or,
the Fatal Enquiry. For D. Browne, Jun; W. Chetwood and J. Woodman; and
S. Chapman. 1722. 8vo.
      Boston Public Library. Daily Post, 16 April 1722.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For D. Browne, Jun., W.
  Chetwood and J. Woodman, and S. Chapman. 1722. 8vo.
      B.M. (635. f. 11/4). Daily Conrant, 24 Dec. 1722.
      The third and fourth editions are a part of Secret Histories,
      etc., 1725, 1732.

  [Another edition.] The British Recluse.... And The Injur'd Husband:
  Or, The Mistaken Resentment. Two Novels. Written by Mrs. Eliza
  Haywood.... The Third Edition. Dublin: For J. Watts. 1724. 8vo.
      B.M. (12611. f. 10).

7. The City Jilt: or, the Alderman turn'd Beau. A Secret History.... For
J. Roberts. 1726.
Included in the two volumes of Mrs. Haywood's additional Works, 1727.
      Daily Journal, 24 June 1726.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For J. Roberts. 1726. 8vo.
      B.M. (012611. e. 13). Daily Post, 30 Sept. 1726, "a new edition."

  [A pirated edition?] Printed by T. Bailey, at the Ship and Crown,
  Leadenhall-street, where Tradesmans Bills are printed at the
  Letter-press, and off Copper-plates, [**Symbol: three asterisks] Where
  Maredant's Antiscorbutic Drops are Sold at Six Shillings the Bottle,
  which Cures the most inveterate Scurvy, Leprosy, &c. [n.d.]
      B.M. (12611. ee. 3).

CLEMENTINA, see The Agreeable Caledonian.

8. Cleomelia: or, the Generous Mistress. Being the Secret History of a
Lady Lately arriv'd from Bengall, A Kingdom in the East-Indies. By Mrs.
Eliza Haywood. To which is added, I. The Lucky Rape: Or, Fate the Best
Disposer. II. The Capricious Lover: Or, No Trifling with a Woman.... For
J. Millan, and sold by J. Roberts, T. Astley, W. Meadows, J. Mackeuen,
H. Northcock. 1727. 8vo.
      Daily Post, 5 Dec. 1726.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For J. Millan, and sold by J.
  Roberts, H. Northcock. 1727. 8vo.
      Bodl. (Godw. Pamph. 1308).

9. Dalinda: or, the Double Marriage. Being the Genuine History of a very
Recent, and Interesting Adventure. Addressed to all the Young and Gay of
both Sexes.... For C. Corbett, and G. Woodfall. 1749. 12mo.
Probably by Mrs. Haywood.
      B.M. (012611. e. 41). Gentleman's Magazine, June 1749.

10. The Disguis'd Prince: or, the Beautiful Parisian. A True History,
Translated from the French. For T. Corbett, and Sold by J. Roberts.
1728, 1729. 8vo.
The Dedication to Lady Lombe is signed Eliza Haywood.
From the French of the Sieur de Prechac or Mme de Villedieu.
      B.M. (12511. h. 5), Part I only. Harvard, 2 parts. Part I, Daily
      Post, 16 Aug. 1728. Part II, Daily Journal, 14 May 1729.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For T. Corbett, and sold by J.
  Roberts. 1733. 8vo.
      Bodl. (Godw. Pamph. 1231/4).

11. The Distress'd Orphan, or Love in a Mad-House. 1726?

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For J. Roberts. 1726. 8vo.

  A second edition was advertised for D. Browne as a part of Mrs.
  Haywood's additional Works, Daily Post, 4 Jan. 1727.
      University of Chicago.

  [Another edition.] The Third Edition. For J. Roberts. 1726. 8vo.
      B.M. (12611. f. 14).

  [A revision.] Love in a Madhouse; or, the History of Eliza Hartley.
  The Distressed Orphan. Written by herself after her happy Union with
  the Colonel. For T. Sabine. [n.d.] 8vo.
  1770? (B.M. Catalogue). 1810 (Miss Morgan).
      B.M. (12403, aa. 34/2).

12. The Double Marriage: or, the Fatal Release. A True Secret History.
For J. Roberts. 1726. 8vo.
Included in the two volumes of Mrs. Haywood's additionalWorks, 1727.
      University of Chicago. Daily Journal, 5 Aug. 1726.

13. The Dumb Projector: Being a Surprizing Account of a Trip to Holland
made by Mr. Duncan Campbell. With the Manner of his Reception and
Behaviour there. As also the various and diverting Occurrences that
happened on his Departure. For W. Ellis, J. Roberts, Mrs. Billingsly, A.
Dod, and J. Fox. 1725. 8vo.
Written as a letter, signed Justicia.
      B.M. (G. 13739/2). Copy owned by Professor Trent.
      Daily Journal, 10 May 1725.

14. L'Entretien des Beaux Esprits. Being the Sequel to La Belle
Assemblee. Containing the following Novels.... Written for the
Entertainment of the French Court, by Madam de Gomez, Author of La Belle
Assemblee. For F. Cogan, and J. Nourse. 1734. 12mo. 2 vols.
The Dedication to "the High Puissant and most noble Prince," Charles
Seymour, Duke of Somerset, is signed Eliza Haywood. From the French of
Madeleine Angelique Poisson de Gomez.
      B.M. (12512. c. 13).

15. Epistles for the Ladies.... For T. Gardner. 1749, 1750. 8vo. 2 vols.
      B.M. (8416. dd. 34). Columbia. Gentleman's Magazine, Nov. 1748,
      &c.

  [Another edition.] A New Edition. For T. Gardner.
      Advertised in The History of Jemmy and Jenny Jessamy, 1753.

  [Another edition.] Epistles for Ladies. A New Edition. For H. Gardner.
  1776. 12mo. 2 vols.
      Yale.

16. The Fair Captive: a Tragedy. As it is Acted By His Majesty's
Servants. For T. Jauney and H. Cole. 1721. Svo.
Dedicated to Lord Viscount Gage.
      B.M. (162. h. 18). Columbia.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For D. Browne, and S. Chapman.
  1724.
  Included with separate title-page and imprint in Works, 1724.

17. The Fair Hebrew: or, a True, but Secret History of Two Jewish
Ladies, Who lately resided in London. For J. Brindley, W. Meadows and J.
Walthoe, A. Bettesworth, T. Astley, T. Worral, J. Lewis, J. Penn, and R.
Walker. 1729. 8vo.
Advertised as by Mrs. Haywood in Frederick, Duke of Brunswick-
Lunenburgh, 1729.
      B.M. (635. f. 11/8). Daily Post, 29 Jan. 1729.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For J. Brindley, W. Meadows and
  J. Walthoe, A. Bettesworth, T. Astley, T. Worral, J. Lewis, J. Penn
  and R. Walker. 1729. Svo.
      B.M. (12614. d. 8).

18. Fantomina: or, Love in a Maze. Being a Secret History of an Amour
between two Persons of Condition. By Mrs. Eliza Haywood. For D. Browne
jun, and S. Chapman. 1725.
Included in the various editions of Secret Histories, etc.

19. Fatal Fondness: or, Love its own Opposer. (Being the Sequel of The
Unequal Conflict.) A Novel. By Mrs. Eliza Haywood.... For J. Walthoe,
and J. Crokatt. 1725. 8vo.
      Sir John Soane's Museum. University of Chicago.
      Daily Post, 19 May 1725.

20. The Fatal Secret: or, Constancy in Distress. By the Author of the
Masqueraders; or, Fatal Curiosity. For J. Roberts. 1724.
Dedicated to (Sir) William Yonge.
      Daily Journal, 16 May 1724.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For J. Roberts. 1724. 8vo.
      University of Chicago. The third edition with separate title-page
      and imprint is a part of Secret Histories, etc., 1725.

THE FEMALE DUNCIAD, see Irish Artifice.

21. The Female Spectator. For T. Gardner. 1745. 8vo. 4 vols.
The monthly parts, April, 1744, to May, 1746 (two months omitted), bound
up with a general title-page, but each part retains its separate
title-page and imprint. Books I-VI, 1744; VII-XX, 1745; XXI-XXIV, 1746.
Vol. I dedicated to the Duchess of Leeds, Vol. II to the Duchess of
Bedford, Vol. III to the Duchess of Queensberry and Dover, Vol. IV to
the Duchess Dowager of Manchester.
      B.M. (94. c. 12-15).

  [Another edition.] The Third Edition. For George and Alexander Ewing.
  Dublin. 1747. 12mo. 4 vols.
      Columbia.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For T. Gardner. 1748. 12mo. 4
  vols.
      B.M. (P.P. 5251. ga). Harvard.

  [Another edition.] The Third Edition. For T. Gardner. 1750. 12mo. 4
  vols.
      Harvard.

  [Another edition.] The Fourth Edition?

  [Another edition.] The Fifth Edition. For T. Gardner. 1755. 12mo. 4
  vols.
      Boston Public Library, Vol. I only.

  [Another edition.] The Sixth Edition?

  [Another edition.] The Seventh Edition. For T. Gardner. 1771. 12mo. 4
  vols.
      B.M. (P.P. 5251. g). Boston Public Library.

  [A French translation.] La Nouvelle Spectatrice. Paris. 1751. 4 parts
  in 2 vols. 12mo.
  "Traduction abregee avec gout," by Jean-Arnold Trochereau de la
  Berliere.
      P. Larousse, Grand Dictionnaire Universel, 1873.

  ADDENDUM:
  The Female Spectator. Glasgow. 1775. 4 vols. 12mo.
      Catalogue of Cadmus Book Shop, New York.

22. The Force of Nature: or, the Lucky Disappointment: A Novel. By Mrs.
Eliza Haywood.
Included in the various editions of Secret Histories, etc.

23. The Fortunate Foundlings: Being the Genuine History of Colonel
M----rs, and his Sister, Madam du P----y, the Issue of the Hon. Ch----es
M----rs, Son of the late Duke of R--L--D. Containing Many wonderful
Accidents that befel them in their Travels, and interspersed with the
Characters and Adventures of Several Persons of Condition, in the most
polite Courts of Europe. The Whole calculated for the Entertainment and
Improvement of the Youth of both Sexes. For T. Gardner. 1744. 12mo.
      B.M. (12614. eee. 16). Gentleman's Magazine, Feb. 1744.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition?

  [Another edition.] The Third Edition. For T. Gardner. 1748. 12mo.
      Yale.

24. Frederick, Duke of Brunswick-Lunenburgh. A Tragedy. As it is Acted
at the Theatre-Royal in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields.... By Mrs. Eliza Haywood.
For W. Mears, and J. Brindley. 1729. 8vo.
Dedicated to Frederick Lewis, Prince of Wales.
      B.M. (643. e. 1). Boston Public Library.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For W. Mears, and J. Brindley.
  1729. 8vo.
      B.M. (162. h. 19). Yale.

25. The Fruitless Enquiry. Being a Collection of Several Entertaining
Histories and Occurrences, Which Fell under the Observation of a Lady in
her Search after Happiness. By Mrs. Eliza Haywood, Author of Love in
Excess.... For J. Stephens. 1727. 12mo.
Dedicated to Lady Elizabeth Germain.
      Bodl. (8vo. B. 433. Line.). Peabody Institute. Daily Post, 24 Feb.
      1727.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. By the Author of the History of
  Miss Betsy Thoughtless. For T. Lowndes. 1767. 12mo.
      B.M. (1208. e. 31). Yale.

  [An abridgment.] A Collection of Novels, selected and revised by Mrs.
  Griffith. For G. Kearsly. 1777. 12mo. 2 vols.
  The Fruitless Enquiry occupies pp. 159-267 of Vol. II.
      B.M. (12614. cc. 14). Boston Public Library.

26. The History of Jemmy and Jenny Jessamy. In Three Volumes. By the
Author of Betsy Thoughtless. For T. Gardner. 1753. 12mo. 3 vols.
      B.M. (12611. b. 23). Yale. Gentleman's Magazine, Dec. 1752.

  [Another edition.] Dublin: For R. Main. 1753. 12mo. 3 vols.
      B.M. (12611. b. 23), Vols. II and III only.

  [Another edition.] For Harrison and Co. 1785. 8vo. 3 vols.
  In Vol. XVII of The Novelist's Magazine.
      B.M. (1207. e. 7). New York Public Library.

27. The History of Leonora Meadowson. By the Author of Betsy
Thoughtless. For Noble. 1788. 12mo. 2 vols.
      Halkett and Laing. Critical Review, March 1788.

28. The History of Miss Betsy Thoughtless, In Four Volumes. For T.
Gardner. 1751. 12mo. 4 vols.
      B.M. (recently acquired from the Huth Sale, Part III). New York
      Public Library. Gentleman's Magazine, Oct. 1751.

  [Another edition.] Dublin. 1751. 12mo. 4 vols. in 2. J. Tregaskis
  Catalogue.

  [Another edition.] Dublin: Printed by Oli. Nelson. 1765. 12mo. 4 vols.
  in 2.
      Yale.

  [Another edition.] The Fourth Edition. For L. Gardner. 1768. 12mo. 4
  vols. in 2.
      South Kensington Museum. Columbia.

  [Another edition.] For Harrison and Co. 1783. 8vo. 4 vols.
  In Vol. XIII of The Novelist's Magazine.
      B.M. (1207. c. 12). New York Public Library.

  ADDENDUM:
  Etourdie ou Histoire de Mis Betsy Tatless, Traduite de l'Anglois.
  Paris. 1754. 3 parts in 2 vols. Bound for Mme du Barry, with her arms
  impressed on the sides. Southeby, Wilkinson, and Hodge Sale, Dec.
  11,1913.

29. The Husband. In Answer to The Wife. For T. Gardner. 1756. 12mo.
      B.M. (836. c. 6). Yale.

30. Idalia: or, the Unfortunate Mistress. A Novel. Written by Mrs. Eliza
Haywood. For D. Browne junr; W. Chetwood; and S. Chapman. 1723. 8vo.
      B.M. (12614. d. 10). Daily Journal, 24 April 1723. Parts II and
      III which compleats the whole, Daily Journal, 21 June 1723.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For D. Browne, junr; W.
  Chetwood; and S. Chapman. 1723. 8vo.
  Advertised in The Rash Resolve, 1724. Included with separate
  title-page and imprint in Mrs. Haywood's Works, 1724. The third
  edition is a part of Secret Histories, etc., 1725.

31. The Injur'd Husband: or, the Mistaken Resentment. A Novel. Written
by Mrs. Eliza Haywood.... For D. Browne, W. Chetwood and J. Woodman, and
S. Chapman. 1723. 8vo.
Dedicated to Lady Howe.
      B.M. (recently acquired from the Huth Sale, Part III). Daily
      Courant, 24 Dec. 1722.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For D. Browne, W. Chetwood and
  J. Woodman, and S. Chapman. 1723. 8vo.
  Advertised in The Rash Resolve, 1724. Included with separate
  title-page and imprint in Mrs. Haywood's Works, 1724. The third
  edition is a part of Secret Histories, etc., 1725.

  [Another edition.] The Third Edition. Dublin: For J. Watts. 1724. 8vo.
      B.M. (12611. f. 10). See The British Recluse.

32. The Invisible Spy. By Exploralibus. For T. Gardner. 1755. 12mo. 4
vols.
[Note: A 3 vol. edition, 1755, entered in a catalogue of John Orr,
Edinburgh, (Autumn, 1914).]
      B.M. (12612. d. 14). Brown University. Gentleman's Magazine, Nov.
      1754.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For T. Gardner. 1759. 12mo. 2
  vols.
      Bodl. (Hope 8vo. 535, 6). Yale.

  [Another edition.] Dublin. 1766. 12mo. 2 vols.
      B.M. (12614. ff. 21).

  [Another edition.] By Explorabilis. A New Edition. For H. Gardner.
  1773. 12mo. 2 vols.
      Yale.

  [Another edition.] For Harrison and Co. 1788. 8vo. 2 vols.
  In Vol. XXIII of The Novelist's Magazine.
      B.M. (1207. c. 3/3). New York Public Library.

33. Irish Artifice; or, The History of Clarina. A Novel. By Mrs. Eliza
Haywood.
A part of The Female Dunciad, For T. Read, 1728, 8vo.
      B.M. (T. 857/2).

34. The Lady's Philosopher's Stone; or, The Caprices of Love and
Destiny: an Historical Novel. Written in French by M. L'Abbe de Castera;
And now Translated into English. For D. Browne, Junr.; and S. Chapman.
1725. 8vo.
From the French of Louis Adrien Duperron de Castera. Dedicated to Lord
Herbert. Included in the two volumes of Mrs. Haywood's additional Works,
1727.
      B.M. (12614. dd. 19). Daily Post, 22 Jan. 1725.

35. Lasselia: or, the Self-Abandon'd. A Novel. By Mrs. Eliza Haywood.
For D. Browne, jun., and S. Chapman.
Dedicated to the Earl of Suffolk and Bindon.
      Daily Journal, 30 Oct. 1723.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For D. Browne junr., and S.
  Chapman. 1724. 8vo.
  Included with separate title-page and imprint in Mrs. Haywood's Works,
  1724. The third edition is a part of Secret Histories, etc., 1725.
      B.M. (12613. c. 26/1).

36. A Letter from H---- G----g, Esq. One of the Gentlemen of the
Bedchamber to the Young Chevalier, and the only Person of his own
Retinue that attended him from Avignon, in his late Journey through
Germany, and elsewhere; Containing Many remarkable and affecting
Occurrences which happened to the P---- during the course of his
mysterious Progress. To a Particular Friend.... Printed, and sold at the
Royal-Exchange, Temple-Bar, Charing Cross, and all the Pamphlet-Shops of
London and' Westminster. 1750. 8vo.
A. Lang, History of English Literature (1912), p. 458, attributes this
work to Mrs. Haywood.
      B.M. (10806. b. 20). Monthly Review, Jan. 1750.

  [A French translation.] Lettre de H.... G.... G Ecuyer, un des
  Gentilshommes de la Chambre du jeune Chevalier de S. George & la seule
  personne de sa Cour qui I'ait accompagne d' Avignon dans son voyage en
  Allemagne & autres Lieux. Contenant Plusieurs aventures touchantes &
  remarquables qui sont arrivees a ce Prince pendant le cours de son
  voyage secret. A un Ami particulier. Traduit de l'Anglois par M.
  l'Abbe *** A Londres. 1757.
      B.M. (10804. a. 16).

37. Letters from a Lady of Quality to a Chevalier. Translated from the
French. By Mrs. Haywood. For W. Chetwood. 1721. 8vo.
With "A Discourse concerning Writings Of this Nature. By Way of Essay."
From the French of Edme Boursault. Published by subscription.
      Columbia. Daily Post, 26 Dec. 1720.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For D. Browne and S. Chapman.
  1724. 8vo.
  Included with separate title-page and imprint in Mrs. Haywood's Works,
  1724.

38. Letters from the Palace of Fame. Written by a First Minister in The
Regions of Air, to an Inhabitant of this World. Translated from an
Arabian Manuscript.... For J. Roberts. 1727. 8vo.
Included in the two additional volumes of Mrs. Haywood's Works, 1727.
      B.M. (635. f. 11/7), incomplete, 24 pp. only. A complete copy is
      owned by Professor Trent. Daily Post, 30 Sept. 1726.

39. The Life of Madam de Villesache. Written by a Lady, who was an
Eye-witness of the greater part of her Adventures, and faithfully
Translated from her French Manuscript. By Mrs. Eliza Haywood.... For W.
Feales; and sold by J. Roberts. 1727. 8vo.
Dedicated to Mrs. Heathcote.
      B.M. (12331. bbb. 42/2). Daily Post, 26 April 1727.

40. Life's Progress through the Passions: or, the Adventures of Natura.
By the Author of The Fortunate Foundlings. For T. Gardner. 1748. 12mo.
      B.M. (12614. e. 19). Yale. Gentleman's Magazine, April 1748.

41. Love in Excess; or, the Fatal Enquiry. Part I.
Issued probably toward the end of 1719 for Chetwood and Roberts, but I
have found no advertisement of it.

Love in Excess; or, the Fatal Enquiry, A Novel, Part the Second. By Mrs.
Haywood. For W. Chetwood, and Sold by J. Roberts, [n.d.] 8vo.
Prefixed is a poem by Richard Savage, 2 pp.
      Pickering and Chatto, Catalogue of English Prose Literature.

Love in Excess; or, the Fatal Enquiry. Part III. By Mrs. Haywood. For W.
Chetwood, and J. Roberts. 2 s.
      Daily Post, 26 Feb. 1720.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition?

  [Another edition.] The Third Edition. For W. Chetwood. 1721.
      Daily Post, 29 May, 1721.

  [Another edition.] The Fourth Edition. For D. Browne, W. Chetwood, and
  S. Chapman. 1722.
      Post Boy, 22-24 Feb. 1722.

  [Another edition.] The Fifth Edition. For D. Browne, jun., and S.
  Chapman. 1724.
  Included with separate title-page and imprint in Mrs. Haywood's Works,
  1724.
      Daily Journal, 13 April 1724.

  [Another edition.] First Edition. Dublin: For J. Watts. 1724. 12mo.
  With The British Recluse and The Injur'd Husband, 2 vols.

  [Another edition.] The Sixth Edition. For D. Browne, jun., and S.
  Chapman. 1725.
  Included in Secret Histories, etc., 1725.
      Columbia.

42. Love in its Variety: Being a Collection of Select Novels. Written in
Spanish by Signior Michel Ban Dello [?]; made English by Mrs. Eliza
Haywood. For W. Feales, and J. Jackson. 1727.
      Daily Post, 26 June 1727.

  [Another edition?] Mrs. Haywood's Love in its Variety; or, Select
  Novels. For T. Lowndes. 2 s. 6 d.
      Advertised in The Fruitless Enquiry, 1767.

43. Love-Letters on All Occasions Lately passed between Persons of
Distinction, Collected by Mrs. Eliza Haywood. For J. Brindley, R.
Willock, J. Jackson, J. Penn, and F. Cogan. 1730. 8vo.
Dedicated to Mrs. Walpole, Relict of the Honourable Galfridus Walpole.
      B.M. (1086. f. 27), with the bookplate of Lady Elizabeth Germain.
      Daily Journal, 14 Jan. 1730.

44. Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots: Being the Secret History of her Life,
and the Real Causes of all Her Misfortunes. Containing a Relation of
many particular Transactions in her Reign; never yet Published in any
Collection.... Translated from the French, By Mrs. Eliza Haywood. For D.
Browne Junior; S. Chapman; and J. Woodman and D. Lyon. 1725. 8vo.
Translated from fifteen or sixteen known authors, (B.M. Catalogue).
      B.M. (10805. aaa. 19). Daily Post, 2 July 1725.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For D. Browne, etc. 1726. 8vo.
      Advertised in La Belle Assemblee, 1743.
      Columbia. Daily Post, 23 Feb. 1726.

45. The Masqueraders; or Fatal Curiosity: being the Secret History of a
Late Amour. For J. Roberts. 1724. 8vo.
Dedicated to Colonel Stanley.
      B.M. (12614. d. 14). Daily Post, 10 April 1724.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For J. Roberts. 1724.
      Daily Journal, 24 April 1724.

  [Another edition.] The Third Edition. For J. Roberts. 1724.
  Included in Secret Histories, etc., 1725.
      Daily Journal, 15 July 1724.

[Note: These were probably bogus editions. Ed. 2 was advertised as
"just publish'd" in The Double Marriage, 1726.]

  [Part II.] The Masqueraders; or Fatal Curiosity: Being the Secret
  History of a Late Amour. Part II. For J. Roberts. 1725. 8vo.
  Included in the two volumes of Mrs. Haywood's additional Works, 1727.
      University of Chicago. Daily Post, 21 Jan. 1725.

46. Memoirs of a Certain Island Adjacent to the Kingdom of Utopia.
Written by a Celebrated Author of that Country. Now translated into
English. For the Booksellers of London and Westminster. 1725, 1726. 8vo.
2 vols.
Advertised as "in the press" in Mrs. Haywood's Works,1724, Vol. I.
      B.M. (12613. g. 18). University of Illinois. (Both vols. with
      Keys.) Vol. I, Daily Post, 8 Sept. 1724. Vol. II, Daily Journal, 3
      Nov. 1725, with a new ed. of Vol. I.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For the Booksellers of London
  and Westminster. 1726. 8vo. 2 vols.
      Daily Post, 2 Mar. 1726.

47. Memoirs of the Baron de Brosse, Who was Broke on the Wheel In the
Reign of Lewis XIV. Containing, An Account of his Amours. With Several
Particulars relating to the Wars in those Times. Collected from
Authentic Authors, and an Original Manuscript. For D. Browne, Jun., and
S. Chapman. 1725, 1726. 8vo.
Included in the two volumes of Mrs. Haywood's additional Works, 1727.
      B.M. (1201. g. 3). Part I, Daily Post, 23 Dec. 1724.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For D. Browne, Jun., and 8.
  Chapman. 1725, 1726. 8vo.
      B.M. (G. 14732/2).

48. The Mercenary Lover: or, the Unfortunate Heiresses. Being a True,
Secret History of a City Amour, In a certain Island adjacent to the
Kingdom of Utopia. Written by the Author of Memoirs of the said Island.
Translated into English.... For N. Dobb. 1726. 8vo.
      B.M. (12611. i. 16). Daily Post, 10 Feb. 1726.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For N. Dobb. 1726.
  Advertised in Reflections on the Various Effects of Love, 1726.

  [Another edition.] The Third Edition. By the Author of Reflections on
  the various Effects of Love.... To which is added, The Padlock: Or, No
  Guard without Virtue. A Novel. For N. Dobb. 1728. 12mo.
  Half-title:--"The Mercenary Lover: and the Padlock. Two Historical
  Novels. By E.H."
      B.M. (12316. bbb. 38/3).

THE NEW UTOPIA, see Memoirs of a Certain Island.

49. The Opera of Operas; or Tom Thumb the Great. Alter'd from the Life
and Death of Tom Thumb the Great. For W. Eayner. 1733. 8vo.
Fielding's Tragedy of Tragedies with songs by William Hatchett and Eliza
Haywood.
      Boston Public Library (Barton Collection).

THE PADLOCK, see The Mercenary Lover, the third edition.

50. The Parrot. With a Compendium of the Times. By the Authors of The
Female Spectator. For T. Gardner. 1746. 8vo.
Issued originally in weekly parts, 2 Aug.-4 Oct. 1746. (9 numbers.)
      B.M. (P.P. 5253. b). Yale.

51. The Perplex'd Dutchess; or, Treachery Rewarded: Being some Memoirs
of the Court of Malfy. In a Letter from a Sicilian Nobleman, who had his
Residence there, to his Friend in London. For J. Roberts. 1728. 8vo.
Included in the two volumes of Mrs. Haywood's additional Works, 1727.
The title-page bears a quotation from her tragedy, The Fair Captive.
      Daily Post, 2 Oct. 1727. Dobell Catalogue (Mar. 1915).

  [Another edition.] To which is added Innocence Preserv'd. A Novel.
  Dublin: S. Powell, for G. Risk and W. Smith. 1727. 12mo.
      A. Esdaile, English Tales and Eomances (1912), p. 284.

52. Persecuted Virtue: Or, The Cruel Lover. A True Secret History. Writ
at the Request of a Lady of Quality. For J.  Brindley, and sold by W.
Meadows, and H. Whitridge, T. Worrall, R. Francklin, J. Watson.

Advertised as by Mrs. Haywood in Frederick, Duke of Brunswick-
Lunenburgh, 1729.
      Daily Post, 23 Nov. 1728.

53. Philidore and Placentia: or, L'Amour trop Delicat. By Mrs.
Haywood.... For T. Green, and Sold by J. Roberts. 1727. 8vo.
Dedicated to Lady Abergavenny.
      Brown University. Part I, Daily Journal, 24 July 1727.

54. Poems on Several Occasions. By Mrs. Eliza Haywood.
Included with no separate title-page in Mrs. Haywood's Works, 1724.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For D. Browne, jun., and S.
  Chapman. 1725. 12mo.
  Included with separate title-page and imprint in Secret Histories,
  etc., 1725.

55. A Present for a Servant-Maid: or, the Sure Means of gaining Love and
Esteem.... To which are Added, Directions for going to Market; Also, For
Dressing any Common Dish, whether Flesh, Fish, or Fowl. With some Rules
for Washing, &c. The Whole calculated for making both the Mistress and
the Maid happy. For T. Gardner. 1743. 8vo.
  B.M. (1037. g. 20). Gentleman's Magazine, June 1743.

  [Another edition.] Dublin: Re-printed by and for George Faulkner.
  1743. 8vo.
      New York Public Library.

  [Another edition.] Dublin: For George Faulkner. 1744. 8vo.
      B.M. (8409. d. 8/1). New York Public Library.

  [Another edition.] For T. Gardner. 1745. 8vo.
      Yale.

  [A revision.] A new Present for a Servant-Maid: containing Rules for
  her moral Conduct, both with respect to herself and her Superiors: the
  whole Art of Cookery, Pickling, and Preserving, &c. With Marketing
  Tables, and Tables for casting up Expences, &c. By Mrs. Haywood.
  Pearch, &c. 1771. 12mo.
      Monthly Review, April 1772.

56. The Rash Resolve: or, the Untimely Discovery. A Novel. In Two Parts.
By Mrs. Eliza Haywood.... For D. Browne, junr.; and S. Chapman. 1724.
8vo.
Dedicated to Lady Rumney.
      B.M. (recently acquired from the Huth Sale, Part III).
      Daily Journal, 12 Dec. 1723.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For D. Browne junr., and S.
  Chapman. 1724. 8vo.
  Included with separate title-page and imprint in Mrs. Haywood's
  Works, 1724. The third edition is a part of Secret Histories, etc.,
  1725.
      B.M. (12613. c. 26/2).

57. Reflections on the Various Effects of Love, According to the
contrary Dispositions of the Persons on whom it operates. Illustrated
with a great many Examples of the good and bad Consequences of that
Passion. Collected from the best Ancient and Modern Histories.
Intermix'd with the latest Amours and Intrigues of Persons of the First
Rank of both Sexes, of a certain Island adjacent to the Kingdom of
Utopia. Written by the Author of The Mercenary Lover, and Memoirs of the
said Island.... For N. Dobb. 1726. 8vo.
      B.M. (635. f. 11/6), incomplete, 16 pages only. Daily Journal, 13
      April 1726.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For N. Dobb. 1726. 8vo.
      B.M. (12614. d. 17).

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For J. Millan, and sold by J.
  Roberts, T. Astley, W. Meadows, and H. Whitridge, Mrs. Dodd, and Mrs.
  Graves. In Two Parts. 1727.
      Daily Journal, 5 July 1727.

58. The Secret History of the Present Intrigues of the Court of
Carimania. For the Booksellers of London and Westminster. 1727. 8vo.
      Yale. Daily Journal, 24 Sept. 1726.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition Corrected. For the Booksellers
  of London and Westminster. 1727. 8vo.
      B.M. (838. c. 7), with a Key.

59. Secret Memoirs Of the late Mr. Duncan Campbel, The Famous Deaf and
Dumb Gentleman. Written By Himself, who ordered they should be publish'd
after his Decease. To which is added, An Appendix, by Way of Vindication
of Mr. Duncan Campbel, against that groundless Aspersion cast upon him,
That he but pretended to be Deaf and Dumb. For J. Millan; and J.
Chrichley. 1732. 8vo.
Mrs. Haywood may have had a hand in this production.
      B.M. (10825. bbb. 26).

60. A Spy upon the Conjurer: or, a Collection Of Surprising
Stories, With Names, Places, and particular Circumstances relating to
Mr. Duncan Campbell, commonly known by the Name of the Deaf and Dumb
Man; and the astonishing Penetration and Event of his Predictions.
Written to my Lord---- by a Lady, who for more than Twenty Years past;
has made it her Business to observe all Transactions in the Life and
Conversation of Mr. Campbell. Sold by Mr. Campbell at the Green-Hatch in
Buckingham-Court, Whitehall; and at Burton's Cofee-House, Charing Cross.
1724. 8vo.
      B.M. (G. 13535). Harvard. Daily Post, 19 Mar. 1724.

  [Another edition.] A Spy on the Conjurer: or, a Collection Of
  Surprizing and Diverting Stories, With Merry and Ingenious Letters. By
  Way of Memoirs of the Famous Mr. Duncan Campbell, demonstrating the
  astonishing Foresight of that Wonderful Deaf and Dumb Man. The Whole
  being Moral and Instructive. Written to my Lord---- by a Lady, who,
  for Twenty Years past, has made it her Business to observe all
  Transactions in the Life and Conversation of Mr. Campbell. Revised by
  Mrs. Eliza Haywood. The Second Edition. For T. Corbet. 1724. 8vo.
      Brown University. Daily Post, 21 Aug. 1724.

  [Another edition.] A Spy upon the Conjurer.... Revised by Mrs. Eliza
  Haywood. For J. Peele. 1724. 8vo.
      Copy owned by Professor Trent.

  [Another edition.] A Spy on the Conjurer.... Revised by Mrs. Eliz.
  Haywood. For W. Ellis, J. Brotherton, J. Batly, T. Woodward, J. Fox.
  1725. 8vo.
  This omits the words "The Second Edition." These four issues consist
  of identical sheets bound up with different title-pages.
      B.M. (613. f. 2). Daily Journal, 25 Jan. 1725.

61. The Surprise: or, Constancy Rewarded. By the Author of the
Masqueraders; or, Fatal Curiosity. For J. Roberts. 1724.
Dedicated to Sir Richard Steele.
      Daily Journal, 23 July 1724.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For J. Roberts. 1724.
      Daily Journal, 7 Sept. 1724.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For D. Browne, jun.; and S.
  Chapman. 1725.
  Included with separate title-page and imprint in Secret Histories,
  etc., 1725.

62. The Tea-Table: or, A Conversation between some Polite Persons of
both Sexes, at a Lady's Visiting Day. Wherein are Represented The
Various Foibles, and Affectations, which form the Character of an
Accomplish'd Beau, or Modern Fine Lady. Interspersed with several
Entertaining and Instructive Stories. By Mrs. Eliza Haywood. For J.
Roberts. 1725. 8vo.
      B.M. (635. f. 11/5). Daily Post, 7 May 1725, "just published."

  [Another edition.] The Fourth Edition. London: Printed, and Dublin
  Re-Printed by W. Wilmot for E. Hamilton. 1725. 8vo.
      Columbia.

  [Part II.] The Tea-Table: Or, a Conversation between some polite
  Persons of both Sexes.... By Mrs. Elizabeth Haywood. Part II. For J.
  Roberts. 1725. 8vo.
      Bodl. (Godw. Pamph. 1308). Daily Post, 25 Mar. 1726.

63. The Unequal Conflict; or, Nature Triumphant: A Novel. By Mrs. Eliza
Haywood. For J. Walthoe, and J. Crokatt. 1725. 8vo.
For a sequel to The Unequal Conflict, see Fatal Fondness.
      B.M. (recently acquired from the Huth Sale, Part III).
      Yale. Daily Post, 10 Mar. 1725.

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For J. Walthoe. 1726.
      Daily Journal, 17 Feb. 1726.

THE UNFORTUNATE PRINCESS, see Adventures of Eovaai.

64. The Virtuous Villager, or Virgin's Victory: Being The Memoirs of a
very Great Lady at the Court of France. Written by Herself. In which the
Artifices of designing Men are fully detected and exposed; and the
Calamities they bring on credulous believing Woman, are particularly
related. Translated from the Original, by the Author of La Belle
Assemblee. In Two Volumes. For F. Cogan. 1742. 12mo. 2 vols.
From the French of Charles de Fieux, Chevalier de Mouhy. The Dedication
to Mrs. Crawley is signed Eliza Haywood.
      B.M. (12612. dd. 3).

65. The Wife. By Mira, One of the Authors of the Female Spectator, and
Epistles for Ladies. For T. Gardner. 1756. 12mo.
      B.M. (836. c. 5). Harvard. Gentleman's Magazine, Dec. 1755.

  [Another edition?] For T. Gardner. 1756.
      B.M. (8416. de. 1).

  [Another edition.] For T. Gardner. 1762. 12mo.
      Arthur Header Catalogue.

66. A Wife To be Lett: A Comedy. As it is Acted at the Theatre-Royal in
Drury-Lane, By his Majesty's Servants. Written by Mrs. Eliza Haywood.
For D. Browne junr, and S. Chapman. 1724. 8vo.
Included in Mrs. Haywood's Works, 1724.
      B.M. (12613. e. 26/3). Boston Public Library (Barton Collection).

  [Another edition.] The Second Edition. For D. Browne; and Sold by J.
  Osborn. 1729. 12mo.
      New York Public Library.

[Another edition.] For W. Feales; And Sold by J. Osborn. 1735. 12mo.
      B.M. (11775. b. 44). Yale.

[An abridgment.] The Comedy of a Wife to be Lett, or, the Miser Cured,
compressed into Two Acts, by Ann Minton. For A. Seale; Ann Minton; and
all booksellers. 1802. 8vo.
      B.M. (11779. b. 84).

67. The Young Lady. No. 1, 2, 3. By Euphrosine. For T. Gardner. 2d.
each.
Euphrosine, like Mira, was the name of one of the Female Spectator Club.
This was probably Mrs. Haywood's last piece of writing.
      Gentleman's Magazine, Jan. 1756.


III. WORKS ATTRIBUTED TO MRS. HAYWOOD

68. The History of Cornelia. For A. Millar. 1750. 12mo.
      Arthur Header Catalogue.

69. Matrimony, a Novel, containing a series of Interesting Adventures.
1755. 8vo. 2 vols.
A re-issue of The Marriage Act (1754) by John Shebbeare (D.N.B.).
      Arthur Header Catalogue.

70. Memoirs of the Court of Lilliput. Written by Captain Gulliver.
Containing an Account of the Intrigues, and some other particular
Transactions of that Nation, omitted in the two Volumes of his Travels.
Published by Lucas Bennet.... For J. Roberts. 1727. 8vo.
Attributed to Mrs. Haywood by Pope.
      B.M. (12510. aaa. 5). Daily Journal, 11 Jan. 1727. A second
      edition was advertised for Roberts on 6 Feb. 1727 (Daily Post).

71. The Pleasant and Delightful History of Gillian of Croydon:
Containing, Her Birth and Parentage: Her first Amour, with the sudden
Death of her Sweetheart: Her leaving her Father's House In Disguise, and
becoming Deputy to a Country Midwife; with a very odd and humoursome
Adventure before a Justice of the Peace, for screening a Child under her
Hoop-petticoat: Her discovery of a Love-Intrigue between her Mistress's
Daughter, and a perjur'd, false-hearted Young-man, which she relates in
the tragical History of William and Margaret: Her Account of a Country
Wedding in Kent; with several merry Passages which attended it.
Illustrated with suitable Cuts.
The Whole done much after the same Method as those celebrated Novels, by
MRS. ELIZA HAYWOOD. For A. Bettesworth. 1727. 12mo.
A chap-book, not by Mrs. Haywood.
      B.M. (12410. a. 28).


IV. WORKS PUBLISHED BY MRS. HAYWOOD

At the end of the first volume of The Virtuous Villager, 1742, occurs
the following advertisement:

New Books, sold by Eliza Haywood, Publisher, at the Sign of Fame in
Covent-Garden.

I. The Busy-Body; or Successful Spy; being the entertaining History of
Mons. Bigand.... The whole containing great Variety of Adventures,
equally instructive and diverting.

II. Anti-Pamela, or Feign'd Innocence detected, in a Series of Syrena's
Adventures: A Narrative which has really its Foundation in Truth and
Nature.... Publish'd as a necessary Caution to all young Gentlemen. The
Second Edition.



CHRONOLOGICAL LIST

THE WRITINGS OF MRS. HAYWOOD WITH SOME CONTEMPORARY WORKS
[Note: Works by other writers are indicated by italics; doubtful
attributions by (?). Works never separately issued are enclosed in
parentheses. Translations are marked Tr.]


1719 Apr. 25 _Defoe: Robinson Crusoe, Pt. I._
             Love in Excess, Pts. I, II.
             _Mrs. Manley: The Power of Love, in Seven Novels (d.
             1720)._
1720 Feb. 25 Love in Excess, Pt. III.
     Apr. 30 _Defoe: Duncan Campbell._
     Dec. 26 Tr. Letters from a Lady of Quality to a Chevalier (d.
             1721).
1721 Mar.  4 The Fair Captive (acted).
1722 Jan. 27 _Defoe: Moll Flanders._
     Apr. 16 The British Recluse.
     Dec. 24 The Injur'd Husband (d. 1723).
1723 June 27 Idalia: or, the Unfortunate Mistress.
     Aug. 12 Works, Vols. I, II, III.
     Aug. 12 A Wife to be Lett (acted). Published Aug.20.
     Nov.  1 Lasselia.
     Dec. 16 The Rash Resolve (d. 1724).
1724 Jan. 31 Works, Vol. IV.
             (Poems on Several Occasions.)
     Mar. 14 _Defoe: The Fortunate Mistress (Roxana)._
     Mar. 19 A Spy upon the Conjurer.
     Apr. 10 The Masqueraders, Pt. I.
     May  16 The Fatal Secret.
     July 23 The Surprise.
     Aug. 11 The Arragonian Queen.
     Aug. 26 Tr. La Belle Assemblee, Pt. I.
     Sept. 8 Memoirs of a Certain Island, Vol. I (d. 1725).
     Oct. 16 Bath-Intrigues (d. 1725).
     Oct. 26 Tr. La Belle Assemblee, Pt. II.
     Dec.  9 Tr. La Belle Assemblee, Pt. III.
     Dec. 23 Secret Histories, Novels and Poems, 4 vols. (d. 1725).
             (Fantomina.)
             (The Force of Nature.)
     Dec. 23 Memoirs of the Baron de Brosse, Pt. I. (d. 1725).
1725 Jan. 21 The Masqueraders, Pt. II.
     Jan. 22 Tr. The Lady's Philosopher's Stone.
     Mar. 10 The Unequal Conflict.
     May   7 The Tea-Table, Pt. I.
     May  10 The Dumb Projector.
     May  19 Fatal Fondness.
     July  2 Mary Stuart.
     Nov.  3 Memoirs of a Certain Island, Vol. II (d. 1726).
1726         The Distressed Orphan.
             _Defoe: The Friendly Daemon._
     Feb. 10 The Mercenary Lover.
     Mar. 25 The Tea-Table, Pt. II.
     Apr. 13 Reflections on the Various Effects of Love.
     June 24 The City Jilt.
     July 27 Tr. La Belle Assemblee, Vol. II.
     Aug.  5 The Double Marriage.
     Sept.24 The Court of Carimania (d. 1727).
     Sept.30 Letters from the Palace of Fame (d. 1727).
     Oct.    _Swift: Travels of Lemuel Gulliver._
     Dec.  5 Cleomelia (d. 1727).
1727 Jan.  9 The Court of Lilliput (?).
     Feb. 24 The Fruitless Enquiry.
     Apr. 26 The Life of Madam de Villesache.
     June 26 Tr. Love in its Variety.
     July 24 Philidore and Plaeentia, Pt. I.
     Oct.  2 The Perplex'd Dutchess (d. 1728).
     Nov.  2 Secret Histories and Novels printed since the publication
             of her Works, 2 vols.
1728         (The Padlock.)
     May  28 _Pope: The Dunciad._
     June 21 The Agreeable Caledonian, Pt. I.
     Aug.    (Irish Artifice) in The Female Dunciad.
     Aug. 17 Tr. The Disguis'd Prince, Pt. I.
     Nov. 23 Persecuted Virtue.
1729         Select Collection of Novels and Histories, 6 vols. (?).
     Jan. 10 The Agreeable Caledonian, Pt. II.
     Jan. 29 The Fair Hebrew.
     Mar.  4 Frederick, Duke of Brunswick-Lunenburgh (acted).
     May  14 Tr. The Disguis'd Prince, Pt. II.
1730 Jan. 14 Love-Letters on all Occasions.
1732         Secret Memoirs of the Late Mr. Duncan Campbel (?).
1733 May  31 The Opera of Operas (acted). Published in June.
1734         Tr. L'Entretien des Beaux Esprits, 2 vols.
1736 July    Adventures of Eovaai.
1740 Nov.    The Unfortunate Princess (d. 1741).
     Nov.    _Richardson: Pamela, Vols. I, II._
1741 June    Anti-Pamela (?) Published by Mrs. Haywood.
     Nov.    Tr. The Busy-Body; or Successful Spy, 2 vols.(?) Published
             by Mrs. Haywood.
1742         Tr. The Virtuous Villager, 2 vols.
     Feb.    _Fielding: Adventures of Joseph Andrews, 2 vols._
1743 June    A Present for a Servant-Maid.
1744 Feb.    The Fortunate Foundlings.
     May     _Sarah Fielding: David Simple._
1744 Apr.)   The Female Spectator (published monthly) 4 vols.
1746 May)
1746 Aug. 2)The Parrot (published weekly).
     Oct. 4)
1747 Nov.    _Richardson: Clarissa, Vols. I, II._
1748 Jan.    _Smollett: Adventures of Roderick Random, 2 vols._
     Apr.    _Richardson: Clarissa, Vols. Ill, IV._
     Apr.    Life's Progress through the Passions.
     Dec.    _Richardson: Clarissa, complete._
1749 Feb.    _Fielding: History of Tom Jones, a Foundling, 6 vols._
     June    Dalinda.
     Nov.    Epistles for the Ladies, 2 vols. (d. 1749-50).
1750 Jan. A Letter from H--- Q--- g, Esq.
1750 Mar. _Johnson: The Rambler._
1752 Mar.
1750 Apr. The History of Cornelia (?).
     Dec. _Mrs. Lennox: The Life of Harriot Stuart, 2 vols._
1751 Feb. _Smollett: Adventures of Peregrine Pickle, 4 vols._
     Oct. The History of Miss Betsy Thoughtless, 4 vols.
     Dec. _Fielding: Amelia, 4 vols._
1752 Mar. _Mrs. Lennox: The Female Quixote, 2 vols._
     Dec. The History of Jemmy and Jenny Jessamy, 3
vols. (d. 1753).
1753 Nov. _Richardson: Sir Charles Grandison, Vols. I, II,
III, IV._
     Dec. _Richardson: Sir Charles Grandison, Vols. V, VI._
1754 Nov. The Invisible Spy, 4 vols. (d. 1755).
1755 Dee. The Wife (d. 1756).
1756 The Husband.
     Jan. The Young Lady, Nos. I, 2, 3, (?).
     Feb. 25 Mrs. Haywood died.
1768 May Clementina.
1772 Apr. A New Present for a Servant Maid (d. 1771).
1778 Mar. The History of Leonora Meadowson, 2 vols.




INDEX


Addison, Joseph,
Adventures of _Eovaai_,
Adventures of _Lindamira_,
_Agreeable Caledonian, The_,
_Amelia_,
_Anti-Pamela_,
Applebee, E.,
_Apprentice's Monitor_,
_Arabian Nights, The_,
Arbuthnot, John,
_Arcadia, The Countess of Pembroke's_,
Argyle, John, Duke of,
_Arragonian Queen, The_,
Astell, Mary,
_Atalantis_, Mrs. Manley's _New_,
Aubin, Mrs Penelope,
Austen, Jane,
_Author to be Let, An_,
_Authors of the Town, The_,

Bandello, Matteo,
Barber, John,
Barker, Mrs. Jane,
_Bath-Intrigues_,
_Beggar's Opera, The_,
Behn, Mrs. Aphra,
_Belle Assemblee, La_
Bellenden, Mary,
Bennet, Lucas,
Bent, W.,
_Beraldus and Celemena_,
_Betsy Thoughtless_, see _History of Miss_
Bettesworth, Arthur,
_Blazing World, Description of a New World called the_,
Boccaccio, Giovanni,
Boileau-Despreaux, Nicolas,
Bond, William,
Boursault, Edme,
Boyd, Mrs. Elizabeth,
Boyle, Robert,
_British Secluse, The_,
Brown, Thomas,
Browne, Daniel, Jr.,
Budgell, Eustace,
Burney, Fanny,
_Busy-Body, The_,
Butler, Mrs. Sarah,

Campbell, Duncan,
_Capricious Lover, The_,
_Captain Singleton_,
Careless, Betsy,
_Carimania, Court of_, see _Secret History_
Castera, Louis Adrien Duperron de,
_Catholic Poet, The_,
Centlivre, Mrs. Susannah,
Cervantes, Miguel de,
_Changeling, The_,
Chapman, Samuel,
Charke, Mrs. Charlotte,
Chesterfield, Lord,
Chetwood, William Bufus,
Chevalier, The Young,
Cibber, Theophilus,
_Citizen of the World, The_,
_City Jilt, The_,
Clarke, Dr. Samuel,
_Clarissa Harlowe_,
_Clelie_,
_Clementina_,
_Cleomelia_,
_Cleopatre_,
Clio, see Fowke, Martha
Clive, Mrs. Kitty,
_Codrus; or the Dunciad dissected_,
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor,
_Colonel Jacque_,
_Comedy of a Wife to be Lett, The_,
Concanen, Matthew,
_Consolidator, The_,
Cooke, Thomas,
Corinna, see Thomas, Mrs.
_Court Intrigues_,
_Craftsman, The_,
_Curliad, The_,
Curll, Edmund,
_Cursory View of the History of Lilliput, A_,

_Dalinda_,
_Danger of Giving Way to Passion, The_,
D'Anvers, Caleb,
_David Simple_,
Davys, Mrs. Mary,
Dawson, Jemmy,
_Decameron, The_,
Dedications,
Defiant Heroines,
Defoe, Daniel,
Delany, Mrs.,
Dennis, John,
Desjardins, Hortense, see Villedieu, Mme de
_Diable Boiteux, Le_,
_Discourse concerning Writings of this Nature_,
_Disguis'd Prince, The_,
_Distress'd Orphan, The_,
Dobson, Austin,
Doddington, George Bubb,
_Double Marriage, The_,
Drake, Dr. Nathan,
Drury Lane Theater,
Dryden, John,
_Duchess of Malfi, The_,
Dufresny, Charles Riviere,
_Dumb Projector, The_,
_Dunciad, The_,
Dunlop, J.C.,
Durand-Bedacier, Mme,

_Entretien des Beaux Esprits, L'_,
_Epigrams on the Dunciad_,
_Epistles for the Ladies_,
_Espion turc, L'_,
Euphrosine,
_Evelina_,
_Exemplary Novels_,
Exploralibus,

_Fair Captive, The_,
_Fair Hebrew, The_,
_Fair Jilt, The_,
_Fantomina_
_Fatal Fondness_
_Fatal Secret, The_
_Female Dunces, The_
_Female Dunciad, The_
_Female Foundling, The_
_Female Page, The_, see _Sappy Unfortunate, The_
_Female Spectator, The_
_Ferdinand, Count Fathom_
Fidelia
Fielding, Henry
Fielding, Sarah
Fieux, Charles de, Chevalier de Mouhy
_Force of Nature, The_
_Fortunate Countrymaid, The_
_Fortunate Foundlings, The_
_Fortunate Mistress, The_
_Foundling, The_
Foundling Hospital, The
_Foundling Hospital for Wit and Humour, The_
Fowke, Martha
Fowler, Robert
Foxton, Mr.
_Frederick, Duke of Brunswick-Lunenburgh_
Frederick Lewis, Prince of Wales
_Friendly Daemon, The_
_Fruitless Enquiry, The_

Gardner, Thomas
George II
Germain, Lady Elizabeth
_Gillian of Croydon, The Pleasant and Delightful History of_
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von
Goldsmith, Oliver
Gomez, Mme de
Goring, Henry
Gosse, Edmund
Griffith, Mrs. Elizabeth

Hackney, Iscariot
Handel, George Frederick
_Happy Unfortunate, The_
Hatchett, William
Haymarket Theater
Haywood, Charles
Haywood, Mrs. Eliza
  Birth
  Death
  Elopement
  Parentage
  Plays
  Publisher
  Stage Career
Haywood, Valentine,
Hearne, Mrs. Mary
Henley, Lady Elizabeth
Henley, Orator
_Henrietta_
_Heros de Roman, Les_
Hervey, Lord
Hill, Aaron
_History of Betty Barnes, The_
_History of Cornelia, The_
_History of Jemmy and Jenny Jessamy, The_
_History of Leonora Meadowson, The_
_History of the Life and Adventures of Mr. Duncan Campbell, The_,
_History of the Life and Reign of Mary Stuart_,
_History of Miss Betsy Thoughtless, The_,
Hogarth, William,
Howard, Henrietta, Countess of Suffolk,
_Humphrey Clinker_,
Hurst, Capt.,
_Husband, The_,

_Idalia_,
_Illustre Parisienne, L'_,
_Injur'd Husband, The_,
_Intrigues galantes de la cour de France_,
_Invisible Spy, The_,
_Irish Artifice_,
_Ivanhoe_,

_Jemmy and Jenny Jessamy_, see _History of_
Johnson, Samuel,
_Joseph Andrews_,
Justicia,
_Key to the Dunciad_,

Kirkall, Elisha,

_Lady's Philosopher's Stone, The_,
La Faye, Charles de,
La Fayette, Mme de,
La Force, Mile de,
Lang, Andrew,
Lampe, Frederick,
_Lasselia_,
Lennox, Mrs. Charlotte,
_Letter from H---- G----, Esq., A_,
_Letters from a Lady of Quality to a Chevalier_,
_Letters from the Palace of Fame_,
_Letters written by Mrs. Manley_,
_Lettres nouvelles de M. Boursault_,
_Lettres Persanes_,
_Lettres Portugaises_,
_Life of Harriot Stuart, The_,
_Life of Madam de Villesache, The_,
_Life's Progress through the Passions_,
Lincoln's Inn Fields Theater,
Lodge, Thomas,
Lombe, Sir Thomas,
Lounsbury, T.E.,
_Love in Excess_,
_Love in its Variety_,
_Love-Letters on all Occasions_,
_Lover's Week, The_,
_Love's Posy_,
_Lucius_,
_Lucky Rape, The_,
Lumley, Lady Frances,

Mallet, David,
Manley, Mrs. Mary,
Marana, G.P.,
Marivaux, Pierre Carlet de Chamblain de,
Marlborough, Sarah, Duchess of,
_Marriage-Act, The_,
_Marriage a la Mode_,
_Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots_,
_Masqueraders, The_,
_Matrimony, a Novel_,
_Memoirs of the Baron de Brosse_,
_Memoirs of a Cavalier_,
_Memoirs of a Certain Island_,
_Memoirs of the Court of Lilliput_,
_Memoirs of Europe in the Eighth Century_,
_Memoirs of Miss Sydney Biddulph_,
_Mercenary Lover, The_,
Minton, Ann,
Mira,
_Moll Flanders_,
Montagu, Lady Mary Wortley,
Moore, George,
Moore-Smith, James,
Morris, Bezaleel,
_Morte D'Arthur_,
_Mouche, La_,
_Mr. Campbell's Pacquet_,

Newcastle, Duchess of,

Ochihatou,
O'Hara, Kane,
_Old Mortality_,
_Opera of Operas_,
Oriental letters,
Oriental tales,
Orinda, The Matchless,
_Oroonoko_,
Osborne, Thomas,

_Padlock, The_,
_Pamela_,
_Parrot, The_,
_Parthenissa_,
_Paysanne Parvenue, La_
_Peregrine Pickle_,
_Perplex'd Dutchess, The_,
_Persecuted Virtue_,
Peterborough, Lord,
_Philidore and Plaaentia_,
_Pierre philosophale des dames, La_,
Pit, Journalist,
Pix, Mrs. Mary,
_Plain Dealer, The_,
_Pleasures of the Imagination, The_,
_Poems on Several Occasions_,
_Political Foundling, The_,
_Polly Honeycombe_,
_Pompey the Little_,
Pope, Alexander,
_Popiad, The_,
_Present for a Servant-Maid, A_,
Pretender, The,
_Princesse de Cleves, La_,
_Prude, The_,

Quin, James,

_Rape of the Lock, The_,
_Rash Resolve, The_,
Reeve, Clara,
_Reflections on the Various Effects of Love_,
_Religious Courtship, The_,
Restoration comedy,
Rich, John,
Richardson, Samuel,
_Rival Father, The_,
_Rival Modes, The_,
Roberts, James,
_Robinson Crusoe_,
_Rosalynde_,
Rowe, Mrs. Elizabeth,
Rowe, Nicholas,
_Roxana_, see _Fortunate Mistress, The_

Sappho,
Savage, Richard,
Scott, Sir Walter,
_Select Collection of Novels and Histories, Mrs. Haywood's_,
_Secret Histories, Novels and Poems_,
_Secret History of Mama Oello, The_,
_Secret History of the Present Intrigues of the Court of Carimania,
The_,
_Secret Memoirs of the late Mr. Duncan Campbel_,
Shadwell, Thomas,
_Shakespeare Restored_,
Shebbeare, John,
Sloane, Sir Hans,
Smollett, George Tobias,
South Sea bubble,
_Specimens of British Poetesses_,
_Spectator, The_,
_Spy upon the Conjurer, A_,
_Stage-Coach Journey to Exeter, A_,
Stanley, Col.,
_Statesman's Progress, The_,
Steele, Richard,
Sterling, James,
_Supernatural Philosopher, The_,
_Surprise, The_,
_Swift, Jonathan_,

_Tatler, The_,
_Tea-Table, The_,
Thackeray, William Makepeace,
Theobald, Lewis,
Thomas, Mrs.,
_Time's Telescope_,
_Timon of Athens_,
_Tom Jones_,
_Tragedy of Tragedies_,
_Turkish Spy, The_,

_Unequal Conflict, The_,
_Unfortunate Princess, The_,
_Utopia, see Memoirs of a Certain Island_

_Venice Preserved_,
Villedieu, Mme de,
_Virtuous Villager, The_,

Walpole, Horace,
Walpole, Sir Robert,
Welsted, Leonard,
_Wife, The_,
_Wife to be Lett, A_,
Woolston, Thomas,
_Works_, Mrs. Haywood's,

Yonge, Sir William,
_Young Lady, The_,





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Life and Romances of Mrs. Eliza
Haywood, by George Frisbie Whicher

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. ELIZA HAYWOOD ***

***** This file should be named 10889.txt or 10889.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/8/8/10889/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Carol David and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


