The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pearl Box, by "A Pastor"

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Pearl Box
       Containing One Hundred Beautiful Stories for Young People

Author: "A Pastor"

Release Date: February 23, 2004 [EBook #11237]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PEARL BOX ***




Produced by Internet Archive; University of Florida, Andrea Ball and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





[Illustration]



THE
PEARL BOX.


CONTAINING
ONE HUNDRED
BEAUTIFUL STORIES
FOR YOUNG PEOPLE.


BY A PASTOR.




Transcribers Note: There are many, but not one hundred,
                   stories in this volume.


PREFACE.


In preparing this volume of stories for young readers, the writer has
had in view their instruction, by presenting to them their station in
a familiar and instructive story. Each story contains a moral, and
teaches principles by which the youth should be governed in their
private, social and public relations in life. In the perusal of these
stories, we hope to accomplish our great object, of aiding young
persons to pursue the peaceful and pleasant path of duty--to render
them more useful in the world, and to grow wiser and happier in the
path of life.




THE PEARL BOX.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE DYING BOY.


A little boy, by the name of Bertie, was taken very ill, and for
sometime continued to grow weaker until he died. A few hours before
his death he revived up, and his first request was to be bathed in the
river; but his mother persuaded him to be sponged only, as the river
water would be too cold for his weak frame. After his mother had
sponged him with water, he desired to be dressed; when his mother
dressed him in his green coat and white collar, and seated him at the
table with all his books and worldly treasures around him. As he sat
there, one would have thought that he was about to commence a course
of study; and yet in the marble paleness of his features, and in the
listless and languid eye, there was evidence that life in the boy was
like an expiring taper, flickering in the socket. He soon asked to go
out in his little carriage. His grandfather, whom he very much loved,
placed him in it, and carefully avoiding every stone, drew him to a
spot commanding the entire landscape. The tide was up and the sun was
shining on the deep blue waters, and bathing the distant mountains and
the green meadows in liquid gold. The gardens and orchards around were
gay in the rich crimson blossoms of the apple tree; the air was filled
with the sweet fragrance of flowers, and the birds were singing
beautifully, when little Bertie looked for the last time on the scenes
of earth. He could not remain long, and was soon taken back to the
little parlor, where he sat on the sofa, resting his elbows on the
table. It was not long before the little boy died. But he was very
happy. Among his last words were these, addressed to his little sister
three years old: "Well, Emmie, very ill--me going to Jesus."

"Oh, mamma, Emmie loves her Saviour."


       *       *       *       *       *


THE BOY AND THE GOLD ROBIN.


A bright eyed boy was sleeping upon a bank of blossoming clover. The
cool breeze lifted the curls from his brow, and fanned with downy
wings his quiet slumbers, while he lay under the refreshing shade of a
large maple tree. The birds sang to him during his happy hours of
sleep. By and by he awoke, and a beautiful gold robin sat on the
spray, and sung a song of joy. The boy reached out his hands to secure
the prize, but the robin spread his golden wings and soared away. He
looked after it with a longing gaze, and when it disappeared from his
sight, he wept aloud. At this moment, a form of light approached, and
took the hands of the child and pointed upwards; and he saw the bird
soaring in freedom, and the sun shining upon its burnished plumes.
Then the shining one said: "Do you love that beautiful bird?" In the
midst of his tears the child replied, "Oh, yes." "Then," said the
angel, "shall it not wing its flight from flower to flower and be
happy, rather than to dwell in a prison with thee?" Then the streams
and flowering vales of Elysium, that breathe the pure air of freedom,
spake: "Wouldst thou bring her back to thee, and make her a prisoner?
Dry up thy tears, and let thy song be, 'Stay not here, but speed thy
flight, O bright one, and snuff the mellow air of freedom.' God made
the birds to be happy in their short existence, and ought we to
deprive them of their own elements of happiness, and take from them
the freedom which they enjoy?"


       *       *       *       *       *


THE WAY TO OVERCOME EVIL.


A little girl, by the name of Sarah Dean, was taught the precepts of
the Bible by her mother. One day she came to her mother very much
delighted, to show her some plums that a friend had given her. The
mother said to her: "Your friend was very kind, and has given you a
great many." "Yes," replied Sarah. "she was, and she gave me more than
these, but I have given some away." The mother asked to whom she had
given them; when the child replied: "I gave them to a girl that pushes
me off the path, and makes faces at me." Upon being asked why she gave
them to her, she answered: "Because I thought that should make her
know that I wished to be kind to her, and perhaps she will not be
unkind and rude to me again." This was true. The rude girl was
afterwards very good to Sarah, and felt very sorry that she had
treated her unkindly. How truly did the little girl obey the command,
"_overcome evil with good_."


       *       *       *       *       *


HARRIET AND HER SQUIRREL.


It was on a Sabbath eve, when at a friend's house, we were all sitting
in the piazza, conversing about the efforts which were being made for
the poor heathen, and the number of Testaments which were being sent
to them.

"Father," said little Harriet, "do the little heathen children wish to
learn to read the New Testament?"

"O yes, my child, many of them do," said the father.

"But have they all got Testaments if they did know how to read?" "No,
my love; few of them have ever heard about the Testament, about God,
or about Jesus Christ." "Will half a dollar buy one?" said Harriet. "O
yes, my child."

"Then," said Harriet, "may I sell anything I have, if I can get the
money?" Her father told her she might.

Now, every child has some favorite toy. Harriet's was a beautiful tame
_gray_ squirrel. It would eat from her hands, attend her in her
rambles, and sleep on her pillow.

She called its name Jenny. It was taken sick, and the little girl
nursed it with care, but it at last died in her lap.

Little Harriet wept sadly about it, and her father tried to console
her, and told her not to feel so.

"Ah," said she, "you know, father, you told me that I might sell
anything I had to buy a Testament for the heathen children, and I was
going to sell my pretty squirrel to Mr. Smith, who said he would give
me half a dollar for it; but now my Jenny is dead." The Father then
put a silver dollar into Harriet's hand, and she dried her tears,
rejoicing that Jenny's death would be the means of his little daughter
having two or three Testaments instead of one.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE REWARD.


A teacher in a Sabbath School promised to supply all the children in
his class with a catechism, who had none.

One of the little girls went home from the school after the books were
given out, and said:

"Mamma, if I had told a lie to-day, I would have got a catechism."

"I think that very strange, Eliza; for the Sabbath School is no place
for lies, and if you could be so wicked, I know your teacher would not
have rewarded you for it."

"Mother," said Eliza, "I tell nothing but the truth; and now I will
explain it.

"You know I went to school this morning with the other girls. They
told me on the way how their mother had bought each of them a new
catechism on last market day, and they said, if I once saw how pretty
their books were, I would not look at my old one any more. Our teacher
asked us all, when we went in, if we had any catechisms, and those who
said they had not, received one from the teacher as a present. Jane,
after all she told me, by the way, denied that she had any, and Lizzy
did the same. But when he asked me, I told him I had one at home; but
if I had said no, I would have got a new one."

Her mother then told her that she should be rewarded for not telling a
lie by giving her a new book and a new Bible.



       *       *       *       *       *


ANECDOTES.


A poor Arabian of the desert was one day asked, how he came to be
assured that there was a God.

"In the same way," he replied, "that I am enabled to tell by a print
impressed on the sand, whether it was a man or beast that passed that
way."

THANKFULNESS.--Walking along Bishopgate street one morning, I saw two
men standing as if amazed at something that had happened.

"Pray, gentlemen," said I, "what is the matter?" One of them informed
me that a genteelly dressed man had hastily come up to him, and
tapping him on the shoulder, had said:

"Sir, did you ever thank God for your reason?"

"No," said I, "not particularly."

"Well," said he, "do it now, for I have lost mine;" when he marched
off with great speed.

HONESTY.--An honest boy, whose sister was sick and the family in want,
found a wallet containing fifty dollars. The temptation was great to
use the money; but he resolved to find the owner. He did so; when the
owner, learning the circumstances of the family, gave the fifty
dollars for their comfort. He took the boy to live with him. That boy
is a prosperous merchant in Ohio.

THE BOY AND HIS MARBLES.--One Sunday a lady called to her little boy,
who was shooting marbles on the pavement, to come into the house.

"Don't you know you shouldn't be out there, my son? Go into the back
yard if you want to play marbles; it is Sunday."

"Yes, mother; but aint it Sunday in the back yard?"


       *       *       *       *       *


THE BOY AND THE DEW DROPS.


A little boy who had been out early in the morning playing on the lawn
before his father's house, while the dew drops lay on the grass, was
soon after seen returning to the spot, and finding them all gone, he
sat down to weep. His father asked him why he wept.

"Because," said he, "the beautiful dew drops are gone." His father
tried to soothe him, but he continued weeping. Just then a cloud
passed over, and on the cloud the beautiful rainbow had cast its arch.

"There, see, my son," said the father, "there are all your dew drops;
the sun has taken them up only to set them forth in greater brightness
in the sky."

  "O father, dear father, why pass they away,
  The dew drops that sparkled at dawning of day,
  That glittered like stars in the light of the moon;
  Oh, why are the dew drops dissolving so soon?
  Does the sun in his wrath chase their brightness away,
  As if nothing that's lovely might live for a day?
  The moonlight is faded, the flowers still remain,
  But the dew drops have shrunk to their petals again."

  "My child," said the father, "look up to the skies;
  Behold that bright rainbow, those beautiful dyes,
  There, there are the dew drops in glory reset,
  'Mid the jewels of heaven they are glittering yet.
  Oh, are we not taught by each beautiful ray
  To mourn not earth's fair things, though passing away?
  For though youth of its beauty and brightness be riven,
  All that withers on earth blooms more sweetly in heaven.
  Look up," sad the father, "look up to the skies----
  Hope sits on the wings of those beautiful dyes."


       *       *       *       *       *


LETTICE AND MYRA.
A SCENE IN LONDON.

My young readers may have heard about the poor people in London. The
following story is a specimen of the hardships of many young girls,
in that famous city.

"Two young women occupied one small room of about ten feet by eight.
They were left orphans, and were obliged to take care of themselves.
Many of the articles of furniture left them had been disposed of to
supply the calls of urgent want. In the room was an old four post
bedstead, with curtains almost worn out, one mattrass with two small
pillows, a bolster that was almost flat, three old blankets and cotton
sheets, of coarse description, three rush-bottom chairs, an old claw
table, a chest of draws, with a few battered band-boxes on the top of
it, a miserable bit of carpet before the fire-place, a wooden box for
coals, a little tin fender, and an old poker. What there was, however,
was kept clean, the floor and yellow paint was clean, and the washing
tub which sat in one corner of the room.

"It was a bitter cold night, the wind blew and shook the window, when
a young girl of about eighteen sat by the tallow candle, which burned
in a tin candlestick, at 12 o'clock at night, finishing a piece of
work with the needle which she was to return next morning. Her name
was Lettice Arnold. She was naturally of a cheerful, hopeful temper,
and though work and disappointment had faded the bright colors of
hope, still hope buoyed up her spirits.

"Her sister Myra was delicate, and lay on the mattrass on that night,
tossing about with suffering, unable to rest. At last Lettice says to
her:----

"'Poor Myra, can't you get to sleep?'

"'It is so cold,' was the reply; 'and when will you have done and come
to bed?'

"'One quarter of an hour more, Myra, and I shall have finished my
work, and then I will throw my clothes over your feet, and I hope you
will be a little warmer.'

"Myra sighed, and lifted up her head, and leaning upon her arm watched
the progress of her sister as she plied the needle to her work.

"'How slowly,' said Myra, 'you do get along. It is one o'clock, and
you have not finished yet.'

"'I cannot work fast, Myra, and neatly too; my hands are not so
delicate and nimble as yours,' and smiling a little, she added: 'Such
swelled clumsy things, I cannot get over the ground nimbly and well at
the same time. You, are a fine race horse, and I a drudging pony. But
I shall soon be through.'

"Myra once more uttered a sigh and cried:

"'Oh, my feet are dreadful cold.'

"'Take this bit of flannel,' said Lettice, 'and let me wrap them up.'

"'Nay, you will want it,' she replied.

"'Oh, I have only five minutes to sit up, and I can wrap this piece of
carpet round mine,' said Lettice.

"And she laid down her work and went to the bed and wrapped her
sister's icy feet in the flannel, and then sat down and finished her
task. How glad was Lettice to creep to the mattress and to lay her
aching limbs upon it. A hard bed and scanty covering in a cold night
are keenly felt. She soon fell asleep, while her sister tossed and
murmured on account of the cold.

"Lettice awoke and drew her over little pillow from under her head,
and put it under her sister's and tried every way to make her sister
comfortable, and she partly succeeded; and at last Myra, the delicate
suffering creature, fell asleep, and Lettice slumbered like a child."

How thankful ought we to be for kind parents, a comfortable home, and
a good fire in a cold night. I will tell you in my next story what
Lettice did with her work.


       *       *       *       *       *


LETTICE TAKING HOME THE WORK.


Early in the morning, before it was light, and while the twilight
gleamed through the curtainless windows, Lettice was up dressing
herself by the aid of the light which gleamed from the street lamp
into the window. She combed her hair with modest neatness, then opened
the draw with much precaution, lest she should disturb poor Myra, who
still slumbered on the hard mattrass--drew out a shawl and began to
fold it as if to put it on.

"Alas!" said Lettice, "this will not do--it is thread-bare, time-worn,
and has given way in two places." She turned it, and unfolded it, but
it would not do. It was so shabby that she was actually ashamed to be
seen with it in the street. She put it aside and took the liberty of
borrowing Myra's, who was now asleep. She knew Myra would be awful
cold when she got up, and would need it. But she must go with the work
that morning. She thought first of preparing the fire, so that Myra,
when she arose, would only have to light the match; but as she went to
the box for coal, she saw, with terror, how low the little store of
fuel was, and she said to herself, "we must have a bushel of coal
to-day--better to do without meat than fire such weather as this." But
she was cheered with the reflection that she should receive a little
more for her work that day than what she had from other places. It had
been ordered by a benevolent lady who had been to some trouble in
getting the poor woman supplied with needle work so that they should
receive the full price. She had worked for private customers before,
and always received more pay from them than from the shops in London,
where they would beat down the poor to the last penny.

Poor Lettice went to the old band-box and took out a shabby old
bonnet--she looked at it, and sighed, when she thought of the
appearance she must make; for she was going to Mrs. Danvers, and her
work was some very nice linen for a young lady about to be married.

Just at this moment she thought of the contrast between all the fine
things that young lady was to have, and her own destitution. But her
disposition was such as not to cause her to think hard of others who
had plenty while she was poor. She was contented to receive her pay
from the wealthy, for her daily needle work. She felt that what they
had was not taken from her, and if she could gain in her little way by
receiving her just earnings from the general prosperity of others, she
would not complain. And as the thought of the increased pay came into
her mind, which she was to receive that day, she brightened up, shook
the bonnet, pulled out the ribbons, and made it look as tidy as
possible, thinking to herself that after buying some fuel she might
possibly buy a bit of ribbon and make it look a little more spruce,
when she got her money.

Lettice now put on her bonnet, and Myra's shawl, and looking into the
little three-penny glass which hung on the wall, she thought she might
look quite tidy after all. The young lady for whom she made the linen
lived about twenty miles from town, but she had come in about this
time, and was to set off home at nine o'clock that very morning. The
linen was to have been sent in the night before, but Lettice had found
it impossible to finish it. This was why she was obliged to start so
early in the morning. She now goes to the bed to tell Myra about the
fire, and that she had borrowed her shawl, but Myra was sound asleep,
so she did not disturb her, but stepped lightly over the floor and
down stairs, for it was getting late, and she must be gone. Read the
next story, and you will be deeply interested in the result.


       *       *       *       *       *


LETTICE AND CATHERINE,
OR THE UNEXPECTED MEETING.


I must tell you who were Lettice and Myra. They were the daughters of
a clergyman, who held the little vicarage of Castle Rising. But
misfortune, which sometimes meets the wise and good, reduced the
family to poor circumstances. After the parents' decease, Lettice and
Myra located in London, for the purpose of doing needle work for a
living.

We said in the last story, that Lettice had entered the street and was
on her way with the work she had finished for the young lady. It was
a cold morning, the snow blew, and the street was slippery. She could
scarcely stand--her face was cold, and her hands so numbed that she
could scarcely hold the parcel she carried. The snow beat upon her
poor bonnet, but she comforted herself with the idea that she might be
supposed to have a better bonnet at home. She cheerfully trudged
along, and at last entered Grosvenor Square, where the lamps were just
dying away before the splendid houses, while the wind rushed down the
Park colder than ever. A few boys were about the only people yet to be
seen about, and they laughed at her as she held her bonnet down with
one hand, to prevent its giving way before the wind, while she carried
her bundle and kept her shawl from flying up with the other.

At last she entered Green Street, and came to the house of the kind
lady who had furnished her and many others with work; raised the
knocker, and gave one humble knock at the door. She had never been at
the house before, but she had sometimes had to go to other genteel
houses where she had been met with incivility by the domestics.

But "like master, like man," is a stale old proverb, and full of
truth. The servant came to the door. He was a grave old man about
fifty. His countenance was full of kind meaning, and his manners so
gentle, that before hearing her errand, observing how cold she looked,
bade her come in and warm herself at the hall stove.

"I have come," said Lettice, "with the young lady's work--I had not
time to come last night, but I hope I have not put her to any
inconvenience--I started before light this morning.'

"Well, my dear, I hope not," said the servant, "but it was a pity you
could not get it done last night. Mrs. Danvers likes to have people
exact to the moment. However, I dare say it will be all right."

As Reynolds, the servant-man, entered the drawing-room, Lettice heard
a voice, "Is it come at last?" And the young lady, who thus enquired,
was Catherine Melvin, who was then making an early breakfast before a
noble blazing fire.

"Has the woman brought her bill?" asked Mrs. Danvers.

"I will go and ask," said the servant. "Stay, ask her to come up. I
should like to enquire how she is getting along, this cold weather."

Reynolds obeyed, and soon Lettice found herself in a warm,
comfortable breakfast room.

"Good morning," said Mrs. Danvers. "I am sorry you have had such a
cold walk this morning. I am sorry you could not come last night. This
young lady is just leaving, and there is barely time to put up the
things." Catherine (for this was the young lady's name) had her back
turned to the door quietly continuing her breakfast, but when the
gentle voice of Lettice replied:

"Indeed, madam, I beg your pardon, I did my very best"--Catherine
started, looked up and rose hastily from her chair; Lettice, advancing
a few steps, exclaimed--"Catherine."

And Catherine exclaimed: "It is--it is you!" and coming forward and
taking her by the hand, she gazed with astonishment at the wan face
and miserable attire of the work-woman. "You," she kept repeating.
"Lettice! Lettice Arnold! Good Heavens! Where is your father? your
mother? your sister?"

"Gone," said the poor girl, "all gone but poor Myra!"

"And where is she? And you, dear Lettice, how have you come to this?"

Such was the unexpected meeting of these two persons, who were once
children of the same village of Castle Rising. Lettice had been
working for her schoolmate, Catherine Melvin. The result was a happy
one, and it was not long before, by the kindness of Catherine, that
the two orphan girls were situated pleasantly in life. But as you will
wish to know how all this came about, I will give you the
circumstances in another story.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE EXPLANATION.


Lettice's father was a man of education, a scholar, a gentleman, and
had much power in preaching. He received one hundred and ten pounds
per year for his services. Her father's illness was long and painful,
and the family were dependant on others for assistance.

"We at last closed his eyes," said Lettice, "in deep sorrow." He used
to say to himself, "It is a rough road, but it leads to a good place."

After his funeral, the expenses exhausted all that was left of their
money--only a few pounds were left when the furniture was sold, and
"we were obliged," said Lettice, "to give up the dear little
parsonage. It was a sweet little place. The house was covered all over
with honeysuckles and jessamines; and there was the flower garden in
which I used to work, and which made me so hale and strong, and aunt
Montague used to say I was worth a whole bundle of fine ladies.

"It was a sad day when we parted from it. My poor mother! How she kept
looking back, striving not to cry, and poor Myra was drowned in tears.

"Then we afterwards came to London. A person whom we knew in the
village had a son who, was employed in one of the great linen
warehouses, and he promised to try to get us needlework. So we came to
London, took a small lodging, and furnished it with the remnant of our
furniture. Here we worked fourteen hours a day apiece, and we could
only gain between three and four shillings each. At last mother died,
and then all went; she died and had a pauper's funeral."

From this room the orphan girl removed soon after their mother's
deceased, and located among the poor of Marylebone street, where Mrs.
Danvers accidently met with the two sisters, in one of her visits
among the poor, and for whom she obtained the work which led to the
unexpected meeting related in the previous story.


       *       *       *       *       *


JONAS AND HIS HORSE.


A horse is a noble animal, and is made for the service of man. No one
who has tender feelings can bear to see the horse abused. It is wicked
for any one to do so. A horse has a good memory, and he will never
forget a kind master. Jonas Carter is one of those boys who likes to
take care of a horse. His father gave Jonas the whole care of an
excellent animal which he purchased for his own use. Every morning he
would go into the stable to feed and water him. As all the horses in
the neighborhood had names, Jonas gave one to his, and called him
Major. Every time he went into the stable to take care of him, Major
would whine and paw, as if his best friend was coming to see him.
Jonas kept him very clean and nice, so that he was always ready for
use at any time of day. At night he made up his bed of straw, and kept
the stable warm in winter and cool in summer. Major soon found that
he was in the hands of a kind master, and being well fed, and well
cleansed, he would often show how proud and nice he was, by playing
with Jonas in the yard. His young master would often let him loose in
the yard, and when Jonas started to go in, the horse, Major, would
follow him to the door, and when he turned him into the pasture, no
one could so well catch him as Jonas; for every time he took him from
the pasture, Jonas would give him some oats; so when he saw his master
coming for him, he remembered the oats, and would come directly to
him. Some horses are very difficult to bridle, but it was not so with
Major. When Jonas came with the bridle, Major would hold his head
down, and take in his bitts, and appear as docile as a lamb. He well
knew that Jonas never drove him hard, but always used him kindly.
Jonas was not a selfish boy; he was willing to let his friends ride a
short distance; and in the picture, you will see him talking with one
of his young friends about his horse.

Now, children, you may be sure that a dumb animal will remember his
kind master; and if ever you own a horse, or drive one which belongs
to another, be sure and treat him kindly. And you will find this rule
to work well among yourselves. Be kind to each other, and to all
whom you meet with, and it will help you along the pleasant path of
life, and secure to you many friends.

[Illustration]


       *       *       *       *       *


EDWARD AND ELLEN.


Edward Ford owned a snug little cottage with a small farm situated
about a mile from the village. When he was married to Ellen G----, who
was said to be one of the best girls in the village, he took her to
his nice little home, where he had every thing around very pleasant
and comfortable. Ellen was very industrious and remarkable for her
prudence and neatness. She spun and churned, and tended her poultry,
and would often carry her butter and eggs herself to market, which
greatly added to their comfort. She had a beautiful little girl, and
they gave her the name of Lily. Things glided smoothly on until Lily
was sixteen. Edward was very fond of the violin and of reading books
that were not very useful, and as he was very fond of music, he spent
a great deal more time in making music and playing the violin than
what his wife thought profitable. Ellen loved music, and was willing
to have him read profitable books, but all this while she thought he
might be patching up the fences and improving the shed for the better
comfort of the cattle. Still she would not complain, hoping all the
time that he would see the necessity of being a little more
industrious. The winter came, and all through its dreary months he was
unable to work, as he was sick. And although Ellen worked hard, yet
her husband required so much of her attention, that all her efforts
availed not much to keep poverty out of their cottage. When the spring
came, Ellen's husband was able to be about again, and she began to
hope that Edward would be more industrious, and they would be able by
strict economy to repair the loss occasioned by his winter's illness,
which had put them so far behind-hand. Edward had become lazy or
disheartened. Affairs about the house continued to grow worse; his
farm was ill worked or neglected, and by the fall, his horse and oxen
had to go for necessary expenses. Ellen still kept her cows, but it
was now very little help she received from her husband. He had been
formerly one of the most temperate of men, but now he spent his days
from home; and here lay Ellen's deepest sorrow. He was often at the
village tavern, wasting in senseless riot the time, health and means
that God had given him for other purposes. Ellen felt sad, and in the
next story you will see a painful scene in the life of


       *       *       *       *       *


LILY FORD.


It was now in the latter part of December--two days more and comes the
season of "Merry Christmas." Ellen thought of the dreary prospect
before her. As she was thinking over her condition, and how she should
manage affairs so as to make home comfortable, the door opened, and in
came Edward earlier than usual, a sober man. With a grateful heart
Ellen set about preparing the supper, and made all the evening as
pleasant as she could for him.

The next morning earlier than usual Edward was preparing to go out.
The weather was bitter cold, and the wood pile was very low. She did
not like to ask Edward to split some wood the evening before, as she
did not wish to vex him. Of late he had harshly refused her simple
requests. She, however, ventured this morning to ask him to split a
few logs, and he replied:

"Why did you not ask me when you saw me doing nothing all last
evening? You must get along the best way you can until night. I have
engaged to work for Squire Davis, and I shall be late unless I go at
once."

"To work! Have you?" said Ellen, in a pleased and grateful tone.

"Yes; so don't detain me. I am to have a dollar and a half a day as
long as I choose to work."

"How very fortunate!" said Ellen.

After he was gone, Ellen busied herself in making things comfortable
for the children. It was market day, and she must carry her heavy
basket to the village for the different families who depended upon her
for their supply of fresh butter and eggs. A year ago she had a neat
little wagon and a good horse to drive. There was something in the
mind of Ellen; what it was she could not tell--a kind of sad
presentiment of something--as she was preparing to go to market. I
shall tell you in the next story what it was. You will see that Ellen
was very kind to her husband and tried every way to make him happy.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE MARKET DAY.


Mrs. Ford had three little children--Lily, Hetty, and a dear little
babe. As she was now going to market, she told Lily, her oldest
daughter, to take good care of the baby. Lily promised to do so. It
was a very cold day. For a time the children got along very well; but
soon the wood was all burned, not a stick or chip remained; as their
father had gone away in the morning without splitting any, so they
were obliged to do the best they could. The baby began to look as if
it was cold, and Lily said:

"Come, Hetty, we will go out and see if together we cannot roll in one
of those great logs."

Hetty was eleven years old. Lily put the baby in the cradle and then
went out with Hetty to roll in the log. They rolled it up to the step,
and got it part way into the door, but, alas! they could not get it
further. There it stuck in the doorway, and the door was wide open;
the wind and snow beat in from without, and the fire gradually settled
away in its embers.

Something must now be done. Hetty put on her cloak and hood and set
out for her mother; for she told them if anything happened to be sure
and come for her. Hetty soon found her mother at the village store,
and without stopping to warm herself, she said:

"O mother, come home, for little Eddy is sick, and Lily says it is the
croup, and that he is dying. The fire is all out, and the room is full
of snow, because the big log we tried to roll in stuck fast in the
doorway."

Hetty and her mother hastened home; and as they were crossing the
street there was her husband just entering the tavern. She told him
about little Eddy, and he promised to go for a physician and to come
home immediately; and by the time they had gone half way home, Edward,
her husband, joined them.

They hurried along, and as they came near the cottage there stood two
of the cows, and under the shed was the third, the old "spotted cow,"
which Hetty thought was in the pond when she left home. To their
surprise the log was rolled away from the door, and as Mrs. Ford
opened the door with a trembling hand, fearing her baby was dead,
there was a young man sitting by a good fire, which he had made while
Hetty was gone, with little Eddy folded in his arms. The anxious
mother bent over her baby as he lay in the stranger's arms, and
seeing his eyes closed, she whispered:

"Is he dead?"

"He is not, he only sleeps," replied the stranger.

This young man came into the house in time to save the baby from the
cold chills of death. He was ever after a friend to the family--a
means of Edward's reformation, so that with some assistance the
mortgage on the farm was paid off, and the farm re-stocked. This
stranger became the husband of Lily, the eldest daughter.


       *       *       *       *       *


MELLY, ANNA AND SUSY.


There is nothing more pleasant than to see brothers and sisters,
lovely in their lives, and in all their plays kind and obliging to
each other. Mrs. Jones' three little children were always noted for
their good behaviour by all the people in the village, and the school
teacher said they were the prettiest behaved children she ever saw,
and this was saying much in their praise, for her scholars were noted
for very good behavior and promptness in their recitations.

Mrs. Jones kept her children under a good discipline, but she always
gave them time and opportunities for their pleasant plays. She would
not allow them to associate with vicious children, because "evil
communications corrupt good manners," and she knew her children were
as liable to fall into bad habits as any others. There were a few
vicious boys in the village where she lived who always took delight in
teasing and vexing the other children, and sometimes these boys would
try some method to break up the children's play.

One afternoon, there being no school, Mrs. Jones gave her little
children permission to go into the lower back-room and spend awhile in
play. Away they jumped and skipped along down stairs to the play room,
with merry hearts and smiling faces. They had not been there a long
time before they heard a very singular noise, which they did not know
what to make of. But they soon forgot it, and continued playing with
the same cheerfulness; very soon again they heard the same noise,
which sounded like somebody's voice. The children began to be a little
frightened, and while little Susy stretches her hand out to take hold
of the post, and is in the act of running away. Melly and Anna put
their fingers to their lips, and listened again to know what the noise
could mean. Soon the noise was repeated, and away they flew to heir
mother's arms in such a tremor that she felt at the moment alarmed
herself. They told their mother what had happened, and all that night
the children could not sleep.

It was ascertained the next day that one of the bad boys crept along
in the back part of the yard where the children were playing, and by
an unnatural sound of his voice made the noise that so alarmed the
three little children. Susy, who was the youngest, did not forget it
for some time; and all of them were afraid to go alone into the lower
room for many weeks.

This was very wrong in the bad boy; he might have injured the children
at play so they would never have recovered from it. I have known young
children to be so frightened as never to forget the impression all
their life-time. How much better for the boy to have been like these
good children, and joined with them in their pleasant pastimes. Never
do any thing that will give sorrow and pain to others, but live and
act towards each other while in youth, so as to enable you to review
your life with pleasure, and to meet with the approbation of your
Heavenly Father.


       *       *       *       *       *


ARTHUR AND HIS APPLE TREE.


One summer day little William was sitting in the garden chair beside
his mother, under the shade of a large cherry tree which stood on the
grass plot in front of the house. He was reading in a little book.
After he had been reading some time, he looked, up to his mother and
said:

"Mother, will you tell me what is the meaning of 'you must return good
for evil?'"

His mother replied: "I will tell you a story that will explain it.

"I knew a little boy," she said, "whose name was Arthur Scott; he
lived with his grandmamma, who loved him very much, and who wished
that he might grow up to be a good man. Little Arthur had a garden of
his own, and in it grew an apple tree, which was then very small, but
to his great joy had upon it two fine rosy-cheeked apples, the first
ones it had produced. Arthur wished to taste of them very much to know
if they were sweet or sour; but he was not a selfish boy, and he says
to his grandmother one morning:

"I think I shall leave my apples on the tree till my birthday, then
papa and mamma and sister Fanny will come and see me, and we will eat
them together."

"'A very good thought," said his grandmother; "and you shall gather
them yourself.'

"It seemed a long time for him to wait; but the birthday came at last,
and in the morning as soon as he was dressed he ran into his garden to
gather his apples; but lo! they were gone. A naughty boy who saw them
hanging on the tree, had climbed over the garden wall and stolen them.

"Arthur felt very sorry about losing his apples, and he began to cry,
but he soon wiped his eyes, and said to his grandmother:

"'It is hard to lose my nice apples, but it was much worse for that
naughty boy to commit so great a sin as to steal them. I am sure God
must be very angry with him; and I will go and kneel down and ask God
to forgive him.'

"So he went and prayed for the boy who had stolen his apples. Now,
William, do you not think that was returning good for evil?"

"O, yes," said William; "and I thank you, mother, for your pretty
story. I now understand what my new book means." Little Arthur grew to
be a man, and always bore a good name.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE MOTHERLESS BIRDS.


There were two men who were neighbors to each other, living in a
distant country were they had to labor hard for the support of their
families. One of them was greatly troubled to know who would take care
of his children if he should die. But the other man was not so
troubled, and was always very cheerful, saying to his neighbor: "Never
distrust Providence."

One day as the sorrowful man was laboring in the fields, sad and cast
down, he saw some little birds enter a bush, go out and then return
again. He went towards the bush, and saw two nests side by side, and
in both nests some little birds, newly hatched and still without
feathers. He saw the old birds go in a number of times, and they
carried in their bills food to give their little ones.

At one time, as one of the mothers returned with her beak full, a
large vulture seized her and carried her away; and the poor mother,
struggling vainly under its talons, uttered piercing cries. He thought
the little young birds must certainly die, as they had now no mother
to take care of them. He felt so bad about them that he did not sleep
any that night. The next day, on returning to the fields, he said to
himself: "I will see the little ones of this poor mother; some without
doubt have already perished."

He went up to the bush, and saw that the little ones in both nests
were all alive and well. He was very much surprised at this, and he
hid himself behind the bush to see what would happen. After a little
time he heard a crying of the birds, and soon the second mother came
flying into the bush with her beak full of food, and distributed it
all among the little birds in both nests. He now saw that the orphan
birds were as well provided for as when their own mother was living.

In the evening, he related the whole story to his neighbor, and said
to him:

"I will never distress myself again about who will take care of my
children, if I should die before them."

His neighbor replied: "Let us always believe, hope, love, and pursue
our course in peace. If you die before me, I will take cure of your
children, and if I die before you, you will be a father to mine; and
if we are both taken away before our children are able to provide for
themselves, there is a Father in heaven."


       *       *       *       *       *


STORY ABOUT A ROBBER.


I will tell you a true story about a robber. A gentleman was once
travelling through a very unfrequented road, along in a chaise, in the
latter part of the day. There was no house nor a sign of a human being
there. It was a very lonely road. Presently at a sudden turn in the
road, directly towards his horse's head, a man came out of the woods.
The gentleman was convinced by his appearance that he came for no good
purpose. He immediately stopped his horse, and asked the stranger to
get in and ride. The man hesitated a moment, and then stepped into the
chaise. The gentleman commenced talking with him about the loneliness
of the road, and observed that it would be an admirable place for a
robbery if any one was so disposed. He proceeded to speak of robbery
and criminals, and how he thought they should be sought out and
instructed, and if possible reformed; and that we ought to try to
convert and reform them; and then he began to tell him what course he
should take with a man who should attempt to rob him. He told him that
he should give him all his money first, and then began to talk kindly
to him, and show the evil consequences of his course of life. He then
said:

"Yes, I would die on the spot rather than to injure a hair on his
head."

They soon came to another road, when the man, who had silently
listened to all the gentleman had said, desired to get out, saying
that his home lay in that direction.

The gentleman stopped his horse, and the man got out, took his adviser
by the hand, saying:

"I thank you, sir, for this ride and for all you have said to me; I
shall never forget any part of it. When I met you, it was my intention
to rob you. I could easily have done so, but your kind act and kind
words put better thoughts into my heart. I think I never shall be
guilty of the crime you have saved me from committing this afternoon.
I thank God for having met you; you have made me a better man."


       *       *       *       *       *


GOOD COMPANIONS.


One day, says a Persian poet, I saw a bunch of roses, and in the midst
of them grew a tuft of grass.

"How," I cried to the grass, "does a poor plant like you dare to be
found in the company of roses?"

And I ran to tear away the tuft, when the grass replied:

"Spare me! It is true, I am not a rose; but you will perceive from my
perfume that I have been among the roses."

This is a very pretty fable for young people. It makes us recollect
one of the proverbs of Solomon: "He that walketh with wise men shall
be wise; but a companion of fools shall be destroyed," Young people
like to have companions, and it is proper that they should have them.

If we had no one to associate with, we should be unhappy. We need
friends that we may confide in, and that we may tell them what we
feel and what we think. But we must take care as to the choice of
friends; for just as the grass in the fable imbibed the scent of the
roses, so we become like those with whom we associate.


       *       *       *       *       *


BERTIE'S BOX.


A very little boy by the name of "Bertie," kept a box in which he
deposited his little treasures. After he died his mother took the key
and opened it. It was full of all sorts of things. There were
specimens of stones, and shells, and moss, and grass, and dried
flowers. There were, also, curious flies, found dead; but they were
not destroyed by him, as he would never sacrifice a short sunny
existence for self gratification. There were a number of books and
small ornamental toys which had been given him--a drawing slate with
pencils, colored chalks, a small box of colors, some little plates
which he had colored, in his own untaught style--a commenced copy of
the hymn, "I know that my Redeemer liveth" an unfinished letter to his
grandpapa, and some torn leaves which he had found with passages of
scripture upon them--a copy of the "lines on the death of an only
son." Also a number of sketches of missionary stations, chapels and
schools, which he had cut out and colored. His mother once asked him
why he cut them out, saying, that there might be some reading on the
back of the pieces worth saving. "Oh no, mamma," he replied, "I looked
carefully at the backs first." In the box was a purse containing three
shillings.

Such were the treasures which this little lamb had left when he died;
And as you will be pleased to know what was done with the box of
treasures, I will tell you. "The thought struck me," says his mother,
"that after he was gone, I should not know what to do with Bertie's
box of treasures; I therefore asked him what I should do with them."
He replied, "Oh, give half to God and half to the children, and be
sure to divide them fairly." The money in the box was devoted to the
purchase of the Bible--and a collecting box made in the form of a
Bible; for, said he, "when my friends come and give money to the
children, then hold Bertie's box for Bertie's share." This is a good
example for all children. Your little treasures may serve a good
purpose when you die.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE CHILD AND FLOWER.



  The Atheist in his garden stood,
    At twilight's pensive hour,
  His little daughter by his side,
    was gazing on a flower.

  "Oh, pick that little blossom, Pa,"
    The little prattler said,
  "It is the fairest one that blooms
    Within that lonely bed."

  The father plucked the chosen flower,
    And gave it to his child;
  With parted lips and sparkling eye,
    She seized the gift and smiled.

  "O Pa--who made this pretty flower,
    This little violet blue;
  Who gave it such a fragrant smell,
    And such a lovely hue?"

  A change came o'er the father's brow,
    His eye grew strangely wild,
  New thoughts within him had been stirred
    By that sweet, artless child.

  The truth flashed on the father's mind,
    The truth in all its power;
  "There is a God, my child," said he,
    "Who made that little flower."


       *       *       *       *       *


ANNE CLEAVELAND.


Anne was the daughter of a wealthy farmer. She had a good New England
school education, and was well bred and well taught at home in the
virtues and manners that constitute domestic social life. Her father
died a year before her marriage. He left a will dividing his property
equally between his son and daughter, giving to the son the homestead
with all its accumulated riches, and to the daughter the largest share
of the personal property amounting to 6 or 7000 dollars. This little
fortune became at Anne's marriage the property of her husband. It
would seem that the property of a woman received from her father
should be her's. But the laws of a barbarous age fixed it otherwise.

Anne married John Warren, who was the youngest child, daintly bred
by his parents. He opened a dry good store in a small town in the
vicinity of B----, where he invested Annie's property. He was a farmer,
and did not think of the qualifications necessary to a successful
merchant. For five or six years he went on tolerably, living _genteelly_
and _recklessly_, expecting that every year's gain would make up the
excess of the past. When sixteen years of their married life had passed,
they were living in a single room in the crowded street of R----.
Every penny of the inheritance was gone--three children had died--three
survived; a girl of fifteen years, whom the mother was educating to be
a teacher--a boy of twelve who was living at home, and Jessy, a pale,
delicate, little struggler for life, three years old.

Mrs. W---- was much changed in these sixteen years. Her round blooming
cheek was pale and sunken, her dark chestnut hair had become thin and
gray, her bright eyes, over-tasked by use and watching, were faded,
and her whole person shrunken. Yet she had gained a great victory.
Yes, it was a precious pearl. And you will wish to know what it was.
It was a gentle submission and resignation--a patience under all her
afflictions. But learn a lesson. Take care to whom you give your hand
in marriage.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE ORPHANS' VOYAGE.


Two little orphan boys, whose parents died in a foreign land, were put
on board a vessel to be taken home to their relatives and friends. On
a bitter cold night, when the north-east winds sang through the
shrouds of the vessel, the little boys were crouched on the deck
behind a bale of goods, to sleep for the night. The eldest boy wrapt
around his younger brother his little cloak, to shield him from the
surf and sleet, and then drew him close to his side and said to him,
"the night will not be long, and as the wind blows we shall the sooner
reach our home and see the peet fire glow." So he tried to cheer his
little brother, and told him to go to sleep and forget the cold night
and think about the morning that would come. They both soon sank to
sleep on the cold deck, huddled close to each other, and locked close
in each other's arms. The steerage passengers were all down below,
snugly stowed away in their warm berths, and forgot all about the cold
wind and the frost. When the morning came the land appeared, and the
passengers began to pace the deck, and as the vessel moved along they
tried some well known spot to trace.

  Only the orphans did not stir,
    Of all this bustling train;
  They reached _their home_ this very night,
    They will not stir again!
  The winter's breath proved kind to them,
    And ended all their pain.

  But in their deep and freezing sleep,
    Clasped rigid to each other,
  In dreams they cried, "the bright morn breaks,
    Home! home! is hear, my brother;
  The angel death has been our friend,
    We come! dear father, mother!"


       *       *       *       *       *


LOOK UP.


A little boy went to sea with his father to learn to be a sailor. One
day his father said to him, "Come, my boy, you will never be a sailor
if you don't learn to climb."

The boy was very ambitious, and soon scrambled up to top of the
rigging; but when he saw at what a height he was he began to be
frightened, and called out, "Oh father, I shall fall, what shall I
do?"

"Look up--look up, my son," said his father; "if you look down you
will be giddy; but if you keep looking up to the flag at the top of
the mast you will descend safely." The boy followed his father's
advice, and soon came down to the deck of the vessel in safety. You
may learn from this story, to look up to Jesus, as the highest
example, and as the Saviour of mankind.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE FLOWER THAT LOOKS UP.


"What beautiful things flowers are," said one of the party of little
girls who were arranging the flowers they had gathered in the pleasant
fields. "Which flower would you rather be like, Helen?"

"Just as if there would be any choice," said Laura. "I like the Rose.
I should like to be the queen of flowers, or none." Laura was
naturally very proud.

"For my part" observed Helen, "I should like to resemble the
_Rhododendron_; when any one touches it, or shakes it roughly, it
scatters a shower of honey dew from its roseate cups, teaching us to
shower blessings upon our enemies. Oh, who does not wish to be as meek
as this flower? It is very difficult, I know," said Helen; "but we are
taught to possess a meek and lowly spirit."

"It is difficult, I know," said Lucy, "if we trust to our own
strength. It is only when my father looks at me in his kind manner,
that I have any control of myself. What a pity it is that we cannot
always remember that the eye of our Heavenly Father is upon us." "I
wish I could," said Helen.

"Now, Clara, we are waiting for you," said Laura. Clara smiled; and
immediately chose the pale woodbine, or convolvulus, which so
carelessly winds in and out among the bushes--this is an emblem of
loving tenderness.

"Now what says Lucy?" exclaimed Helen.

"I think I can guess," said Clara; "either a violet, or a heart's
ease. Am I right?"

"Not quite," said Lucy, "although both the flowers you have mentioned,
are great favorites of mine. But I think I should like to resemble the
daisy, most, because it is always looking upward."

Certainly Lucy made a wise choice. What more do we require for
happiness, than to be able, let the cloud be ever so dark, to look
upward with trusting faith in God.


       *       *       *       *       *


MY EARLY DAYS.


My father's house was indeed a pleasant home; and father was the
supreme guide of his own household. He was gentle, but he could he
firm and resolute when the case demanded. Mother was the sunshine of
our little garden of love; her talents and energy gave her influence;
and united to a man like father, she was all that is loveable in the
character of woman.

[Illustration]

But the dear old home, where I grew from infancy to boyhood, and from
boyhood to youth, I shall never forget. It was a large house on the
slope of a hill, just high enough to overlook several miles of our
level country, and smooth enough with its soft grassy carpet for us to
roll down from the summit to the foot of the hill. At the back of the
house was another hill, where we used to roll under the shade of the
old elm, and where Miles and I would sit whole afternoons and fly the
kite, each taking turns in bolding the string. This was a happy place
for us, and especially in the spring time, when the happy looking
cows grazed along the pathway which winds around the elm to the stream
where Kate and I used to sail my little boat. All summer long this
place was vocal with the songs of birds, which built their nests in
safety among the tall trees of the grove in the rear of the farm. We
had also the music of the running brook, and the pleasant hum of my
father's cotton mill, which brought us in our daily bread. Haying time
was always a happy season for us boys. Father's two horses, "_Dick_"
and "_Bonny_" would take off the farm as large a load of hay as any in
the village.

Years past on, and we were a happy band of brothers and sisters. After
Kate, came the twins, Margaret and Herbert, and last of all came the
youngest darling, blue eyed Dora. We had a happy childhood. Our
station in the world was high enough to enable us to have all the
harmless pleasures and studies that were useful and actually necessary
to boys and girls of our station. Father always thought that it was
better in early youth not to force the boys to too hard study, and
mother loved best to see Kate and Margaret using the fingers in
fabricating garments, than in playing the harp. We were free, happy,
roving children on father's farm, unchained by the forms of
fashionable life. We had no costly dresses to spoil, and were
permitted to play in the green fields without a servant's eye, and to
bathe in the clear shallow stream without fear of drowning. As I have
said before, these were happy days; and when I think of them gone, I
often express my regret that we did not improve them more for the
cultivation of the mind and the affections. In the next story you will
see that there were some passing clouds in our early summer days.


       *       *       *       *       *


MARGARET AND HERBERT.


In a large family there are often diversity of character and varieties
of mood and temper, which bring some clouds of sorrow. In our little
Eden of innocence there were storms now and then. Miles was a little
wild and head-strong from his babyhood, and Margaret, though very
beautiful, was often wilful and vain. For five years the twins had
grown up together the same in beauty and health One day an accident
befel Herbert, and the dear child rose from his bed of sickness a pale
and crippled boy. His twin sister grew up tall and blooming. The
twins loved each other very much, and it was a pleasant sight to see
how the deformed boy was cherished and protected by his sister
Margaret. She would often leave us in the midst of our plays to go and
sit by Herbert, who could not share with us in them.

We had our yearly festivals, our cowslip gatherings, our blackberry
huntings, our hay makings, and all the delights so pleasant to country
children. Our five birthdays were each signalized by simple presents
and evening parties, in the garden or the house, as the season
permitted. Herbert and Margaret's birthdays came in the sunny time of
May, when there were double rejoicings to be made. They were always
set up in their chairs in the bower, decorated with flowers and
crowned with wreaths. I now think of Margaret smiling under her
brilliant garland, while poor Herbert looked up to her with his pale
sweet face. I heard him once say to her when we had all gone away to
pluck flowers:

"How beautiful you are to-day, Margaret, with your rosy checks and
brown hair."

"But that does not make me any better or prettier than you, because I
am strong and you are not, or that my cheeks are red and your's are
pale."

Miles was just carrying little Dora over the steeping stones at the
brook, when Herbert cried:

"O, if I could only run and leap like Miles; but I am very helpless."

To which Margaret replied: "Never mind, brother; I will love you and
take care of you all your life," and she said these words with a
sister's love, as she put her arms around the neck of her helpless
brother. She loved him the more, and aimed to please him by reading
books to him which were his delight. This was a pleasant sight, and
the brothers always admired Margaret for her attention to their
helpless brother.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE BIT OF GARDEN.


Young children like to have a small piece of land for a garden which
they can call their own. And it is very pleasant to dig the ground,
sow the seed, and watch the little green plants which peep out of the
earth, and to see the beautiful buds and fresh blossoms.

Every boy and girl has a bit of garden, and we are told in the good
book to take good care of it, and see that the weeds of vice do not
spread over it, and to be sure and have it covered with plants of
goodness. This garden is the HEART. Such things as anger, sloth,
lying and cheating, are noxious weeds. But if you are active and
industrious, and keep cultivating this little garden, and keep out all
the bad weeds, God will help you to make a good garden, full of
pleasant plants, and flowers of virtue. I have seen some gardens which
look very bad, covered with briars and weeds, the grass growing in the
paths, and the knotty weeds choking the few puny flowers that are
drooping and dying out. Every thing seems to say--"How idle the owner
of this garden is." But I have seen other gardens where there were
scarcely any weeds. The walks look tidy, the flowers in blossom, the
trees are laden with fruit, and every thing says, "How busy the owner
is." Happy are you, dear children, if you are working earnestly in the
garden of your hearts. Your garden will be clean, pleasant, and
fruitful--a credit and comfort to you all your days.


       *       *       *       *       *


REMEMBER THE CAKE.


I will tell you an anecdote about Mrs. Hannah More, when she was
eighty years old. A widow and her little boy paid a visit to Mrs.
More, at Barley Wood. When they were about to leave, Mrs. M. stooped
to kiss the little boy, not as a mere compliment, as old maids usually
kiss children, but she took his smiling face between her two hands,
and looked upon it a moment as a mother would, then kissed it fondly
more than once. "Now when you are a man, my child, will you remember
me?" The little boy had just been eating some cake which she gave him,
and he, instead of giving her any answer, glanced his eyes on the
remnants of the cake which lay on the table. "Well," said Mrs. M.,
"you will remember the cake at Barley Wood, wont you?" "Yes," said the
boy, "It was nice cake, and you are _so kind_ that I will remember
both." "That is right," she replied, "I like to have the young
remember me for _being kin_--then you will remember old Mrs. Hannah
More?"

"Always, ma'am, I'll try to remember you always." "What a good child"
said she, after his mother was gone, "and of good stock; that child
will be as true as steel. It was so much more natural that the child
should remember the cake than an old woman, that I love his
sincerity." She died on the 7th of Sept., 1833, aged eighty-eight.
She was buried in Wrighton churchyard, beneath an old tree which is
still flourishing.


       *       *       *       *       *


BENNY'S FIRST DRAWING.


You have perhaps heard of Benjamin West, the celebrated artist. I will
tell you about his first effort in drawing.

One of his sisters who had been married some time, came with her babe
to spend a few days at her father's. When the child was asleep in the
cradle, Mrs. West invited her daughter to gather flowers in the
garden, and told Benjamin to take care of the little child while they
were gone; and gave him a fan to flap away the flies from his little
charge. After some time the child appeared to smile in its sleep, and
it attracted young Benney's attention, he was so pleased with the
smiling, sleeping babe, that he thought he would see what he could do
at drawing a portrait of it. He was only in his seventh year; he got
some paper, pens, and some red and black ink, and commenced his work,
and soon drew the picture of the babe.

Hearing his mother and sister coming in from the garden, he hid his
picture; but his mother seeing he was confused; asked him what he was
about, and requested him to show her the paper. He obeyed, and
entreated her not to be angry. Mrs. West, after looking some time,
with much pleasure, said to her daughter, "I declare, he has made a
likeness of _little Sally_," and kissed him with evident satisfaction.
This gave him much encouragement, and he would often draw pictures of
flowers which she held in her hand. Here the instinct of his great
genius was first awakened. This circumstance occurred in the midst of
a Pennsylvania forest, a hundred and four years ago. At the age of
eighteen he was fairly established in the city of Philadelphia as an
artist.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE GREY OLD COTTAGE.


In the valley between "Longbrigg" and "Highclose," in the fertile
little dale on the left; stands an old cottage, which is truly "a nest
in a green place." The sun shines on the diamond paned windows all
through the long afternoons of a summer's day. It is very large and
roomy. Around it is a trim little garden with pleasant flower borders
under the low windows. From the cottage is a bright lookout into a
distant scene of much variety.

Some years ago it was more desolate, as it was so isolated from the
world. Now the children's voices blend with the song of the wood
birds, and they have a garden there of dandelions, daisies, and
flowers. The roof and walls are now covered with stone crop and moss,
and traveller's joy, which gives it a variety of color. The currant
bushes are pruned, and the long rose brandies are trimmed, and present
a blooming appearance. This house, with forty acres of land, some
rocky and sterile, and some rich meadow and peat, formed the
possessions of the Prestons in Westmoreland. For two hundred years
this land had been theirs. Mr. Preston and his wife were industrious
and respectable people. They had two children, Martha and John. The
sister eight years older than her brother and acted a motherly part
towards him. As her mother had to go to market, to see to the cows and
dairy, and to look after the sheep on the fell; Martha took most of
the care of little Johnny.

It is said that a very active mother does not _always_ make a very
active daughter, and that is because she does things herself, and has
but little patience with the awkward and slow efforts of a learner.
Mrs. Preston said that Martha was too long in going to market with the
butter, and she made the bread too thick, and did not press all the
water out of the butter, and she folded up the fleeces the wrong way,
and therefore she did all herself. Hence Martha was left to take the
whole care of Johnny, and to roam about in the woods. When she was
about fifteen her mother died, so that Martha was left her mother's
place in the house, which she filled beyond the expectation of all the
neighbors. Her father died when Johnny was sixteen, and his last
advice to his daughter was, to take care of her brother, to look after
his worldly affairs, and above all to bear his soul in prayer to
heaven, where he hoped to meet the household once more. The share of
her father's property when he died, was eighty pounds. Here Martha
spent her days, frugal, industrious and benevolent. And it is said,
there will not be a. grave in Grasmere churchyard, more decked with
flowers, more visited with respect, regret, and tears, and faithful
trust, than that of Martha Preston when she dies. In the next story
you will be interested in what happened at the Grey Cottage.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE BOY FOUND IN THE SNOW.


One winter's night when the evening had shut in very early, owing to
the black snow clouds that hung close around the horizon, Martha sat
looking into the fire. Her old sheep dog, Fly, lay at her feet. The
cows were foddered for the night, and the sheep were penned up in the
yard. Fly was a faithful dog, and for some reason, this evening, he
was very restless. Why he pricked up his ears, and went snuffing to
the door, and pacing about the room, was more than Martha could tell.

"Lie down. Fly,--good dog--lie down," she said; but Fly would not mind
her, which was an unusual thing. She was certain something was the
matter, and she felt she must go up to the fell; and with the
foresight common to the Dale's people, who knew what mountain storms
are, she took under her cloak a small vial of gin, which was kept in
case of any accident, and set out with the dog Fly. The snow fell
fast, the wind blew, and the drifts lay thick. She had great
confidence in Fly, that if any thing was the matter he would find it
out. He ran straight up the little steep path which led through the
woods. On she followed, her cloak white with snow, until she came,
into the more open ground, where she lost sight of Fly and for a time
stood bewildered, until he should return and guide her. The birds and
beasts had gone to rest, and the stillness of the moors was awful. It
was night, and dark. Suddenly she heard a child's feeble voice, and in
an instant she pressed on towards the spot from which the sound came;
soon she heard Fly's loud howl for aid. At last she reached the spot,
and found a little boy half asleep, a kind of drowsiness which
precedes death. He could not speak; he could only moan. She moistened
his lips with the gin, and poured a little down his throat. She then
raised him up and carried him a short distance down the hill; then she
stopped to rest awhile; and then she got as far as the woods, where
the winds were not so cold. Again she gave him a few drops from her
vial, and now he was able to walk a few steps; then Martha, put up a
fervent prayer to God for assistance, as she dragged the lost boy
to her cottage. She now laid him down to the warm fire, while Fly
snuffed around him in great joy. She took off his wet clothes, and
wrapped him in her woollen cloak. He soon recovered and was able to
tell his story.

[Illustration]

His father had sent him up to the fells for a sheep that was missing.
The dog left him, and night and snow came on, and he got lost on the
fells. The family had lately come to live near Rydal, and the boy did
not know all the landmarks. Martha took the best of care of the boy
till the morning, when his mother came, with a grateful heart towards
God for the means which had guided Martha to her lost boy.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE BROTHER AND SISTER.
(In three Stories.)


THE PARTING SCENE.


In one of our western cities was a poor woman, in the garret of a
lonely house, who was very sick, and near dying. She had two children,
a brother and sister, who knelt beside her bed to catch her dying
words. "Annie, my daughter," said the mother, "soon, and your young
brother will have no earthly friend but you; will you, my daughter, be
to him a faithful sister?"

"Yes, mother, _I will_," said the daughter, as she wiped away her
tears.

And then she laid her hand upon the head of her son, and said, "Be a
good boy, Willy, and mind your sister; she is but three years older
than yourself, but as far as her knowledge goes, she will be a guide
for you; and she and you have a Father in Heaven who will never leave
you. Will you promise to do as she wishes?"

Willy raised his eyes to his mother, and bowed his head in token of
assent, and then burst into tears. The mother was a Christian, and
putting her arm around the neck of Willy, and with the other hand
clasping her daughter, she calmly said to them, "Weep not, dear
children, you will find friends; God is the father of the fatherless.
Keep in mind that his eye is upon you; be honest and virtuous,
faithful and believing, and all things will work together for your
good."

The dying mother could say no more; her breath grew short, and
stretching out her arms, she cried, "My dear children, I must leave
you: let me kiss you--God bless and keep----"

Her arms fell from around them, the words died away on her lips, and
her weary soul departed.

After the funeral of this mother, the moon shone brightly into the
desolate chamber, and revealed a beautiful scene, that of a sister's
love.

Anna sat near the window, and little Willy lay his weary head in her
lap. They were now without father or mother. Sleep had stolen upon the
weary eyes of Willy. Anna smoothed back the dark hair, which hung over
his brow, then carefully raised his slender frame in her arms and laid
him upon his bed. Then seating herself beside him she thought of her
mother's last request to take care of Willy.

"Yes," she exclaimed, "I must begin to-morrow. I will go out and try
to get some work, for poor Willy must remain at school. Dear boy," she
exclaimed, "I will never see him suffer." You will, in the next story,
find


ANNA SEEKING EMPLOYMENT.


It was a wearisome day to poor Anna, as she walked from square to
square, calling at the houses for employment. Some received her
kindly, and patronised her themselves, and promised to interest their
friends in her behalf, while others, alleging that she could not earn
as much as a woman, endeavored to beat her down a few shillings in her
price. But among all, Anna found means of subsistence for many months.
But soon her constitution began to grow weak, and her friends thought
it best for Willy to give up his school awhile, and to obtain some
place as errand boy, and for Anna to pursue a more active life.

Soon Anna found herself in a new home, doing the work of a family
which devolved on her. She kept a diary, and she would often go away
in her own little room and scribble a few lines in her book. Here is
an extract from her writings:----

"To-day I am very tired and yet but very little has been accomplished.
I know I could do well enough if I was allowed to regulate my work, or
if there was only order in the arrangement. There is certainly a great
want of system in this family; I am never allowed to finish one piece
of work before I am called off to another, and then blamed because I
did not do the first in time.

"One wants me to put the dough in the pants, and before I get my
hands clean, another calls me to go and get some wood; another tells
me to go to the store for some thread; another cries out, Anna! Anna!
and away I am sent to the third story after a book. Do they think a
girl like me is never tired? Ah, me! I must seek another place. I love
little children, and I think I should do for a child's nurse; I will
advertise."

And she did advertise, and it was not long before she was answered by
a request to call at Number 4, Elm street, at three o'clock on
Wednesday. In the next story we shall find


ANNA WITH A PLEASANT HOME.


Anna, having obtained leave of her mistress, soon found herself at the
door of Mrs. West. The servant girl came to the door, and Anna
followed her into the sitting-room, where every thing was nicely
arranged. Soon a gentle looking lady came into the room, with a babe
in her arms, and asking her, in a pleasant voice, "if she was the girl
who advertised? You look hardly strong enough to handle such a boy as
this," said she, as she placed on her lap a plump, black-eyed little
fellow of eight months old. "Let me see if you can lift him easily."

Anna gave the little fellow a hug and a kiss, and then playfully
tossed him up a few times, but he was so heavy that she soon placed
him on her knee, saying, "I am not used to holding children, but think
I shall soon get accustomed to it." The lady agreed to have Anna come
and enter upon her duties the next week.

Weeks rolled away, and Anna's face looked joyous, for peace was in her
heart. She loved her mistress because she was so thoughtful and would
not even let her carry the babe half so much as she wished, but would
tell her to amuse him on the floor. Mrs. West would often bring her
work and sit with Anna in the nursery, and talk with her about her
mother and Willy. Oh, how Anna loved Mrs. West!

Willy was now learning a trade with an honest carpenter, who gave him
permission to visit his sister once a week, and many happy hours did
they pass together in the nursery with the little pet Charley.

As the summer months came on, Mrs. West prepared to visit her mother,
who lived a few miles in the country. Anna went with her. Charley was
now old enough to go into the woods and run about, while Anna gathered
flowers, chased butterflies, and amused him with infant stories.
Little Charley would often fall asleep to the sweet tones of Anna's
voice, and then she would take him up and bear him to the house.

Three years passed away, and Charley needed no other nurse than his
mother, and Anna's heart ached at the thought of leaving Mrs. West and
little Charley. She had been so happy there that she dreaded to go out
among strangers to look for a new place.

Mrs. West made arrangements for Anna to live with her parents, who in
a short time made her their adopted child. It was a beautiful country
home, and she became as a dear child to Mr. and Mrs. Warren.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE GLOW WORM.


On a summer's evening about half an hour after bed time, as three
little brothers lay talking together they heard a gentle footstep on
the stairs. It was their sister Lucy. "Are you asleep," she asked.

"No, we are not asleep," cried the boys.

"I have brought something to show you" said Lucy, and going into the
darkest corner of the room, she opened her hand and the boys saw
something sparkle like a diamond or a star.

"What is it," cried little Frank, jumping out of bed and running to
look. Lucy held out her hand, but told him not to touch it.

"Oh, it moves! It moves!" said he "It must be something alive."

"Ah!" said John, "it is a glow worm. I saw one last summer on a bank
in Sand Lee."

"Take care," said Frank, "that it does not burn the counterpane." The
two elder brothers laughed; but Lucy reminded them that they would
most likely have fallen into the same mistake, if they had not been
taught that the glow worm's light, though it shines so brightly, does
not burn. To convince Frank she told him to hold out his hand. The
little boy felt afraid, but as he knew that Lucy never deceived him,
he put out his hand, and soon, to his great delight, the harmless
glow worm lay in his hand. Lucy promised to tell him something about
the glow worm another time. Frank went back to his bed, and Lucy bid
her brothers good night, promising to put the prize under a glass on
the lawn.

So night after night, for weeks, the three boys saw the twinkling
light of the glow worm on the dewy grass. One evening they began to
quarrel about it, and none but little Frank was willing to give up his
claim to it. It grieved him to hear his brothers quarrelling and
saying unkind words to each other; and he also thought that the poor
glow worm ought not to be kept a prisoner under the glass, instead of
flying over the green turf or mossy bank. But when he tried to bring
John and Robert to the same opinion, they would not hear to him. So
Lucy, who was a kind sister, when she found that the pleasure she had
procured for them was the occasion of their naughty conduct, sat down
by the window and told them to remember that God, who made the glow
worm and caused its light to shine, could see them in their chamber,
and hear every sinful word. John and Robert felt the force of their
sister's words, and settled their quarrel without delay, and they gave
Frank permission to go early in the morning and let the imprisoned
glow worm creep away.


       *       *       *       *       *


EMILY'S MORNING RAMBLE.


In the suburbs of the city of B. stands the beautiful residence of Mr.
James. It was a rural spot, as it was surrounded with all the beauties
of nature. There were rippling streams, and winding paths through the
green fields and woods, sunny hills and mossy rocks. Emily, the only
daughter of Mr. J., had all these pleasant scenes to enjoy, and every
thing to make her home happy. Her father owned a noble pair of grays
and a very fine carriage, and she had the pleasure of riding with her
father whenever she chose. But Emily did not live altogether for her
own happiness; she was accustomed to go and see the people in the
neighborhood of her home, and if any were poor or sick she would
always try to benefit them.

Her mother had to put up many a bundle of nice things for her to take
to some poor family in need. She was also fond of the works of nature,
and would frequently spend an hour in walking alone in the shady rural
places in her town. One day, as the beautiful spring had just unfolded
its loveliness, Emily thought she would walk out and breathe the
delicious air. With a heart laden with good thoughts and with a quick
step she passed along the gravelled street and by the cultivated
grounds and fine houses, until she reached the green turf and wooded
slopes, and here paused awhile under the large old trees, and thought
of the wisdom, goodness, and love of God in giving us such a beautiful
earth.

On her route, where the river curved around the foot of a gentle
sloping hill in the shadows of old forest trees, was made a rural
cemetery; so pleasant were its quiet paths and its cool shades in
summer, that the living loved to wander there. Friends came there to
plant flowers upon the graves of dear ones they had lost.

Through a low ivy covered gateway of stone, Emily entered the quiet
place. There were no massive railings, and lofty monuments, and no
costly devices, but God had made this place very beautiful--flowers
were blooming along the well trodden paths, and around the last
resting places of the dead. Here and there arose a simple shaft or a
light column, and the graves of the household were bordered by a green
hedge or surrounded by shadowing trees.

As Emily passed through the familiar walks, she came suddenly to a
grave in the remote corner of the cemetery, beside which sat a
solitary mourner. A small white slab lay upon the centre of the green
mound and at its head grew a rose bush in bloom, bending, till its
weight of white buds and blossoms touched the long bright grass upon
the grave. Emily attracted by its simply beauty, and drawing near, she
stooped down and read upon the marble slab, "Dear Mina." Her young
eyes filled instantly with tears, for she knew that it was the darling
child of a lady who to her was a stranger. As she turned away from the
spot she met a lady approaching, who passed her and kneeled down
beside the grave. She thought she would speak to the lady, and with
tender sympathy she asked, "Was it your child?"

The lady, who was deep in thought, looked up at the sound of Emily's
earnest voice, and answered, softly, "yes; 'Dear Mina' was my only
child." This interview led Emily to an acquaintance with the sorrowing
mother, which caused her never to forget her morning ramble. She was a
good woman, and at the decease of Emily's mother became her Christian
companion and instructor.

       *       *       *       *       *

I doubt whether he will find the way to heaven who desires to go
there alone: all heavenly hearts are charitable: enlightened souls
cannot but diffuse their rays. I will, if I can, do something for
others and for heaven, not to merit by it, but to express my
gratitude. Though I cannot do what I would, I will labor to do what I
can.--_Feltham_.


       *       *       *       *       *


FLYING THE KITE.


Flying the kite is a pleasant amusement for boys, and when we see the
kites flying high in the air, we are always reminded of a kite whose
history we heard when a little child, and which we give our readers.
Shortly after the close of the Revolutionary war, there was a little
boy whose parents had left their home and friends in England, on
account of their sympathy with the struggle of freedom for their
rights in America. Their first home was in Norfolk, Va.

This little boy was very much delighted with the American eagle, and
he determined to make a kite as much like his favorite bird as he
could. He had a friend who was a painter and gilder, and a person
of great ingenuity. Together they contrived a beautiful kite
representing an eagle of gigantic size. It was painted and gilded in
the most beautiful manner, and a small but very brilliant lantern was
attached to it just below the breast.

They kept their secret very carefully, never suffering any one to
enter the room while it was making.

On a dark, cloudy, windy night, the kite was flown. Its mechanism was
so perfect that it sailed very beautifully. The lantern illuminated
every part, and it made a very brilliant appearance. Crowds of people
thronged the streets, wondering what the strange visitor was. Some
were alarmed, and thought it was an omen of fearful events.

Great was their admiration when they discovered that the wonderful
bird was the ingenious contrivance of a little boy; and they could
scarcely be convinced that what looked so much like a real bird was
only an ingenious combination of sticks and painted paper.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE HAPPY FAMILY.


There are a great many novel sights in the streets of London, for the
cheap entertainment of the people. The family circle of different
animals and birds is an admirable illustration of the peace which
should pervade among families. The proprietor of this little menagerie
calls it, "The Happy Family." The house in which they are kept is a
simple constructed cage. It is a large square hen-coop, placed on a
low hand-cart which a man draws about from one street to another, and
gets a few pennys a day from those who stop to look at the domestic
happiness of his family. Perhaps the first thing you will see, is a
large cat, washing her face, with a number of large rats nestling
around her, like kittens, whilst others are climbing up her back and
playing with her whiskers. In another corner of the room a dove and a
hawk are sitting on the head of a dog which is resting across the neck
of a rabbit. The floor is covered with the oddest social circles
imaginable--weazles and Guinea pigs, and peeping chickens, are putting
their noses together, caressingly. The perches above are covered with
birds whose natural antipathies have been subdued into mutual
affection by the law of kindness. The grave owl is sitting upright,
and meditating in the sun, with a keen-sighted sparrow perched between
his ears trying to open the eyes of the sleepy owl with its sharp
bill.

Children stop to look at this scene, and Mr. Burritt thinks they may
carry away lessons which will do them good. They will think on it on
their way to school, and at home too, when any thing crosses their
will in family or on the play ground.


       *       *       *       *       *


STORY ABOUT AN INDIAN.


A poor sick man might go to the door of some rich person's house and
ask relief for himself and not be able to obtain admittance; but if he
brought in his hand a paper written by the son of the master of the
house, whom he had met with in a distant land, and in his name asked
for the relief, his request would be granted for the sake of the
master's son.

Now we all need friends and every one tries to get and keep a few
friends. Children will love a little dog, or a lamb, or a dove, or a
bird. The little boy will talk to his top, and the little girl will
talk to her doll, which shows that they want a friend; and if the top
and doll could talk and love them, they would feel happier.

Some years ago there was an Indian in the State of Maine, who for his
very good conduct had a large farm given him by the State. He built
his little house on his land, and there lived. The white people about
did not treat him so kindly as they ought. His only child was taken
sick and died, and none of the whites went to comfort him, or to
assist him in burying his little child. Soon after, he went to the
white people, and said to them--"When white man's child die, Indian
may be sorry--he help bury him--when my child die, no one speak to
me--I make his grave alone. I can no live here, for I have no friend
to love me."

The poor Indian gave up his farm, dug up the body of his child, and
carried it with him 200 miles through the forest, to join the Canada
Indians.

The Indian loved his child, and he wanted friends. So you children
will need a friend to look to every day. When we are sick, in
distress, or about to die, we want a friend in whom we may trust and
be happy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wherefore did God create passions within us, pleasures round about
us, but that these, rightly tempered, are the very ingredients of
virtue.--_Milton_.


       *       *       *       *       *


GATHER THE FLOWERS.


Two little girls went into the fields to gather flowers. Buttercups,
violets, and many other blossoms were in abundance. One of the girls
was pleased with every thing, and began to pick such flowers as came
in her way. In a short time she collected a great quantity of flowers,
and though some of them were not very handsome, yet they made a very
beautiful bunch. The other child was more dainty and determined to get
her none but those which were very beautiful. The buttercups were all
of one color and did not strike her fancy--the blue violets were too
common, and so the little pair wandered on through the fields till
they were about to return home. By this time the dainty child, seeing
that her sister had a fine collection of flowers while she had none,
began to think it best to pick such as she could get. But now the
flowers were scarce; not even a dandelion nor a flower was to be
found. The little girl at length begged of her sister a single
dandelion, and thus they returned home. The children told their story,
and their mother addressed them thus "My dear children, let this event
teach you a lesson. Jane has acted the wisest part. Content with such
flowers as came in her way, and not aiming at what was beyond her
reach, she has been successful in her pursuit. But Laura wanted
something more beautiful than could be found, collected nothing from
the field, and was finally obliged to beg a simple flower from her
sister. So it is, children, in passing through life--gather what is
good and pleasant along your path, and you will, day by day, collect
enough to make you contented and happy. But if you scorn those
blessings which are common, and reach after those which are more
rare and difficult to be obtained, you will meet with frequent
difficulties, and at last be dependant on others. So gather the
flowers as you go along the pathway of life."

       *       *       *       *       *

Think not all is well within when all is well without; or that thy
being pleased is a sign that God is pleased: but suspect every thing
that is prosperous, unless it promotes piety, and charity, and
humility.--_Taylor_.

       *       *       *       *       *

God hath given to man a short time here upon earth, and yet upon this
short time eternity depends.--_Taylor_.


       *       *       *       *       *


JANE AND HER LESSONS.


It is a mark of a good scholar to be prompt and studious. Such were
the habits of little Jane Sumner. She was the youngest of three
sisters and from her first being able to read, she was very fond of
reading; and at school her teacher became much interested in little
Jane on account of her interest in study, and the promptness she
manifested in reciting her lessons. Jane had a quiet little home and
was allowed considerable time for study, although she hid to devote
some time in assisting her mother about house.

There was a very fine garden attached to Mrs. Sumner's residence,
where she took much pleasure in cultivating the flowers. In the centre
of the garden was built a summer house all covered over with grape
vine. The broad leaves of the vine made a refreshing shade to it, and
thereby shielded the warm sun from persons under it. This little
summer house Jane frequently occupied for her study. In the picture
you see her with book in hand getting her lesson. She arose very early
in the morning, and by this means gained much time.

  Up in the morning early,
  By daylights earliest ray,
  With our books prepared to study
  The lessons of the day.

Little Jane, for her industry and good scholarship, obtained quite a
number of "rewards of merit," which her school mates said she justly
deserved. There is one of them with these lines:

  For conduct good and lessons learned,
  Your teacher can commend;
  Good scholarship has richly earned
  This tribute from your friend.

On one day, she came running home very much pleased with her card,
which her teacher gave herself and her little sister Emma, for their
good conduct and attention to their studies. The card contained these
lines:

  See, Father! mother, see!
  To my sister and me,
  Has our teacher given a card,
  To show that we have studied hard.
  To you we think it must be pleasant,
  To see us both with such a present.

Every good boy and girl will be rewarded, and all such as are
studious, and respectful to their teachers, will always get a reward.

       *       *       *       *       *

God never allowed any man to do nothing. How miserable is the
condition of those men who spend their time as if it were _given_
them, and not lent.--_Bishop Hall_.


       *       *       *       *       *


HARVEST SONG.


  Now the golden ear wants the reaper's hand,
  Banish every fear, plenty fills the land.
    Joyful raise songs of praise,
    Goodness, goodness, crowns our days.
    Yet again swell the strain,
  He who feeds the birds that fly,
  Will our daily wants supply.

  CHORUS----

  As the manna lay, on the desert ground,
  So from day to day, mercies flow around.
  As a father's love gives his children bread,
  So our God above grants, and we are fed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Think in the morning what thou hast to do this day, and at night what
thou hast done; and do nothing upon which thou mayst not boldly ask
God's blessing; nor nothing for which thou shalt need to ask his
pardon.--_Anon_.


       *       *       *       *       *


TELLING SECRETS.


There is a company of girls met together, and what can they be talking
about. Hark! "Now I will tell you something, if you'll promise never
to tell," says Jane. "I will, certainly," replied Anne. "And will you
promise _never_ to tell a single living creature as long as you live?"
The same reply is given, "_I will never tell_."

Now Jane tells the secret, and what is it? It turns out to be just
nothing at all, and there is no good reason why every body should'nt
know it. It is this--"Lizzy Smith is going to have a new bonnet,
trimmed with pink ribbon and flowers inside." Anna thinks no more of
her solemn promise, and the first school-mate she meets, she opens the
secret, with a solemn injunction for her not to tell. By and by the
secret is all out among the girls--the promises are all broken. Now,
children, remember your word--keep it true, and never make a promise
which you do not intend to keep, and always avoid telling foolish
secrets.


       *       *       *       *       *


AGNES AND THE MOUSE.


One brilliant Christmas day, two little girls were walking towards a
neighboring village, when they observed a little creature walking
about the road. "Surely," said Mary, "it is a large mouse;" and it did
not seem to be afraid, so they thought from its tameness, it must be
hungry. "Poor little thing," said Agnes, "I wish I had something to
give you." She took a few almonds from her pocket and went gently
along towards the mouse and put it close by its side. The mouse began
to nibble, and soon finished it. Agnes then put down two or three
more, and left the mouse to eat its Christmas dinner. I think you
would have enjoyed seeing the mouse eating the almonds. I hope you
will always be kind to poor dumb animals. I have seen children who
were cruel to dumb animals. This is very wrong, and such children will
never be respected, nor can thy expect to be befriended.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE TWO ROBINS.


A few summers ago I was sitting on a garden seat, beneath a fruit
tree, where the works of nature looked very beautiful. Very soon I
heard a strange noise among the highest branches of the tree over my
head. The sound was very curious, and I began to look for the cause. I
shook one of the lower branches within my reach, and very soon I
discovered two birds engaged in fighting; and they seemed to gradually
descend towards the ground. They came down lower and lower, tumbling
over one another, and fighting with each other. They soon reached the
lowest branch, and at last came to the ground very near me. It was
with some difficulty that I parted them; and when I held one of them
in each of my hands, they tried to get away, not because they were
afraid of me but because they would resume the conflict. They were two
young robins, and I never before thought that the robin had such a bad
spirit in its breast. Lest they should get to fighting again, I let
one go, and kept the other housed up for several days, so that they
would not have much chance of coming together again.

Now, children, these two little robins woke in the morning very
cheerful, and appeared very happy as they sat on the branch of the
tree, singing their morning songs. But how soon they changed their
notes. You would have been sorry to have seen the birds trying to hurt
each other.

If children quarrel, or in any degree show an unkind temper, they
appear very unlovely and, forget that God, who made them, and gives
them many blessings, disapproves of their conduct. Never quarrel, but
remember how pleasant it is for children to love each other, and to
try to do each other good.

       *       *       *       *       *

Every hour is worth at least a good thought, a good wish, a good
endeavor.--_Clarendon_.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE PLEASANT SAIL.


Down by the sea-coast is the pleasant town of Saco, Where Mr. Aimes
has resided for many years. Once a year he had all his little nephews
and nieces visit him. It was their holiday, and they would think and
talk about the visit for a long time previous to going there. Their
uncle took much pleasure in making them happy as possible while they
were with him. He owned a pleasure sail boat which he always kept in
good order. On this occasion he had it all clean and prepared for the
young friends, as he knew they lotted much on having a sail. As his
boat was small, he took part of them at a time and went out with them
himself, a short distance, and sailed around the island, and returned.
In the picture you see them just going out, with their uncle at the
helm, while three of the nephews are on the beach enjoying the scene.

But I must tell you children to be very careful when you go on the
water to sail. There are some things which it is necessary for you to
know, as a great many accidents occur on the water for the want of
right management. When you go to sail, be sure and have persons with
you who understand all about a boat, and how to manage in the time of
a squall. Always keep your seats in the boat, and not be running about
in it. Never get to rocking a boat in the water. A great many people
have lost their lives by so doing. Sailing on the water may be very
pleasant and agreeable to you if you go with those who understand
all about the harbor, and are skilled in guiding the boat on the
dangerous sea.

[Illustration]


       *       *       *       *       *


THE SAILOR BOY.


Yarmouth is the principal trade sea-port town in the county of
Norfolk. Fishermen reside in the towns and villages around, and among
the number was a poor man and his wife; they had an only son, and when
ten years old his father died. The poor widow, in the death of her
husband, lost the means of support. After some time she said to her
boy, "Johnny, I do not see how I shall support you." "Then, mother, I
will go to sea," he replied. His mother was loth to part with Johnny,
for he was a good son and was very kind to her. But she at last
consented on his going to sea.

John began to make preparations. One day he went down to the beach
hoping to find a chance among some of the captains to sail. He went to
the owner of one and asked if he wanted a boy. "No," he abruptly
replied "I have boys enough." He tried a second but without success.
John now began to weep. After some time he saw on the quay the captain
of a trading vessel to St. Petersburg, and John asked him if "a boy
was wanted." "Oh, yes," said the captain, "but I never take a boy or a
man without a character." John had a Testament among his things, which
he took out and said to the captain, "I suppose this won't do." The
captain took it, and on opening the first page, saw written, "_John
Read, given as a reward for his good behaviour and diligence in
learning, at the Sabbath School_." The captain said, "Yes, my boy,
this will do; I would rather have this recommendation than any other,"
adding, "you may go on board directly." John's heart leaped for joy,
as, with his bundle under his arm, he jumped on board the vessel.

The vessel was soon under weigh, and for some time the sky was bright,
and the wind was fair. When they reached the Baltic Sea a storm came
on, the wind raged furiously, all hands were employed to save the
vessel. But the storm increased, and the captain thought all would be
lost. While things were in this state the little sailor boy was
missing. One of the crew told the captain he was down in the cabin.
When sent for he came up with his Testament in his hand and asked the
captain if he might read. His request was granted. He then knelt down
and rend the sixtieth and sixty-first Psalms. While he was reading the
wind began to abate, (the storms in the Baltic abate as suddenly as
they come on.) The captain was much moved, and said he believed the
boy's reading was heard in Heaven.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE BRACELET;
OR, HONESTY REWARDED.


At St. Petersburgh, the birth day of any of the royal family is
observed as a time of great festivity, by all kinds of diversions.
When the vessel in which John Read shipped arrived, he was allowed to
go on shore to see the sport on that occasion. In one of the sleighs
was a lady, who at the moment of passing him lost a bracelet from her
arm, which fell on the snow. John hastened forward to pick it up, at
the same time calling after the lady, who was beyond the sound of his
voice. He then put the bracelet into his pocket, and when he had seen
enough of the sport, went back to the ship.

John told the captain all about it, showing him the prize which he had
found.

"Well, Jack," said the captain "you are fortunate enough--these are
all diamonds of great value--when we get to the next port I will sell
it for you." "But," said John, "It's not mine, it belongs to the lady,
and I cannot sell it." The captain replied, "O, you cannot find the
lady, and you picked it up. It is your own." But John persisted it was
not his. "Nonsense, my boy," said the captain, "it belongs to you."
John then replied "But if we have another storm in the Baltic," (see
story preceding.) "Ah, me," said the Captain, "I forgot all about
that, Jack. I will go on shore with you to-morrow and try to find the
owner." They did so; and after much trouble, found it belonged to a
nobleman's lady, and as a reward for the boy's honesty, she gave him
eighty pounds English money. John's next difficulty was what to do
with it. The captain advised him to lay it out in hides, which would
be valuable in England. He did so, and on arriving at Hull, they
brought one hundred and fifty pounds.

John had not forgotten his mother. The captain gave him leave of
absence for a time, and taking a portion of his money with him, he
started for his native village. When he arrived there, he made his way
to her house with a beating heart. Each object told him it was home,
and brought bygone days to his mind. On coming to the house he saw it
was closed. He thought she might be dead; and as he slowly opened the
gate and walked up the path and looked about, his heart was ready to
break. A neighbor seeing him, said, "Ah, John, is that you?" and
quickly told him that his mother still lived--but as she had no means
of support, she had gone to the poor-house. John went to the place,
found his mother, and soon made her comfortable in her own cottage.
The sailor boy afterwards became mate of the same vessel in which he
first left the quay at Yarmouth.


       *       *       *       *       *


NO PAY--NO WORK.


"Little boy, will you help a poor old man up the hill with this
load?" said an old man, who was drawing a hand-cart with a bag of corn
for the mill.

"I can't," said the boy, "I am in a hurry to be at school."

As the old man sat on the stone, resting himself he thought of his
youthful days, and of his friends now in the grave; the tears began to
fall, when John Wilson came along, and said,--"shall I help you up the
hill with your load sir?" The old man brushed his eyes with his coat
sleeve, and replied, "I should be glad to have you." He arose and took
the tongue of his cart, while John pushed behind. When they ascended
the top of the hill, the old man thanked the lad for his kindness. In
consequence of this John was ten minutes too late at school. It was
unusual for him to be late, as he was known to be punctual and prompt;
but as he said nothing to the teacher about the cause of his being
late, he was marked for not being in season.

After school, Hanson, the first boy, said to John, "I suppose you
stopped to help old Stevenson up the hill with his corn."

"Yes," replied John, "the old man was tired and I thought I would give
him a lift."

"Well, did you get your pay for it?" said Hanson, "for I don't work
for nothing."

"Nor do I," said John; "I didn't help him, expecting pay."

"Well, why did you do it? You knew you would be late to school."

"Because I thought I _ought_ to help the poor old man," said John.

"Well," replied Hanson "if you will work for nothing, you may. _No
pay, no work_, is my motto."

"To _be kind and obliging_, is mine," said John.

Here, children, is a good example. John did not perform this act of
kindness for nothing. He had the approbation of a good conscience--the
pleasure of doing good to the old man--and the respect and gratitude
of his friends. Even the small act of benevolence is like giving a cup
of cold water to the needy, which will not pass unnoticed. Does any
body work for nothing when he does good? Think of this, and do
likewise.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE TREE THAT NEVER FADES.


"Mary," said George, "next summer I will not have a garden. Our pretty
tree is dying, and I won't love another tree as long as I live. I will
have a bird next summer, and that will stay all winter."

George, don't you remember my beautiful canary bird? It died in the
middle of the summer, and we planted bright flowers in the ground
where we buried it. My bird did not live as long as the tree."

"Well, I don't see as we can love anything. Dear little brother died
before the bird, and I loved him better than any bird, or tree, or
flower. Oh! I wish we could have something to love that wouldn't die."

The day passed. During the school hours, George and Mary had almost
forgot that their tree was dying; but at evening, as they drew their
chairs to the table where their mother was sitting, and began to
arrange the seeds they had been gathering, the remembrance of the tree
came upon them.

"Mother," said Mary, "you may give these seeds to cousin John; I never
want another garden."

"Yes," added George, pushing the papers in which he had carefully
folded them towards his mother, "you may give them all away. If I
could find some seeds of a tree that would never fade, I should like
then to have a garden. I wonder, mother, if there ever was such a
garden?"

"Yes, George, I have read of a garden where the trees never die."

"A _real_ garden, mother?"

"Yes, my son. In the middle of the garden, I have been told, there
runs a pure river of water, clear as chrystal, and on each side of the
river is the _tree of life_,--a tree that never fades. That garden is
_heaven_. There you may love and love for ever. There will be no
death--no fading there. Let your treasure be in the tree of life, and
you will have something to which your young hearts can cling, without
fear, and without disappointment. Love the Saviour here, and he will
prepare you to dwell in those green pastures, and beside those still
waters."

       *       *       *       *       *

Every neglected opportunity draws after it an irreparable loss, which
will go into eternity with you.---_Doddridge_.


       *       *       *       *       *


YOUNG USHER.


You have read of that remarkable man, Mr. Usher, who was Archbishop of
Armagh. I will tell you something about his early childhood. He was
born in Dublin, in the year 1580, and when a little boy he was fond of
reading. He lived with his two aunts who were born blind, and who
acquired much knowledge of the Scriptures by hearing others read the
Scriptures and other good books. At seven years of age he was sent to
school in Dublin; at the end of five years he was superior in study to
any of his school fellows, and was thought fully qualified to enter
the college at Dublin.

While he was at college he learned to play at cards, and he was so
much taken up with this amusement that both his learning and piety
were much endangered. He saw the evil tendency of playing cards, and
at once relinquished the practice entirely. When he was nine years
old, he heard a sermon preached which made a deep impression on his
mind. From that time he was accustomed to habits of devotion. He loved
to pray, and felt that he could not sleep quietly without first
commending himself to the care of his Heavenly father for protection.
When he was fourteen years old, he began to think about partaking of
the Lord's supper. He thought this act to be a very solemn and
important one, and required a thorough preparation. On the afternoon
previous to the communion, he would retire to some private place for
self examination and prayer. When he was but sixteen years of age, he
obtained such a knowledge of chronology as to have commenced the
annals of the Old and New Testaments, which were published many years
after, and are now a general standard of reference.

When his father died, he being the eldest son, the paternal estate was
left to him to manage. But as he feared it would occupy to much of his
time and attention, he gave it entirely to his brother and sisters,
reserving only enough for his books and college expenses. At the age
of twenty he entered the ministry, and seven years after was chosen a
professor in the University of Dublin. In 1640, he visited England at
the time of the commencement of the rebellion; all his goods were
seized by the popish party, except some furniture in his house, and
his library at Drogheda, which was afterwards sent to London. He bore
his loss with submission, but he never returned to Ireland. He had
many trials to endure on account of the troublous times in England,
(it being the time of civil wars.) In 1646 he received a kind
invitation from the Countess of Peterborough to reside in one of her
houses, which proposal he accepted and lived in one of them till his
death, in 1665. By the direction of Cromwell he was buried in
Westminster Abbey.


       *       *       *       *       *


A GOOD ACT FOR ANOTHER.


A man was going from Norwich to New London with a loaded team; on
attempting to ascend a hill where an Indian lived he found his team
could not draw the load. He went for the Indian to assist him. After
he had got up the hill he asked the Indian what was to pay. The Indian
told him to do as much for some body else.

Some time afterward the Indian wanted a canoe. He went up Shetucket
river, found a tree, and made him one. When he had finished it he
could not get it to the river; accordingly he went to a man and
offered to pay him if he would go and draw it to the river for him.
The man set about it immediately, and after getting it to the river,
the Indian offered to pay him. "No," said the man; "don't you
recollect, so long ago, helping a man with a team up the hill by the
side of your house?" "Yes." "Well, I am the man; take your canoe and
go home."


       *       *       *       *       *


A BOY REPROVED BY A BIRD.


The sparrows often build their nests under the eaves of houses and
barns. A young lad saw one of the sparrows conveying materials for her
nest, which she was building under the eaves of a cottage adjoining
his father's house. He was told not to disturb it. But birds eggs form
a temptation to many boys. At a favorable opportunity the lad climbed
up to the roof of the cottage and carried away the nest with the eggs
in it. Among the materials of which the nest was composed was a piece
of paper with some printed verses on it. The boy pulled it out and
found it to be a page of one of Dr. Watts' hymns, which had been
picked up in the yard by the poor bird for strengthening her nest.
The boy unfolded the paper and read:----

  "Why should I deprive my neighbor
    Of his goods against his will?
  Hands were made for honest labor,
    Not to plunder nor to steal."

The lad says, in his after years, "I never forgot the lesson presented
to me by that leaf of paper which had been fixed to the nest of the
poor sparrow." Let young people remember that when they do wrong they
will get reproved, and it may be by the means of a bird.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE ECHO.


Little Charles knew nothing about an echo. As he was playing by
himself in the field, he cried out, "Ho, hop!" and immediately a voice
from the woods near by answered, "ho, hop!" Being surprised at this,
he called out, "who be you?" The voice answered, "who be you." Charles
thought this very strange, and cried out "you're a stupid fellow,"
and "stupid fellow," was the reply from the woods.

Charles began to be much displeased, and called several abusive names,
and every name he called, came back to him. "I never met with such
insolence," said he, "but I'll revenge myself;" and he ran up and down
among the trees, trying to find the supposed offender, but he could
see no one. Vexed and disappointed, he hastened home and told his
mother that a bad boy had hidden in the woods and called him all sorts
of names.

His mother smiled and shook her head. "Now you have been angry at
yourself, Charles, for you must know that you heard nothing but your
own words repeated. As you have seen your own face reflected in the
water, so you have now heard your own voice echoed." Had Charles spoke
kind words he would have heard kind words in return. It is often true
that the behavior we meet with from others, is but an echo of our own.
If we speak kind words we shall have kind words in return.


       *       *       *       *       *


LIZZY AND HER DOG.


I wish to relate to you a very affecting story about a good girl who
died when she was thirteen years old. She was an interesting young
girl, and possessed great intellectual powers. She was also very fond
of the works of nature, especially of flowers, and would often say,
"How good God is to make these beautiful flowers for us to enjoy."
Soon it was very evident to her friends that disease was preying on
her delicate constitution. She bore all her sickness with calm
submission, and when she died she appeared to all who knew her to be
prepared for heaven. While she was sick, her parents did every thing
to make her comfortable and happy. They had a dog which Lizzy set a
great deal by, and with him she used to play in the house and in the
garden. When Lizzy was so sick that she could not play with him, he
would come and lay himself down at her bed side, and appeared to be
very sad on her account. When she died [and] was buried, the dog
followed with the parents in the funeral, to the grave-yard where
Lizzy was laid away. One day, about five months afterwards, I went
with her father to see the grave of Lizzy.

As we went into the grave-yard, we walked slowly along, reading the
names of persons buried there, while the dog followed us. We soon
missed the dog, supposing he had wandered into some other part of the
cemetery. But when we came within a few yards of Lizzy's grave we saw
him sitting at its head, leaning against the stone which was erected
in memory of the lovely daughter. It was a very affecting scene--the
attachment of the dog, as well as the power of his memory. Dogs are
faithful creatures, and we can never bear to see them abused. Be kind
to them and they will be kind to you.


       *       *       *       *       *


JULIA'S SUNSET WALK.


It was a beautiful June day, just at the sun's setting, when Julia
Eastworth went to visit the resting place of a dear grandmother. While
she was in the grave-yard, meditating on the loss of one of her best
earthly friends, she saw a lady dressed in mourning busily engaged in
doing something near a rose bush that grew at the foot of a little
mound, at a short distance from where she stood. Julia walked along
and came near where she was, and laid her hand gently upon the woman
and said, "Madam, is this your little mound?"

"Oh, no, my child; it is my dear Elise's grave."

"And is it long since you laid her here ma'am?" said Julia.

"Only a few weeks," was the reply; "there were buds on this rose bush
when I brought it here."

"And was it her's?" asked Julia, as she stooped down to inhale the
rich fragrance of the beautiful flower.

"Yes, my child, it was a dear treasure to her. My Elise was a good
child, she was my Idol, but my Heavenly Father has seen best to remove
her from me. I only cared to live that I might be useful to her in
giving her such instructions as might be a blessing to her. I almost
adored her, but she is gone from me, and I am alone. I know she is
happy, because she was good."

"And have you always lived here in our town?" asked Julia.

"Oh, no! I am from Italy. When my child was but two years old, I left
my native shores, and with my only relative, my father, followed my
young husband, who is an American, to his own land. We settled in the
State of Virginia, and a short time ago he died and left me with a
charge to take care of our dear Elsie. She had her father's hair and
complexion, and inherited his delicate constitution, We were poor, and
I labored hard, but I cared not, if I could only make my child
comfortable and happy. She was not like me; her mind was full of
thoughts of beauty; she would often talk of things with which I could
not sympathize; the world seemed to her to be full of voices, and she
would often say, 'How beautiful _heaven_ must be.' Her nature was
purer and gentler than mine, and I felt that she was a fit companion
of the angels. But she is now gone to be with them, and I hope soon to
meet her."

Julia bid the lady good bye, and went towards her home. As she walked
slowly along, she thought to herself, "Elsie with the angels!" and she
dwelt upon the theme till her mother, seeing her rather different in
her conduct, asked her the cause, when she replied, "Oh, mother! I
want to dwell with the angels."


       *       *       *       *       *


FLORA AND HER PORTRAIT.


"And was there never a portrait of your beautiful child," said Anne
Jones, to a lady whom she met at the grave where her child had been
lain a few weeks.

"Oh, yes! but I may never have it," replied the woman as she stood
weeping at the grave.

Anna did not understand the mother's tears, but in a few moments she
became calm, and continued to explain.

"Not many weeks before my child's illness, as we were walking together
in the city, an artist observed my daughter and followed us to our
humble home. He praised her countenance to me, and said her beauty was
rare. In all his life he had never seen face to compare with it, nor
an eye so full of soul, and begged to have me consent to his drawing
her portrait. After many urgent entreaties, my dear child consented.
For several mornings I went with Flora to the artist's room, though I
could ill afford the time, for our daily bread was to be earned. When
he was finishing the picture, Flora went alone. One day she returned,
and flinging into my lap her little green purse, she said: 'The
picture does not need me any more, and I am very glad, for my head
aches badly. They say the portrait is very like me, mother.'

"I resolved to go and see it the day following, but when the time came
that I first looked upon it, my dear child began to fade in my arms,
until she died. And here she is buried. Since then I go to the
artist's room to see her portrait, and there, full of life and beauty,
she stands before me, and I have permission to see it every day.

"But I am about to leave this country for our native land. My aged
father has long wished to return to his own country, and we shall soon
sail with our friends for Italy. I must leave the dear child here. But
if I can purchase the picture of the artist, I shall be happy. We are
poor; but by the sale of some little articles, we have raised money
enough to buy the picture, at the price which the artist demands for a
similar picture.

"When I went to buy it, you know not how I felt, when the artist,
notwithstanding all my pleadings, denied my request. His apology was,
that he had taken it for some purpose of his own; some great
exhibition of paintings; what, I could not fully comprehend. He would
not sell it. Day after day I have been to him, but in vain. And now
the time of our departure will soon come, and duty demands that I
must go with my father, and I must leave my dear Flora, and portrait
too."

She then laid her face upon the grave and wept. Anna's eyes were
filled with tears, and for some moments she did not speak. At last she
thought--"I know the artist." And then touching the mother, who was
almost insensible, she said, "Madam, it may be that I can do something
for you; describe to me the picture. I think I must have seen it at
this same artist's room."

The mother then gave the description, and after Anna had gathered from
the mother all needful information, her name, and residence, and time
of sailing, then giving her own address, and speaking to her words of
consolation and hope, she arose and left the stranger at the grave of
her child. The next story will tell you how the picture was obtained.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE PORTRAIT OF FLORA PURCHASED.


Anna started for her home, and when she had arrived, she slowly
ascended to her room, flung herself upon her couch, and buried her
face among its cushions.

"Edgar," (for that was the artist's name, and Anna knew him,) "Edgar
is cold hearted." She did not meet the family at tea that evening, but
when her mother came to inquire if she was ill, she related all the
sad story of the childless mother, and asked what could be done. The
next morning, Anna and her father went to see the artist. He was not
in attendance, but one to whom they were well known brought forward
the picture, at Anna's request, and which she had before seen. While
they were looking at it, the artist came in.

"Pardon me, sir," said Anna's father, "for examining your beautiful
picture during your absence, but my daughter has a very earnest desire
to possess it. Is it for sale?"

Edgar replied, "I have painted this picture for the coming artist's
exhibition, and, therefore, I have made no design as to its disposal,
but it would be an honor to me to have you and Miss Anna its
purchasers. I would wish, however, previously to its being given up,
that it might be exhibited, according to my intention, at the rooms,
which open on Monday next."

Mr. H. hesitated: the vessel, which was to carry away the sorrowing
mother, was to sail in a little more than two weeks: they must have
the picture at that time, if ever; and he said to the artist, "I am
aware that this is a beautiful painting, and I will pay you your
price, but I must be allowed to take it at the expiration often days,
if at all."

Edgar reflected a few moments, and being well aware that, in the
mansion of Mr. Hastings, his elegant picture would be seen by persons
of the most accomplished manners, and of excellent taste, concluded to
sell the picture. The bargain was made and Anna and her father
departed, leaving the artist somewhat elated at the thought of having
Mr. H. the owner of his picture.

That night Edgar dreamed that Flora, who had been buried a few weeks,
and of whose image his picture was the exact resemblance, stood before
him, pleading him to have pity on her lonely mother: he dreamed her
hand clasped his, and he awoke trembling.

He raised himself upon his elbow, and pressed to his lips some flowers
which were left on his table, and then rejoiced that the ocean would
soon be between him and the wearisome old woman who had so long
annoyed him about the picture.

The Monday morning came and with it the portrait of Flora, which had
been admired at the exhibition rooms the previous week. A simple frame
had been prepared for it, and for a few moments Anna gazed on the
picture, and with a love for the buried stranger, looked for the last
time into the deep dark eyes which beamed on the canvass.

The ship Viola, bound for the port of Naples, lay at the wharf, the
passengers were all hurrying on board, the flags were flying, and all
wore the joyous aspect of a vessel outward bound. A carriage drawn by
a pair of horses came down to the vessel. Mr. Hastings and Anna
alighted, and were followed by a servant, who took the safely cased
portrait in his arms, and accompanied them on board the ship. They
soon met the mother of Flora, and Anna took the picture and presented
it to her, and promised to care for the rose buds which bloomed at
Flora's grave. Mr. H. received from the gallant captain a promise to
take special charge of the Italian widow, and her aged father, and to
care for the valued picture of Flora. Thanks and farewells closed the
scene, when Anna, with her father, returned home. There she found a
note from Edgar, the artist, requesting permission to call on Anna
that evening. She wrote a reply, saying that a previous engagement
would forbid her complying with his request, at the same time
enclosing a check for $200, saying, "My father requests me to forward
this check to you in payment for the portrait of _Flora Revere_."


       *       *       *       *       *


THE SAINT'S REST.


  We've no abiding city here:
    This may distress the worldling's mind,
  But should not cost the saint a tear,
    Who hopes a better rest to find,

  We've no abiding city here;
    We seek a city out of sight.
  Zion its name; the Lord is there;
    It shines with everlasting light.

  Hush, my soul, nor dare repine;
    The time my God appoints is best;
  While here to do his will be mine,
    And his to fix my time of rest.


       *       *       *       *       *


A GOOD MOTHER.


Mrs. Savage was the eldest sister of Matthew Henry. When she was a
child she had a great many advantages for the improvement of her mind.
When only seven years of age, she could translate the Hebrew language,
and when ten years old, she could write out her father's sermons. She
possessed a very amiable disposition, and was very kind and benevolent
to all who needed the comforts of life. She was a Christian, and when
she became a mother she began the work of educating her children
herself. She had a large family of nine children, and as she had
treasured up in her memory many hymns and verses which she had learned
when a child, she was able to teach the same to her children. She was
so kind and affectionate that every body loved her. Her children took
much pleasure in hearing their mother repeat to them the hymns and
texts of Scripture which she had learned.

[Illustration]

Some children are very careless, and indifferent to their parents'
advice; such ones will regret it in their riper years. But Mrs.
Savage's little boys and girls loved their mother, and were very
obedient to her commands. When evening came, before they retired to
bed she would call her little children around her (as you see in the
picture,) and they would kneel down and say their evening prayer. A
pleasant sight, indeed, to see our dear children remembering their
Creator in the days of their youth. Mrs. S. was "useful, beloved,
meek, humble, and charitable." She lived a happy, cheerful life; she
was an ornament to her Christian profession, a "good mother." She died
suddenly at the good old age of eighty-eight.


       *       *       *       *       *


MOTHER'S LAST LESSON.


"Will you please teach me my verse, mamma, and then kiss me and bid me
good night," said little Roger, as he opened the door and peeped into
the chamber of his sick mother. "I am very sleepy, but no one has
heard me say my prayers." Mrs. L. was very ill, and her friends
believed her to be dying. She sat propped up with pillows and
struggling for breath, her eyes were growing dim, and her strength was
failing very fast. She was a widow, and little Roger was her only
darling child. He had been in the habit of coming into her room every
night, and sitting in her lap, or kneeling by her side, while she
repeated some Scripture passages to him, or related a story of wise
and good people. She always loved to hear Roger's verse and prayer.

"Hush! hush!" said the lady who was watching beside the couch. "Your
dear mamma is too ill to hear you to night." And as she said this, she
came forward and laid her hand gently upon his arm as if she would
lead him from the room. "I cannot go to bed to night," said the little
boy, "without saying my prayers--I cannot."

Roger's dying mother heard his voice, and his sobs, and although she
had been nearly insensible to everything around her, yet she requested
the attendant lady to bring the boy and lay him near her side. Her
request was granted, and the child's rosy cheek nestled in the bosom
of his dying mother.

"Now you may repeat this verse after me," said his mother, "and never
forget it: 'When my father and mother forsake me, the Lord will take
me up.'" The child repeated it three times--then he kissed the pale
cheek of his mother, and went quietly to his little couch.

The next morning he sought as usual for his mother, but she was now
cold and motionless. She died soon after little Roger retired to his
bed. That was her last lesson to her darling boy---he did not forget
it. He has grown to be a man and occupies a high post of honor in
Massachusetts. I never can look upon him without thinking about the
faith so beautifully exhibited by his dying mother. It was a good
lesson.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE GOLDEN CROWN.


A teacher once asked a child, "If you had a golden crown, what would
you do with it?" The child replied, "I would give it to my father to
keep till I was a man." He asked another. "I would buy a coach and
horses with it," was the reply. He asked a third. "Oh," said the
little girl to whom he spoke, "I would do with it the same as the
people in heaven do with their crowns. I would cast it at the
Saviour's feet."


       *       *       *       *       *


EARLY AT SCHOOL.


One Sabbath evening a teacher was walking up and down in the porch
before his house, in one of the South Sea Islands. The sun was setting
behind the waves of the ocean, and the labors of the day were over. In
that cool, quiet hour, the teacher was in prayer, asking a blessing on
his people, his scholars, and himself. As he heard the leaves of the
Mimosa tree rustling, he thought the breeze was springing up--and
continued his walk. Again he heard the leaves rattle, and he felt sure
that it could not be the wind. So he pushed aside the long leafy
branches of the trees, and passed beneath. And what did he find there?
Three little boys. Two were fast asleep in each other's arms, but the
third was awake.

"What are you doing there, my children?" asked the teacher. "We have
come to sleep here," said the boy. "And why do you sleep here; have
you no home?" "Oh, yes," said the lad, "but if we sleep here, we are
sure to be ready when the school bell rings in the morning." "And do
your parents know about it?" "Mine do," said the lad, "but these
little boys have no parents; they are orphans."

You know the nights in the South Sea Islands are not cold and damp
like ours, but as the teacher thought a heavy rain would fall in the
night, he roused the orphans, and led the three little boys into the
large porch of the house where they might rest in safety. He was happy
to find that they were some of his scholars, and that they loved their
school. What would these little Islanders think if they could look
from their distant homes into some of our schools and see how many
late comers there are!


       *       *       *       *       *


THE PLUM BOYS.


Two boys were one day on their way from school, and as they were
passing a cornfield, in which there were some plum trees, full of
nice, ripe fruit, Henry said to Thomas, "Let us jump over and get some
plums. Nobody will see us, and we can scud along through the corn and
come out on the other side."

Thomas said, "I cannot. It is wrong to do so. I would rather not have
the plums than to steal them, and I think I will run along home."

"You are a coward," said Henry, "I always knew you were a coward, and
if you don't want any plums you may go without them, but I shall have
some very quick."

Just as Henry was climbing the fence, the owner of the field rose up
from the other side of the wall, and Henry jumped back and ran away.
Thomas had no reason to be afraid, so he stood still, and the owner of
the field, who had heard the conversation between the boys, told him
that he was very glad to see that he was not willing to be a thief. He
then told Thomas that he might step over the fence and help himself to
as many plums as he wished. The boy was pleased with the invitation,
and soon filled his pockets with plums which he could call his own.
Honesty will always get its reward.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE FIRST DOLLAR.


I will tell you an affecting story about a young lad by the name of
Emerson Terry, who lived in Hartford, Ct. He was very kind to the
poor, and could never see the sufferings of his fellow beings without
making an effort for their relief. Here is one instance of his
kindness and liberality:

While he resided in Bristol, his father, Dr. Terry, took little
Emerson with him to ride into Hartford that he might see the city.
Emerson had one dollar, and it was the first dollar he ever earned. He
took the dollar with him, thinking to buy something with it in the
city. While they were riding along on the way, they overtook a poor
fugitive slave seeking his freedom in the North. Mr. Terry kindly took
the wayfaring man into his carriage when the poor man related to him
his sufferings and poverty, and also his trust in God. Young Emerson's
heart was touched, when, of his own accord, he drew out his _first_
and _only_ dollar and gave it to the poor fugitive. When he returned
home he told his mother what he had done, with a satisfaction that
indicated his pleasure in being able to relieve a suffering stranger.
How noble was this act. He felt willing to forego the pleasure of
spending his dollar for himself, for any pleasing toys that he might
help a poor wanderer on the earth. When he was fifteen years of age,
he was drowned in the Connecticut river. He was beloved and respected
by a large circle of acquaintance. He was noted for his kind
disposition, tender feelings, and lovely spirit. He sleeps in peace,
and we all hope to meet him in heaven.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE SHEPHERD AND HIS BIBLE.


A poor shepherd, living among the Alps, the father of a large family,
for whose wants he provided with great difficulty, purchased an old
Bible from a dealer in old cloths and furniture. On Sunday evening, as
he was turning over the leaves, he noticed several of them were pasted
together. He immediately began to separate the pasted leaves with
great care. Inside of these leaves he found carefully enclosed a bank
bill of five hundred dollars. On the margin of one of the pages was
written these words: "I gathered together money with very great
difficulty, but having no natural heirs but those who have absolutely
need of nothing, I make thee, whosoever shall read this Bible, my
natural heir."

We cannot promise our young friends that they will find money in the
leaves of their Bibles, but you may be assured that if you study its
pages, and follow its precepts, you will find wisdom, which is better
than silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold.


       *       *       *       *       *


REVELATION OF GOD'S HOLY WORD.


  Ye favored lands, rejoice
    Where God reveals his word:
  We are not left to nature's voice
    To bid us know the Lord.

  His statutes and commands
    Are set before our eyes;
  He puts the gospel in our hands,
    Where our salvation lies.

  His laws are just and pure,
    His truth without deceit;
  His promise is for ever sure,
    And his rewards are great.


       *       *       *       *       *


PLEASANT PLAY.


There are many plays in which children may amuse themselves so as to
benefit both the mind and body. Exercise is very essential to the
health, and all children should accustom themselves to such exercise
as will give elasticity too all the muscles of the body. Some
children often play too hard, and others, before they get through
playing, get to quarrelling. Children never appear so badly as when
they quarrel with each other. Joseph and William, Jane and little
Susan, are out in the garden playing "hide and seek," around the
summer house. William became a little contrary, because everything in
the play did not suit him, and declared he would run away. Children
should never let anger rise in their bosoms because of some small
mistake on the part of others. They should always overlook all
mistakes, forgive all injuries, and learn to love each other when at
play, as well as when at school. Good children will play together,
without getting angry, and it is a pretty sight to see such children
all happy in each other's society and enjoying their pleasant pastimes
with cheerful and happy hearts.

  Our evil actions spring like trees,
    From small and hidden seeds;
  We think, or wish some wicked thing,
    And then do wicked deeds.

  Whoever dares to tell a lie,
    Whoever steals a pin,
  Whoever strikes an angry blow,
    Has done a deed of sin.


       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGE AND HIS GUINEA.


Little George Ames went with his aunt to attend a missionary meeting.
After the minister had ended his sermon, as he sat in the pew he
whispered to his aunt, saying, "I wish you would lend me a guinea and
I will give it to you again when we get home." His aunt asked him what
he wanted of his guinea; he told her he wished to put it in the box
when it came round, to assist in sending the gospel to the heathen
children. She replied, "a guinea is a great deal of money, George; you
had better ask your mother, first." As George's mother lived very near
the church, he went home immediately, and said, "Mother, will you let
me have my guinea to give to the mission?" George's mother saw that he
was very much interested for the heathen children, and says to him,
"supposing you give half of it." "No," said George, "I want to give it
all." "Well, my dear, you will remember you cannot give it and have
it too." She then gave him a one pound note, and a shilling. But
George said he would rather have a guinea. "Why," said his mother,
"what difference can it make? it is just the same amount." "Yes," said
George, "but that one pound will seem so much for a little boy to
give. If I had a guinea, I could put it in between two half-pence and
nobody would know anything about it." His mother was pleased with his
proposal, and George having got his guinea returned to the church and
put it in the box as he intended.

Little George is now dead, and there is no danger of his being puffed
up by what he has done. You may learn from this act of George, how to
do some good to poor heathen children. You should be willing to deny
yourselves some pleasures in order that you may benefit others. And if
you do good out of a pure motive you will be blessed in the deed.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE JEW AND HIS DAUGHTER.


A Jew came to this country from London, many years ago, and brought
with him all his property. He had a lovely daughter of seventeen; with
her he settled in a charming retreat on the fruitful banks of the
Ohio, in the Western part of Virginia. He had buried his wife before
he left Europe, and he knew no comfort but the company of his beloved
daughter. She possessed an amiable disposition, and was well educated;
she could speak several languages, and her manner pleased all who knew
her. Being a Jew, he brought up his daughter in the strictest
principles of his faith.

It was not long after that his daughter was taken sick. The rose faded
from her cheek, her strength failed, and it was certain that she could
not live long. Her father was deeply affected. He tried to talk with
her, but could seldom speak without weeping. He spared no expense to
have her get well. One day he was walking in the wood near his house
when he was sent for by his dying daughter. With a heavy heart he
entered the door of her room, and he saw that he was now to take the
last farewell of his daughter.

"My father," said the child, "do you love me?" "Yes," he replied, "you
know that I love you." "I know, father, you have ever loved me. You
have been a kind father, and I tenderly love you. Grant me my dying
request."

"What is it, my child? ask what you will, though it take every
farthing of my property, it shall be granted. I _will grant_ your
request."

"My dear father, I now beg of you never again to speak lightly of
Jesus of Nazareth; I know that he is a Saviour, and that he has made
himself known to me, since I have been sick, even for the salvation of
my soul. I entreat you to obtain a Testament that tells of him and
that you may bestow on him the love that was formerly _mine_." She now
ceased speaking, her father left the room, when her soul took its
flight to God who gave it. After her decease the parent purchased a
Testament and read about Jesus of Nazareth, and is now a devoted
Christian. Good children may be made blessings to their parents and
friends.


       *       *       *       *       *


ANECDOTES.


TRUE BENIFICENCE.--Mark Antony, when very much depressed, and at the
ebb of his fortune, cried out, "I have lost all, except what I have
given away."

WASHINGTON AND THE SOLDIER.--A British soldier said, "It was once in
my power to shoot Gen. Washington." "Why, then," said an American,
"did you not do it?" "Because," he replied, "the death of Washington
would not have been for our benefit, for we depended upon him to treat
our prisoners kindly."

YES AND NO.--John Randolph, in one of his letters to a young relative,
says: "You must expect unreasonable requests to be preferred to you
every day of your life; and you must endeavor to say _no_ with as much
facility and kindness as you would say _yes_."

OSCEOLA.--It is said that the name of Osceola was given to that famous
chief by an old lady in a frontier village, who had newly arrived in
the country, and had never seen an Indian. When she seen him she burst
forth in utter astonishment--"Oh see! Oh la! What a curious looking
man!"

SIGISMOND.--This Emperor was once reproached by some courtiers for
being favorable to his foes--to whom he replied, "Do I not effectually
destroy my enemies when I make them my friends?"


       *       *       *       *       *


CHINESE PROVERBS.


What is told in the ear is often heard a hundred miles.

Riches come better after poverty, than poverty after riches.

Who aims at excellence will be above medirocity; who aims at medirocity
will fall short of it.

No remedies can revive old age and faded flowers.

A truly great man never puts away the simplicity of a child.

He who toils with pain will eat with pleasure.

A wise man forgets old grudges.


       *       *       *       *       *


Those that dare lose a day are dangerously prodigal; those that dare
misspend it, desperate.--_Bishop Hall_.

Truth enters into the heart of man when it is empty, and clean and
still; but when the mind is shaken with passion as with a storm, you
can never hear the voice of the charmer, though he charm never so
wisely.


      *       *       *       *       *


COMFORT AND SOBRIETY.

Let me here give you a few maxims to commit to memory:----

Avoid and shun the sources of misery.

Be sure not to _indulge_ your appetite.

Strong drink excites a person to do wrong.

Remember you are never out of temptation.

A _life of virtue and temperence_ will secure to you money and time;
will give you health, and prosperity, peace, character, respect, and
usefulness.


PLEDGE.


  Our hands and our hearts we give
    To the temperance pledge, declaring
  That long as on earth we live,
    All its bountiful blessings sharing,

  We will taste not and touch not the bowl
    That burns with intoxication,
  And will lend our assistance to roll
    The temperance ball through the nation.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE TRUSTY DOG.


I am glad to introduce to you, the noble dog whose picture is before
you. He was an old and tried friend of mine, and I could tell you a
great many things about him. He was more trust-worthy than many a
little child that I have known; for though circumstances have thrown
me in the way of many beautiful children, some of the little ones with
whom I have met, were not so truthful and trusty as they ought to have
been.

[Illustration: "Erie," the trusty dog.]

But I must not forget the work I commenced; and run off into telling
you stories of bad children rather than of the good dog. I know that
you are already interested in this noble fellow, by this fine portrait
of him. Hasn't he a beautiful face. It is as kind and good natured a
dog as you ever saw. Now you want to know his name; and, perhaps some
of you are feeling curious by this time, to know what he is doing with
that great basket which he holds in his mouth, I will first tell you
his name, and then come to the question of the basket. His name was
"Erie." Mayhap you never knew a dog by this name. It is very peculiar
to call a dog "Erie," but, as this was an extraordinary wise dog, he
deserved a name somewhat different from ordinary dogs.

Now I will proceed to my story which is true, and may be believed as
well as wondered at.

"Erie" had great many wonderful tricks. He seemed to understand what
was said to him, and would obey promptly any person in whom he had
confidence, when they told him to do anything which was in his power
to do. You could trust him to carry any article which he could hold in
his mouth, He would take it to any place you might name, where he was
accustomed to go, and give to the person you told him to give it to,
and never to any other, under any circumstances. If he could not find
the person to whom the article was sent, he would surely return it to
you with a knowing look which seemed to say, "I tried to do my errand
but couldn't." He was usually very good natured, but on such
occasions, when he was entrusted with the care of anything; he did not
like to be interfered with, and if any one attempted to touch anything
which he held in his mouth he would growl at them in a most ferocious
manner, as if he would say, "Take care, this is not yours, and I shall
treat you harshly if you undertake to carry off what belongs to
another."

His master used to love hunting very much, and "Erie" almost always
went with him. At such times he was very fond of carrying the game bag
in his mouth. There was a closet in the house where his master kept
his guns powder, flasks, and all things necessary for hunting. One day
Mr. A. left for [the] woods with his gun, while the dog was absent
from home. He had gone about a mile, when he thought of his powder
flask which in the haste of leaving home he had forgotten. He turned
back regretting that he had taken so many unnecessary steps, when his
eye fell upon "Erie" running toward him with great speed holding the
powder flask in his mouth. The dog had returned home and finding his
master gone, had examined the closet, the door of which had been left
ajar, and found the gun gone while the flask was left; he seemed to
know this ought not to be, and seizing the flask in his mouth he
pursued his master and carried him the important article.

Mr. A. taught him to carry meat home from the market, and he was never
known to eat it, or allow any other dog to take it from him.

This was very convenient for the family. Often when Mr. A. was in
haste, he would write a note telling the butcher what meat to send him
for his dinner. This note he would put into the bottom of the meat
basket, and give the basket to "Erie," telling him which market he was
to go to, and reminding him to be sure and come back quickly. In a few
moments the dog would return with the dinner as safely as a child
could have done.

One day as he was going home from the market, the basket was heavy,
having in it a large piece of meat. "Erie" grew very tired and set the
basket down on the pavement to rest his mouth a moment. At this moment
a large black dog was passing, who, smelling the meat, thought he
would like a piece for his own dinner; so walking up to the basket he
attempted to thrust his nose in and help himself. "Erie" gave one of
his ferocious warning growls, which said as plain as words, "Take
care, take care." At first the other dog retreated a little, but being
very hungry he again approached the basket.

"Erie" seemed really to reason about the matter. He knew that the
other dog was determined to steal the meat which was especially
entrusted to _his_ care. It was as if he thought to himself, "Now if I
stop to fight with this dog, some other dog may come and run away with
my meat, my only safety is flight," so seizing up the basket he fled
as fast as his legs could carry him toward home. The large dog pursued
him a little way, but "Erie" out-ran him and reached home in safety,
As soon as he had deposited the basket in the hands of his mistress,
he turned and ran down street again as fast as he could, in search of
the thieving dog, whose dishonesty he seemed to think he must punish.
After searching a long time he found him playing with a number of
other dogs, and I never saw a dog take a worse whipping than "Erie"
gave him.

Now my dear children as you read this story, ask yourselves if you are
as honest and trustworthy as this noble dog was. You know that you may
be much better than he; for God has made you wiser and given you power
to do much, more than any animal.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE UNCERTAINTY OF LIFE.


Josiah Martin was a young man of whom any mother might have been
proud. He was an only child, and had been the support of his widowed
mother for five years; though at the time when we first knew him he
was not twenty.

And this was not all. He was so frugal, and industrious, that he was
able, besides providing for himself and mother, to contribute largely
toward the support of his aunt Eleanor and her daughter, who were very
poor, and without his help, might have suffered oftentimes for want of
the necessaries of life.

In return for his care, he had a wealth of love bestowed upon him by
mother, aunt and cousin, who often said, and often felt in their
hearts, that Josiah was as good a boy as ever lived. He enjoyed
perfect health, and had naturally a merry heart, so that every day of
his life, he was as happy as the birds. He expected to continue so,
through many long years: and never thought of dying until he got to be
an old man.

One pleasant summer morning, he rose early and prepared to leave home
to be absent a week. He had agreed to go and help Mr. Brown about
harvesting, and the farm being five miles from where his mother lived,
he could not come home before Saturday night. He bade his mother an
affectionate good morning, and started cheerily on his way. The road
ran by aunt Eleanor's door, so he thought he would just peep in, and
see how she was and tell her that he should not see her again for
several days.

The old lady did not seem as well as usual, and "wished heartily," she
said, that Josiah wasn't going away.

"Why, I shall be back," said he "in six days, and can come sooner, if
any of you need me."

"You should not speak so positive about it," said aunt Eleanor, "you
may never come back again."

"Oh fye, auntie, you've got the blues this morning! I shall be back
just as sure as Saturday night comes."

"Don't be too certain my boy; life and death are not in our hands; you
may be called any hour."

[Illustration]

"Now auntie, don't get gloomy about such a hale stout boy as I am;
who never saw a sick day in his life, and don't know what pain is. Why
see how strong I am," and laughingly he bent down, and lifting his
cousin with one arm and his great dog with the other, he tripped
lightly over the threshold. "There, auntie," he cried, "I could carry
off your whole establishment, almost as easy as Samson did the gates
of Gaza."

Though the old lady smiled at the moment the cloud came back again to
her face, and through the open door she watched him as long as her
misty eyes could distinguish him in the distance.

As merry, as strong, and as full of life as ever, the young man went
to his work that morning. Arrived at the harvest field, he took off
his coat and went in among the laborers, saying that he thought he
could outwork them all that day, he felt so vigorous. The sun was
exceeding hot, the air sultry and close, and the laborers, in spite of
their determination and strength, grew very weary when the sun was
high in the heavens. About eleven o'clock, a boy came from the house
and brought them a jug of cold water. Josiah took it first, and drank
of it until they all called to him to stop. He did not heed them, but
being very thirsty, drank until he was satisfied; then stooped to set
the jug on the ground, and fell down beside it a corpse.

Thus suddenly, in the prime of his young life, was he called into
eternity. In a moment from perfect health, he passed to death.

I seem to hear you saying, little reader, "This was very sudden; but
surely such unexpected deaths are rare, I shall not die in that way."
That you cannot tell, you must go in the time that God appoints, it
may be before another sunset. But whether it be sooner or later that
you are called home to heaven, would you not love to leave with your
friends the memory of as good a life as this of which you have been
reading. On the neat white slab that shows where Josiah sleeps it
says, "Here lies a good boy, who blessed the world while he lived in
it." Go ye little readers and do likewise.

       *       *       *       *       *

  'Tis well to walk with a cheerful heart
    Wherever our fortunes call,
  With a friendly glance, an open hand,
    And a gentle word for all.
  Since life is a thorny and difficult path
    Where toil is the portion of man,
  We all should endeavor, while passing along,
    To make it us smooth as we can.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE FIRST DECEPTION.


When I was a boy, and attended school, I was like a great many other
boys, more inclined to play and read story books than I was to study
my lessons; it was a rule at our school to carry a book home every
night and study the lesson for the following day; but I would avoid
this by some deception, and of course the next morning my recitation
would be very imperfect.

One morning I awoke quite early, and I remembered that we were to have
a very difficult lesson on that morning, and I had neglected it that I
might join in a game of foot-ball. It was too late then to commit it
to memory, and I felt ashamed to go to school without it, for I knew
that I should be punished, and be obliged to remain in at recess to
make up the lesson. I did not want to play truant, for I was fearful
of detection, so I went to my father and feigned headache, and plead
that I might remain at home that day. The wish was granted, and for a
moment I felt relieved, but at breakfast or dinner, I was not allowed
to eat anything; I was obliged to remain in doors all day, although
the sun was shining brightly out of doors, and with a conscience
restless and reproving me all the time, I passed a wretched day.

My father, always kind and attentive to his children, would lay his
hand upon my head and pity me, so that my heart ached when I thought
how wickedly I was deceiving him. The day passed, and I went to my
bed, but I could not sleep. I had told my father a lie, and the
thought of it lay like a weight upon my heart. I slept a little, but
it was a troubled and unhappy sleep. When I arose in the morning, I
went to my father, and with tearful eyes confessed my deception. He
was surprised and grieved. I stood before him with my head hung down,
feeling thoroughly ashamed. I asked forgiveness of him and it was
granted. I was then told to go to school and tell the teacher of my
fault, and promise never to attempt such a wrong again.

I have grown a man since then, but the memory of that error is still
fresh in my mind. It was the last time I ever attempted to deceive my
father. I have no father or mother now, but the lesson which that day
I learned, will guard me through life from any attempt at deceiving
those to whom I am indebted for kindness and love. If any little boy
should read this story, let him be mindful and avoid all temptations,
which, if yielded to, will cause him in after years many bitter pangs
and hearty remorse.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pearl Box, by A Pastor

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PEARL BOX ***

***** This file should be named 11237.txt or 11237.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/1/2/3/11237/

Produced by Internet Archive; University of Florida, Andrea Ball and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


