Project Gutenberg's Notes and Queries, No. 2, November 10 1849, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Notes and Queries, No. 2, November 10 1849

Author: Various

Release Date: February 24, 2004 [EBook #11265]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, NO. 2 ***




Produced by Jon Ingram, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




[Transcriber's Note:
In the section 'NOTES UPON "NOTES, NO. 1."' there are several 'C's
which have been flipped along a vertical axis. These have been denoted
by [*C].]

{17} NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 2.]
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 10. 1849.
[Price Threepence. Stamped Edition 4d.

       *       *       *       *       *

A FEW WORDS TO OUR FRIENDS.

In our opening Address we carefully avoided any thing at all approaching
to a boast of what we would, or even what we hoped to perform. We stated
that "we would rather give a specimen than a description." We are now in
like manner unwilling to point as exultingly, as we think we might, to
the position which we have already taken. But there is a vast difference
between vain boasting and the expression of an honest satisfaction; and
it would be worse than an affectation of humility--it would be a mean
hypocrisy--if we did not express heartily and unreservedly the gratitude
we owe and feel to those who have encouraged us by their friendly advice
and able pens. We have opened a Literary Exchange, and we have had the
gratification to see that men whose learning and talents the public
recognise--leaders in their several branches of inquiry--have at once
taken advantage of it. They have proved the necessity for some such
medium of communication, as well as their good-will to the one now
offered to them, by a gathering in its behalf which the public will
respect, and of which we may well feel proud.

Some whose good opinion we most value, and who have spoken most warmly
in favour of our plan, have proved the sincerity of their praise by
suggestions of improvement in its detail, and hints for its further
extension. They may feel assured that such hints and such suggestions
shall not be lost sight of. For instance, one respected correspondent
hints that as we have very properly adopted Dr. Maitland's suggestion
with regard to Herbert's edition of Ame's _Typographical Antiquities_,
namely, that of "offering a receptacle for illustrations, additions, and
corrections," and invited "our readers to take advantage of our columns
to carry out Dr. Maitland's suggestions," we should open our columns
with equal readiness to the correction and illustration of more modern
and more popular works. We entirely concur with him; but in reference to
this subject there is a distinction which must be borne in mind. Our own
literature, like that of every other country, consists of two classes of
books. We have the books of pretenders to knowledge, the hasty, crude,
imperfect, but often for the time attractive and popular volumes of the
Ned Purdons of the day. These books have a use--such as it is--and thus
answer their purpose; but it would be for the credit of our literature,
and save a world of trouble, if they were forgotten as soon as they had
done so. To illustrate such books, to add to their information or
correct their blunders, would be useless and almost ridiculous. They
should be left to die of mere powerlessness and exhaustion, or to wither
under the wholesome influence of a just and manly criticism.

But there are books of another kind--books {18} which our worthy
bibliopoles designate as "standard works." These are the books of
competent workmen--books which are the result of honest labour and
research, and which from the moment of their publication assume a
permanent station in our national literature. Even in such books there
are many things incomplete, many things erroneous. But it is the
interest of every man that such books should be rendered as complete as
possible; and whatever tends to illustrate or correct works of that
class will be sure of insertion in our columns.

We would point to Macaulay's _England_, and Hallam's _Introduction to
the Literary History of the 15th, 16th, and 17th Centuries_, his _Middle
Ages_, and his _Constitutional History_, and we may add, as
illustrations of a different kind, _The Annals of the Stage_ of our
excellent friend Mr. Collier, and _The Handbook of London_ of our valued
contributor Mr. Peter Cunningham, as examples of the sort of
publications to which we allude. Such were the books we had in our mind,
when we spoke in our Prospectus of the "NOTES AND QUERIES" becoming,
through the inter-communication of our literary friends, "a most useful
supplement to works already in existence--a treasury towards enriching
future editions of them."

Another correspondent--a bibliographical friend--suggests that, for
various reasons, which bibliographers will appreciate, our Prospectus
should have a place in the body of our work. We believe that many of our
readers concur in a wish for its preservation, and it will therefore be
found in the Number now before them.

One suggestion again urges us to look carefully to Foreign Literature,
and another points out the propriety of our making our paper as British
as possible, so that our topographical facts should, as far as
practicable, be restricted to the illustration of British counties, and
our biographical ones to such as should contribute towards a Biographia
Brittanica.

All these, and many other expressions of sympathy and promises of
support, poured in upon us within a few hours after our birth. No one of
them shall be forgotten; and if for a time our pages seem to indicate
that we have made a QUERY as to the adoption of any suggestion, let our
kind contributors be assured that there is no hint which reaches us,
whether _at present_ practicable or not, that we do not seriously and
thankfully "make a NOTE of."

       *       *       *       *       *

BISHOP AYLMER'S LETTER, AND THE POEM ON THE ARMADA.

As I am in a condition to answer the inquiry of your "Hearty
Well-wisher," on p. 12 of your last Number of "NOTES AND QUERIES," I
proceed to give him the information he asks. I shall be happy if what
follows is of any use to your correspondent, taking it for granted that
he is as zealous for your success as his signature indicates.

The "foolish rhyme," to which the attention of the Bishop of London had
been directed by Lord Burghley, has the subsequent doggrel title:--

  "A Skeltonicall Salvtation,
  Or condigne gratvlation,
  And iust vexation
  Of the Spanishe nation,
  That in a bravado
  Spent many a crvsado,
  In setting forth an armado
  England to invado."

This is as the title stands in the Oxford impression (of which I never
saw more than one copy, because, we may presume, it was suppressed by
the authorities of the University), and the following is the imprint at
the bottom of it:--"Printed at Oxford by Ioseph Barnes, and are to bee
sold in Paules Churchyard, at the signe of the Tygres head, 1589."

There exists several exemplars of the London edition--"Imprinted at
London for Toby Cooke, 1589,"--the title-page of which, as well as the
rest of the poem, differs only literally from that of Oxford, excepting
that to the latter is appended a Latin version, also in rhyme, and in
close imitation of the English. I subjoin a brief specimen of it:-- {19}

  "Qui regis Hispanos,
  Superbos et vanos,
  Crudeles et insanos,
  Multum aberrasti,
  Cum tuos animasti,
  Et bellum inchoasti
  Contra Anglos animosos,
  Fortes et bellicosos,
  Nobiles et generosos.
  Qui te excitavit
  Proculdubio deliravit
  Et te fascinavit," &c.

The whole production consists only of ten leaves, 4to., and the Latin
portion, which has the subsequent separate title-page, occupies four of
them:--

                  "AD REGEM
                   HISPANVM.
  Cum tua non fuerint heroica facta, Philippe,
  Risu digna cano carmine ridiculo."

I shall not here introduce any part of the English version, because one
or two long quotations will be found in the introductory portion of the
Rev. A. Dyce's excellent edition of Skelton's Works (2 vols. 8vo. 1843).
Respecting the Latin portion I have been more particular, because the
learned editor was not aware that the production had come from the press
of Barnes of Oxford, nor that a Latin version was appended to it.

I may take the liberty of adding here a mention of Skelton which escaped
notice, and which is from one of the tracts against Thomas Nash,
produced by Gabriel Harvey, the friend of Spenser. He couples Skelton
and Scoggin together, in no very respectful manner, and completes the
triumvirate by Nash, whom he here calls Signor Capriccio:--"And what
riott so pestiferous as that which in sugred baites presenteth most
poisonous hookes? Sir Skelton and Master Scoggin were but innocents to
Signior Capricio."

This quotation is the more noticeable, because it recognises the sacred
character of Skelton (however unworthy of the gown) in the prefix "Sir,"
which, as most people are aware, was then generally given to clergymen:
Scoggin, on the other hand, is only styled "Master Scoggin."

J. PAYNE COLLIER.

[The preceding communication was already in type when we received the
following from Mr. Bolton Corney, which we gladly print, inasmuch as it
illustrates some points not touched upon by Mr. Collier.]

       *       *       *       *       *

QUERIES ANSWERED, NO. 1.

It is not without some slight reluctance that I notice anonymous
communications, but shall endeavour to repress such feelings with regard
to the modest students who may choose to announce their desiderata
through the convenient channel of the "NOTES AND QUERIES." A _hearty
well wisher_ to so commendable an enterprise, shall have my first
responsive scrap.

The inquiry affords no scope for ingenuity of conjecture! The _foolish
rime_ to which bishop Aylmer refers, is undoubtedly the pamphlet thus
entitled:--

  "A Skeltonicall salutation,
  Or condigne gratulation,
  And iust vexation
  Of the Spanish nation,
  That in a bravado
  Spent many a crusado,
  In setting forth an armado
  England to invado."
      Oxford, Joseph Barnes, 1589. 4to.
  "A Skeltonicall salutation," &c.
    Imprinted at London for Toby Cook, 1589. 4to.

The Oxford edition is recorded by Ames, and there is a copy of the
London edition in the British Museum. Strype, in his account of bishop
Aylmer, gives the substance of the letter as his _own_ narrative, almost
_verbatim_--but fails to identify the pamphlet in question. Park briefly
describes it in _Censura Literaria_, 1815, ii. 18.; and there is a
specimen of it in _The Poetical Works of John Skelton_, as edited by the
Reverend Alexander Dyce, 1843.

While _queries_ evince a sharp mental appetite, _answers_ help to
satisfy it; and so, by their united influence, a brisk circulation of
ideas may be produced--which, as master Burton assures us, wards off
melancholy.

BOLTON CORNEY.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES UPON "NOTES, NO. 1."

Sir,--I take the liberty to send you one or two Notes on your first
Number, just as they occur to me in looking it over. I will not trespass
on you by preface or apology.

The "_bibliographic project_" I shall rejoice {20} to see carried out; and
though neither an unemployed aspirant nor a fortunate collector (of
which class I hope many will be stimulated by the proposition), yet, as
I once took some trouble in the matter, I should be happy to contribute
some Notes then made whenever the plan is matured and the proposed
appeal is made--provided (I must add, and to _you_ I may add) I can find
them.

The _Liber Sententiarum_ was printed by Limborch, at Amsterdam, in 1692.
It forms the greater part, as, indeed, it was the occasion, of his folio
volume, entitled "_Historia Inquisitionis cui subjungitur Liber
Sententiarum Inquisitionis Tholosanae ab anno Christi Cl[*C]CCCVI ad annum
Cl[*C]CCCXXIII._" Gibbon, in a note on his fifty-fourth chapter, observes
that the book "deserved a more learned and critical editor;" and, if
your correspondent will only place the _Book of Sentences_ before the
public in a readable form, with a map, and (by all means) a few _notes_,
he will be doing a great service to all persons who take an interest in
ecclesiastical history, or, indeed, in history of any kind. In the year
1731 Chandler published a translation of the _History of the
Inquisition_, with a long Introduction of his own, but did not meddle
with the _Book of Sentences_, except so far as to introduce into the
text of the _History_ some passages from it, which Limborch (as he
appended the whole book) did not think it necessary to quote. I remember
seeing the MS. in the British Museum within these ten or twelve years,
and, according to my recollection, it was accompanied by papers which
would furnish an interesting literary history of the volume. I hope your
correspondent will give us farther information.

N.B.

[Mr. Brooke, of Ufford, has also kindly replied to the Query of
INQUISITORIUS, by referring him to Limborch.]

       *       *       *       *       *

QUERY AS TO REFERENCES.

Sir,--May I be permitted to suggest one way in which you may be of great
service to many literary men, and indeed to the cause of literature in
general; and this, too, without much trouble to yourself? Would you be
willing to receive "Queries" respecting _references_? They frequently
puzzle those who are engaged in literary works, and indeed those who are
merely readers, and who have not access to public libraries or the
manuscript treasures of the metropolis and the universities. If, for
instance, a clergyman or squire, interested in the history of his
parish, should find in the county historian something which his own
local or genealogical knowledge leads him to think erroneous, vouched
for by a reference to the _Cotton_ or _Harleian MSS._, might he apply to
you? It may be supposed that you are not very far from some one of the
great fountains of information, and have easy access to all; and it is
probable that you might not only do a personal favour to the inquirer,
but confer a benefit on the public, by correcting an erroneous
statement. Of course you would subject yourself to unreasonable
requests, but the remedy would always be in your own hands.

Yours, &c.

A. G. C.

[The Editor inserts this letter because he is sure that it comes from a
friendly quarter, and he knows that something like what it suggests is
very much wanted. He would feel great diffidence as to his powers of
fulfilling all that might be expected if he were simply to reply in the
affirmative: but he is quite willing to make the trial, and he thinks
that (though sometimes perhaps with a little delay) he could in general
obtain any information of this kind which could be reasonably sought.]

       *       *       *       *       *

LINES IN THE STYLE OF SUCKLING.

Mr. Editor,--The following lines are written in pencil on sheet 61. of
the _Notes of the Debates in the Long Parliament_, taken down in the
House of Commons by Sir Ralph Verney. The _Notes of Debates_, but not
these lines, were published by the Camden Society in 1845. For any thing
that appears to the contrary, these lines may have been written in the
House as well as the _Notes of Debates_. The sheet 61. refers to debates
which took place in March 1641-2. I am not aware that the lines have
been published, nor can I assign them to their author. If any of your
readers can tell me anything about them, I shall esteem it a favour.

  Wert thou yet fairer than thou art,
    Which lies not in the power of art;
  Or hadst thou, in thine eyes, more darts
    Than Cupid ever shot at hearts;
  Yet, if they were not thrown at me,
    I could not cast one thought at thee. {21}

  I'd rather marry a disease
    Than court the thing I cannot please;
  She that will cherish my desires,
    Must feed my flames with equal fires.
  What pleasure is there in a kiss,
    To him that doubts the heart's not his?

  I love thee, not 'cause thou art fair,
    Smoother than down, softer than air,
  Nor for those Cupids that do lie
   In either corner of thine eye;
  Will you then know what it may be?
    'Tis--I love you 'cause you love me.

J. BRUCE.

24th Oct. 1849

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES UPON ANCIENT LIBRARIES.

A knowledge of the intellectual acquirements of the middle ages must be
mainly formed upon a consideration of the writings which directed them,
or emanated from them. Unfortunately such materials are very imperfect,
our knowledge of the existence of works often resting only upon their
place in some loosely-entered catalogue--and of the catalogues
themselves, the proportion still remaining must be small indeed. Under
these circumstances the following documents, which are now for the first
time printed, or even noticed, will be found to be of considerable
interest. The first is, in modern language, a Power of Attorney,
executed by the Prior of Christ Church, Canterbury, appointing two of
the monks of his church to be his procurators for the purpose of
receiving from the convent of Anglesey, in Cambridgeshire[1], a book
which had been lent to the late Rector of Terrington. Its precise date
is uncertain, but it must be of about the middle of the thirteenth
century (1244-1254), as Nicholas Sandwich, the Prior of Christ Church,
was the second of four priors who presided between the years 1234 and
1274.

    "N. Prior Ecclesiae Christi Cantuariensis discretis viris et
    religiosis Domino Priori de Anglesheya et ejusdem loci sacro
    conventui salutem in Domino. Cum sincera semper caritate
    noverit faternitas vestra nos constiuisse fratres Gauterum de
    Hatdfeld et Nicolaum de Grantebrigiense Ecclesiae nostrae monachos
    latores precencium procuratores nostros ad exigendum et
    recipiendum librum qui intitulatur. Johannes Crisestomus de
    laude Apostoli. In quo etiam volumine continentur Hystoria vetus
    Britonum quae Brutus appellatur et tractatus Roberti Episcopi
    Herfordiae de compoto. Quae quondam accommodavimus Magistro
    Laurentio de Sancto Nicholao tunc Rectori ecclesiae de Tyrenton.
    Qui post decessum praefati Magistri L. penes vos morabatur et
    actenus moratur. In cujus rei testimonium has litteras patentes
    nostro sigillo signatas vobis transmittimus."

The contents of the book which is the subject of this special embassy
are of the character usually found to have formed the staple of monastic
libraries, though the particular treatises included in it are not
common.

In the Reverend Joseph Hunter's valuable treatise upon _English Monastic
Libraries_[2] occurs a notice of an indenture executed in A.D. 1343,
whereby the priory of Henton lent no less than twenty books to another
monastic establishment. The deed is described, but not printed. It will
be seen that the instrument we have given above is nearly a century
earlier; and the minute description of the book given in this document
supplies some very curious facts illustrative of the mode of putting
together ancient books, which have not hitherto been remarked, for the
simple reasons that no opportunity for comparison like that presented by
the present case has yet been noticed. Among the Cottonian MSS. (Galba
E. iv.) is a perfect specimen of an ancient Library Catalogue, which,
although not altogether unnoticed, deserves a more careful examination
than it has yet received. It relates to the magnificent monastic
foundation from which emanated the deed we have printed above, and is
headed "Tituli librorum de libraria Ecclesiae Christi Cantuariensis et
contenta in eisdem libris tempore H. Prioris." It is written in that
bold hand which prevails so extensively in ecclesiastical MSS., with but
little variation, from the middle of the fourteenth century, to the end
of the fifteenth,--a hand which is not always clearly written, and which
therefore, in itself, does not materially assist in the distinction of a
date. Now having first assigned the credit of this noble {22} Catalogue--in
which are entered about 600 volumes, in nearly every one of which,
besides the substantive (or initial?) work, are particularised numerous
detached writings, varying from two or three to five-and-forty distinct
"tracts"--to Prior Henry Chichely (1413--1443), the founder of All
Souls' and St. John's Colleges, Oxford, and who, "built the library of
the church, and furnished it with books," we will see whether the book
"qui intitulatur Johannes Crisestomus," &c. was returned to Canterbury,
and had a place in the list;--and this, we think, is satisfactorily
shown by the following entry:--

  "Johannes Crisostomus de laude Apostoli.
    In hoc volumine continentur
  Idem de laude Redemptoris.
  Brutus latine.
  Nomina Regum Britanniae sicut in ordine successerunt.
  Nomina Archiepiscoporum Cantuariensis sicut in ordine successerunt.
  Tabula et questiones Bede de ratione temporum.
  Tabula ejusdem et expositio super tabulam de lunationibus.
  Descriptio Britanniae Insulae.
  Expositio super Merlinum, imperfecta."

It may perhaps be supposed that this proves too much, as, besides the
direct title of the volume, _eight_ "tracts" are here entered, while in
the Power of Attorney only _two_ are noticed. But we would maintain,
nevertheless, that it is the identical book, and explain this variation
in the description by the circumstance that the library having, in the
space of nearly two centuries, been materially enriched, numerous works,
consisting in many cases only of a single "quaternion," were inserted in
the volumes already existing. An examination of the structure of books
of this period would confirm this view, and show that their apparent
clumsiness is to be explained by the facility it was then the custom to
afford for the interpolation or extraction of "sheets," by a contrivance
somewhat resembling that of the present day for temporarily fixing loose
papers in a cover, and known as the "patent leaf-holder."

The second document is a list of certain books, belonging to the
monastery of Anglesey, early in the fourteenth century, allotted out to
the canons of the house for the purpose of custody, or, perhaps, of study
or devotion.

  "Isti libri liberati sunt canonicis die ... anno regni Regis Edwardi
          septimo"[3] (7 Edw. II. A.D. 1314.)
  Penes Dominum Priorem; Parabelae Salomonis; Psalterium cum ...
  Penes Dominum J. de Bodek.; Epistolae Pauli...; Quaedam notulae super
          psalter et liber miraculorum ... Mariae cum miraculis sanctorum.
  Penes Sub-priorem; Liber vitae Sancti Thomae Martiris.
  Penes E. de Ely; Quartus liber sententiarum cum sermo...; Liber
          Reymundi; Liber de vitiis et virtutibus et pastorale.
  Penes R. Pichard; Liber Alquini; Liber Johannis de Tyrington cum
          Catone et aliis.
  Penes Henrici Muchet; Liber de vita Sanctae Mariae Magdalenae et
          remediarum (?)
  Penes Walteri de Yilwilden; Liber S ... ligatus in panno ymnaro
          glosatus cum constitutionibus; Belet ligatus et vita sanctorum.
  Penes Ricardi de Queye; Omeliae Gregorii (?) super Evangelistos ligatae
          in nigro corio.
  In commune biblia; Decreta; Decretales; Prima pars moralium Job; Liber
          de abusionibus.
  Liber justitiae; penes Magistrum Adam de Wilburham.
  Penes Walteri de Wyth; Liber Innocentii super sacramenta cum Belet et
          introductione in uno volumine.
  Item penes Sup-priorem; Psalterium glosatum duod fuit in custodia
          Magistri Henrice de Melreth.
  Item aliud psalterium glosatum inpignoratum penes Isabellam Siccadona.

Several of these descriptions are highly curious; particularly the last
item, which describes one of the "glossed" psalters as being "_in
pawn_," a fact which, in itself, tells a history of the then condition
of the house.

The first document, taken in connection with that referred to by Mr.
Hunter would seem to establish the existence of a system of
interchanging the literary wealth of monastic establishments, and
thereby greatly extending the advantages of their otherwise scanty
stores. Both are executed with all the legal forms used in the most
important transactions, which would support the opinion of their not {23}
being special instances: but they are, in either case, curious and
satisfactory evidence of the care and caution exercised by the monks in
cases where their books were concerned; and one cannot but regret that
when the time came that the monasterias were destined to be dissolved,
and their books torn and scattered to the winds, no attention was paid
to Bale's advice for the formation of "one solemne library in every
shire of England."

JOSEPH BURTT

    [1] The information given of this house by Dugdale is very
    scanty. It could surely be added to considerably.

    [2] London, 1831. quarto. See also a Paper by Mr. Halliwell in
    the _Archaeologia_, xxvii. p. 455., and Sir Francis Palgrave's
    Introduction to _Documents and Records illustrating the History
    of Scotland_, pp. xcvi.--cxvi., for extracts from the
    historical chronicles preserved in the monasteries, &c.

    [3] The formula of this date, "anno R.R.E. septimo," would at
    first sight be considered to refer to the preceding reign; but
    the list is merely a memorandum on the dorse of a completely
    executed instrument dated A.D. 1300, which it is highly
    improbable that it preceded. The style of Edward II. is often
    found as above, though not usually so.

       *       *       *       *       *

PEDLAR'S SONG ATTRIBUTED TO SHAKSPERE, AND TRADITION CONNECTED WITH
SHAKSPERE'S "HAMLET."

The following verses, which would form a very appropriate song for
Autolycus, were arranged as a glee for three voices by Dr. Wilson about
the year 1667. They are published in Playford's _Musical Companion_ in
1673; in Warren's _Collection of Glees and Catches_; and in S. Webbe's
_Conveto Harmonico_. The words were, I believe, first ascribed to
Shakspere by Clark, in 1824, in his _Words of Glees, Madrigals, &c._;
but he has not given his authority for so doing. It has been stated that
they have since been discovered in a common-place book written about
Shakspere's time, with his name attached to them, and with this indirect
evidence in favour of their being written by him, that the other pieces
in the collection are attributed to their proper writers. The late Mr.
Douce, who was inclined to believe the song to have been written by
Shakspere, once saw a copy of it with a fourth verse which was shown to
him by the then organist of Chichester. The poem is not included in Mr.
Collier's edition of Shakspere, nor in the Aldine edition of Shakspere's
Poems, edited by the Rev. A. Dyce. Perhaps if you will be good enough to
insert the song and the present communication in the "NOTES AND
QUERIES," some of your readers may be enabled to fix the authorship and
to furnish the additional stanza to which I have referred.


PEDLAR'S SONG.

  From the far Lavinian shore,
  I your markets come to store;
  Muse not, though so far I dwell,
  And my wares come here to sell;
  Such is the sacred hunger for gold.
        Then come to my pack,
          While I cry
        "What d'ye lack,
          What d'ye buy?
  For here it is to be sold."

  I have beauty, honour, grace,
  Fortune, favour, time, and place,
  And what else thou would'st request,
  E'en the thing thou likest best;
  First, let me have but a touch of your gold.
        Then, come to me, lad,
          Thou shalt have
        What thy dad
          Never gave;
  For here it is to be sold.

  Madam, come, see what you lack,
  I've complexions in my pack;
  White and red you may have in this place,
  To hide your old and wrinkled face.
  First, let me have but a touch of your gold,
        Then you shall seem
        Like a girl of fifteen,
  Although you be threescore and ten years old.

While on this subject, perhaps I may be permitted to ask whether any
reader of the "NOTES AND QUERIES" can throw light on the following
questionable statement made by a correspondent of the _Morning Herald_,
of the 16th September, 1822.

    "Looking over and old volume the other day, printed in 1771,
    I find it remarked that it was known as a tradition, that
    Shakspeare shut himself up all night in Westminster Abbey when
    he wrote the ghost scene in Hamlet."

I do not find in Wilson's _Shakspeariana_ the title of a single "old"
book printed in 1771, on the subject of Shakspere.

T.

       *       *       *       *       *

SIR WILLIAM SKIPWYTH, KING'S JUSTICE IN IRELAND.

Mr. Editor,--I am encouraged by the eminent names which illustrate the
first Number of your new experiment--a most happy thought--to inquire
whether they, or any other correspondent, can inform me who was the
William de Skypwith, the patent of whose appointment as Chief Justice of
the King's Bench in Ireland, dated February 15. 1370, 44 Edward III., is
to be found in the _New Faedera_ vol. iii. p.877.? In the entry on the
Issue Roll of that year, p. 458., of the payment of "his expences and
equipment" in going there, he is called "Sir William Skipwyth, Knight,
and the King's Justice in Ireland." {24}

There was a Sir William Skipwyth, who was appointed a Judge of the
Common Pleas in 33 Edward III., and Chief Baron of the Exchequer in 36
Edward III.; and, were it not that Collins, in his _Baronetage_,
followed by Burke, says that he remained Chief Baron till 40 Edward
III., _in which year he died_, I should have had no doubt that the Irish
Chief Justice was the same with the English Chief Baron.

The same authority adds that Sir William Skipwyth who was made a Justice
of the King's Bench [it should have been of the Common Pleas] in 50
Edward III., and who resigned his office in 11 Richard II., was the
eldest son of the Chief Baron. But that authority does not make the
slightest allusion to the appointment of the Chief Justice of Ireland.

A suspicion that this last Justice of the Common Pleas is not only the
same person as the Chief Justice of Ireland, but also as the Chief Baron
of the Exchequer, has arisen in my mind for the following among other
reasons.

1. Collins and Burke are wrong in saying that he remained Chief Baron
till 40 Edward III. His successor in that office was appointed on
October 29. 1365, 39 Edward III.

2. They are further wrong, I imagine, in saying that he continued Chief
Baron till his death: for Joshua Barnes, in his _History of Edward
III._, p. 667., says that Skipwyth and Sir Henry Green, the Chief
Justice of the King's Bench, were in 1365 arrested and imprisoned on
account of many enormities which the King understood they had committed
against law and justice; and this relation is corroborated by the fact
that Green's successor as Chief Justice was appointed on the same day as
Skipwyth's successor as Chief Baron.

3. No proof whatever is given of the Chief Baron's death in 40 Edward
III.

I will not trouble you with other grounds of identification which occur
to me: but as an answer to my question might "make these odds all even,"
I sent the "Query" to the "Lost and Found Office" you have established,
in the hope that some stray "Note," as yet unappropriated, may assist in
solving the difficulty.

EDWARD FOSS.

November 5. 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE THISTLE OF SCOTLAND.

Mr. Editor,--May I ask if any of your contibutors could inform me in an
early number, when and on what occasion the Thistle was adopted as the
emblem of the Scottish nation? I have looked into many historians, but
as yet found nothing definite enough.

R. L.

Paisley, Oct. 29. 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *

CAPTURE OF THE DUKE OF MONMOUTH.

Mr. Editor,--Having noticed the letter of Mr. John Bruce, in your
Miscellany, I beg leave to inform him that the ash tree under which
Monmouth was taken is still standing on the Woodland estate, now the
property of the Earl of Shaftesbury.

I shall be happy at some future day, if it suits your purpose, to
collect and send you such particulars as may be gained on the spot
respecting it, and the incidents of the capture.

We have still in the Town Hall here the chain in which it is said
Jefferies sat at the Bloody Assize.

A. D. M.

Dorcester, 3d Nov. 1849.

[We shall gladly receive the particulars which our Correspondent
proposed to collect and forward.]

       *       *       *       *       *

SERPENTS' EGGS AND STRAW NECKLACES.

[Mr. Thoms' Query in this case should have been limited to the _straw
necklaces_, as Mr. Nichols has already explained the _serpents' eggs_;
but our Correspondent's letter is so satisfactory on both points that we
insert it entire.]

The passage from Erasmus, "brachium habet ova serpentum," is plainly to
be rendered "and with a string of serpents' eggs on your arm." The
meaning is equally apparent on recalling the manner in which snakes'
eggs are found, viz., hanging together in a row. Erasmus intends
Menedemus to utter a joke at the _rosary of beads_ hanging over the
pilgrim's arm, which he professes to mistake for serpents' eggs.

I am not aware what particular propriety the "collar or chaplet" (for it
may mean either) of _straw_ may have, as worn by a pilgrim from
Compostella; or whether there may not lurk under this description, as
beneath {25} the other, a jocular sense. The readiest way of determining
this point would be to consult some of the accounts of Compostella and
of its relics, which are to be found in a class of books formerly
abundant in the north-western towns of Spain.

V.

       *       *       *       *       *

MADOC--HIS EXPEDITION TO AMERICA.

"A Student" may consult the _Proceedings of the Royal Society of
Northern Antiquaries, Copenhagen_, Mr. Geogehan's _Ireland_,
O'Flaherty's _Ogygia_, Magnusen and Rafn _On the Historical Monuments of
Greenland and America_, and some of the _Sagas_.

SCOTUS.

Brechin, Nov. 5. 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES ON COFFEE.

The earliest account we have of coffee is said to be taken from an
Arabian MS. in the Bibliotheque du Roi in Paris.

Schehabeddin Ben, an Arabian author of the ninth century of the Hegira,
or fifteenth of the Christians, attributes to Gemaleddin, Mufti of Aden,
a city of Arabia Felix, who was nearly his contemporary, the first
introduction into that country, of drinking coffee. He tells us, that
Gemaleddin, having occasion to travel into Persia, during his abode
there saw some of his countrymen drinking coffee, which at that time he
did not much attend to; but, on his return to Aden, finding himself
indisposed, and remembering that he had seen his countrymen drinking
coffee in Persia, in hopes of receiving some benefit from it, he
determined to try it on himself; and, after making the experiment, not
only recovered his health, but perceived other useful qualities in that
liquor; such as relieving the headach, enlivening the spirits, and,
without prejudice to the constitution, preventing drowsiness. This last
quality he resolved to turn to the advantage of his profession; he took
it himself, and recommended it to the Dervises, or religious Mahometans,
to enable them to pass the night in prayer, and other exercises of their
religion, with greater zeal and attention. The example and authority of
the mufti gave reputation to coffee. Soon men of letters, and persons
belonging to the law, adopted the use of it. These were followed by the
tradesmen and artisans that were under the necessity of working in the
night, and such as were obliged to travel late after sunset. At length
the custom became general in Aden; and it was not only drunk in the
night by those who were desirous of being kept awake, but in the day for
the sake of its other agreeable qualities.

Before this time coffee was scarce known in Persia, and very little used
in Arabia, where the tree grew. But, according to Schehabeddin, it had
been drunk in AEthiopia from time immemorial.

Coffee being thus received at Aden, where it has continued in use ever
since without interruption, passed by degrees to many neighbouring
towns; and not long after reached Mecca, where it was introduced as at
Aden, by the Dervises, and for the same purposes of religion.

The inhabitants of Mecca were at last so fond of this liquor, that,
without regarding the intention of the religious, and other studious
persons, they at length drank it publicly in coffee-houses, where they
assembled in crowds to pass the time agreeably, making that the
pretense. From hence the custom extended itself to many other towns of
Arabia, particularly to Medina, and then to Grand Cairo in Egypt, where
the Dervises of Yemen, who lived in a district by themselves, drank
coffee on the nights they intended to spend in devotion.

Coffee continued its progress through Syria, and was received at
Damascus and Aleppo without opposition; and in the year 1554, under the
reign of Solyman, one hundred years after its introduction by the Mufti
of Aden, became known to the inhabitants of Constantinople, when two
private persons of the names of Schems and Hekin, the one coming from
Damascus, and the other from Aleppo, opened coffee-houses.

"It is not easy," says Ellis, "to determine at what time, or upon what
occasion, the use of coffee passed from Constantinople to the western
parts of Europe. It is, however, likely that the Venetians, upon account
of the proximity of their dominions, and their great trade to the
Levant, were the first acquainted with it; which appears from part of a
letter wrote by Peter della Valle, a Venetian, in 1615, from
Constantinople; in which he tells his friend, that, upon his return he
should {26} bring with him some coffee, which he believed was a thing
unknown in his country."

Mr. Garland tells us he was informed by M. de la Croix, the King's
interpreter, that M. Thevenot, who had travelled through the East, at
his return in 1657, brought with him to Paris some coffee for his own
use, and often treated his friends with it.

It was known some years sooner at Marseilles; for, in 1644, some
gentlemen who accompanied M. de la Haye to Constantinople, brought back
with them on their return, not only some coffee, but the proper vessels
and apparatus for making it. However, until 1660, coffee was drunk only
by such as had been accustomed to it in the Levant, and their friends;
but that year some bales were imported from Egypt, which gave a great
number of persons an opportunity of trying it, and contributed very much
to bringing it into general use; and in 1661, a coffee-house was opened
at Marseilles in the neighbourhood of the Exchange.

Before 1669, coffee had not been seen at Paris, except at M. Thevenot's,
and some of his friends'; nor scarce heard of but from the account of
travellers. In that year, Soliman Aga, ambassador from the Sultan
Mahomet the Fourth, arrived, who, with his retinue, brought a
considerable quantity of coffee with them, and made presents of it to
persons both of the court and city, and it is supposed to have
established the custom of drinking it.

Two years afterwards, an Armenian of the name of Pascal, set up a
coffee-house, but meeting with little encouragement, left Paris and came
to London.

From Anderson's _Chronological History of Commerce_, it appears that the
use of coffee was introduced into London some years earlier than into
Paris. For in 1652 one Mr. Edwards, a Turkey merchant, brought home with
him a Greek servant, whose name was Pasqua, who understood the roasting
and making of coffee, till then unknown in England. This servant was the
first who sold coffee, and kept a house for that purpose in George Yard
Lombard Street.

The first mention of coffee in our statute books is anno 1660 (12 Car.
II. c. 24), when a duty of 4d. was laid upon every gallon of coffee made
and sold, to be paid by the maker.

The statute 15 Car. II. c. 11. Sec. 15. an. 1663, directs that all
coffee-houses should be licensed at the general quarter sessions of the
peace for the county within which they are to be kept.

In 1675 King Charles II. issued a proclamation to shut up the
coffee-houses, but in a few days suspended the proclamation by a second.
They were charged with being seminaries of sedition.

The first European author who has made any mention of coffee is
Rauwolfus, who was in the Levant in 1573.

       *       *       *       *       *

DR. DRYASDUST.

Sir,--Do you or any of your readers know anything of the family of that
celebrated antiquary, and do you think it probable that he was descended
from, or connected with, the author of a work which I met with some time
ago, intituled "Wit Revived, or A new and excellent way of
Divertisement, digested into most ingenious Questions and Answers. By
ASDRYASDUST TOSSOFFACAN. London: Printed for T. E. and are to be sold by
most Booksellers. MDCLXXIV." 12mo. I do not know anything of the
author's character, but he appears to have been a right-minded man, in
so far as he (like yourself) expected to find "wit revived" by its
digestion into "most ingenious questions and answers;" though his notion
that asking and answering questions was a _new_ way of divertisement,
seems to indicate an imperfect knowledge of the nature and history of
mankind; but my query is simply genealogical.

H. F. W.

       *       *       *       *       *

MACAULAY'S "YOUNG LEVITE."

Sir,--The following passage from the _Anatomy of Melancholy_, published
1651, struck me as a curious corroboration of the passage in Mr.
Macaulay's _History_ which describes the "young Levite's" position in
society during the seventeenth century; and as chance lately threw in my
way the work from which Burton took his illustration, I take the liberty
of submitting Notes of both for your examination.

    "If he be a trencher chaplain in a gentleman's house (as it befel
    Euphormio), after some seven years' service he may perchance have
    a living to {27} the halves, or some small rectory, with the
    mother of the maids at length, a poor kinswoman, or a crackt
    chambermaid, to have and to hold during the time of his
    life."--Burton, _Anat. of Mel._ part i. sect. 2. mem. 3. subsect 15.

Burton is here referrng to the _Euphormionis Lusinini Satyricon_,
published anno 1617. It professes to be a satire, or rather A FURIOUS
INVECTIVE, on the corrupt manners of the times, and is in four parts:
the 1st is dedicated to King James I.; the 2nd to Robert Cecil; the 3rd
to Charles Emmanuel of Savoy; the 4th to Louis XIII., King of France.

The use that Burton makes of the name of Euphormio is any thing but
happy. He was not a "_trencher chaplain_" but the slave of a rich
debauchee, Callion, sent in company with another slave, Percas, to carry
some all-potent nostrum to Fibullius, a friend of Callion, who was
suffering from an attack of stone. Euphormio cures Fibullius, not by the
drug with which he was armed, but by a herb, which he sought for and
found on a mountain. Fibullius, to reward his benefactor, offers him as
a wife a most beautiful girl, whom he introduces to him privately while
in his sick room. Euphormio looks with no little suspicion on the offer;
but, after a few excuses, which are overruled by Fibullius, accepts the
lady as his betrothed, "seals the bargain with a holy kiss," and walks
out of the room (to use his own words) "et sponsus, et quod
nesciebam--Pater," page 100. The next mention of this lady [evidently
the prototype of the "crackt chambermaid,"] is in page 138. Callion had
paid his sick friend Fibullius a visit, and, on the eve of his
departure, had ordered Euphormio to ride post before him, and prepare
the inhabitants of the districts through which he was to pass for his
arrival. While Euphormio is on the horseblock in the act of mounting his
steed, a rustic brings him a letter from Fibullius, and in conversation
gives him such an account of his bride as forces upon him the
reflection, that even the grim Libitina would be preferable, as a bride,
to so confirmed a Thais, so fruitful a partner, as the _protegee_ of
Fibullius would be likely to prove. But, as these _notes_ have, in spite
of all my attempts at condensation, already grown to a most formidable
size, I will not indulge in any moral reflections; but conclude by
_querying_ you, or any of your readers, to inform me whether the
personages mentioned in the _Euphorm. Lus. Satyricon_, such as Callion,
Pereas, Fibullius, &c., are real characters or not? as, in the former
case, I am inclined to think that the work might throw some interesting
lights on the private manners and characters of some of the courtiers of
the day. "No scandal against any of the maids of honour"--of course. The
phrase "_To the halves_" (in the quotation from Burton) means,
inadequate, insufficient; we still talk of "half and half" measures.
Montanus inveighs against such "perturbations, that purge _to the
halves_, tire nature, and molest the body to no purpose."--Burton,
_Anat. of Mel._, part. ii. sect. 2. mem. 4. subsect. 6.

MELANION.

[The work referred to by our correspondent was written by Barclay,
better known as the author of the _Argenis_. The First Part of the
_Satyricon_, dedicated to James the First, was published, London, 12mo.
1603; and with the addition of the 2nd Part, Paris, 1605. The best
edition of the work (which, really in two parts, is made, by the
addition of the _Apologia Euphormionis_, &c. sometimes into five) is
said to be the Elzevir 12mo., 1637. There are two editions of it _cum
notis variorum_, Leyden, 1667 and 1669, 8vo., in two volumes. Of some of
the editions (as that of 1623, 12mo.) it is said, "adjecta Clavi sive
obscurorum et quasi aenigmaticorum nominum, in hoc Opere passim
occurrentium, dilucida explicatione." The _Satyricon_ was twice
translated into French; and its literary history, and that of the
_Censura Euphormionis_, and other tracts, which it called forth, might
furnish a curious and amusing paper.]

       *       *       *       *       *

SERMONES SANCTI CAROLI BORROMAEI.

Sir,--I have been wanting to get a sight of the following work,
"Sermones Sancti Caroli Borromaei, Archiepisc. Mediol. Edidit. J.A.
Saxius. 5 Tom. Mediol. 1747." Can I learn through your columns whether
the work is any where accessible in London? I sought for it in vain at
the British Museum a twelvemonth ago; nor, though then placed in their
list of _Libri desiderati_, has it yet been procured.

C. F. SECRETAN.

       *       *       *       *       *

LUTHER AND ERASMUS.

Mr. Editor,--The following lines, written in a hand of the early part of
the seventeenth century, occur on the fly-leaf of a copy of the {28}
_Translation of Luther on the Galatians_, edit. London, 4to. 1577. Can
any of your readers oblige me by informing me who was their author?

  "Parum Lutherus ac Erasmus differunt
  Serpens uterque est, plenus atro toxico;
  Sed ille mordet ut cerastes in via,
  Hic fraudulentus mordet in silentio."

Your obedient servant,

ROTERODAMUS.

       *       *       *       *       *

TOWER ROYAL--CONSTITUTION HILL--COUNTESS OF PEMBROKE'S
LETTER--TENNISON'S FUNERAL SERMON ON NELL GWYNNE.

Sir,--I should be glad to obtain answers to any or all of the following
Queries:--

1. What is the origin of the name TOWER ROYAL, as applied to a London
locality, and when did our kings (if they ever inhabited it) cease to
inhabit it?

2. When was CONSTITUTION HILL first so called, and why?

3. Is there any contemporary copy of the celebrated letter said to have
been written by Anne Pembroke, Dorset and Montgomery, to Sir Joseph
Williamson? It first appeared in _The World_.

4. Does a copy exist in MS., or in print, of the sermon which Archbishop
Tennison preached at the funeral of Nell Gwynne?

PETER CUNNINGHAM.

       *       *       *       *       *

GROG--BISHOP BARNABY.

Mr. Editor,--I hope you intend to keep a corner for Etymologies.

Query, the origin of the word "Grog?"--And why do the people in Suffolk
call a ladybird "Bishop Barnaby?"

If you can enlighten me upon either of these points, I shall feel
encouraged to try again.

Yours, &c.

LEGOUR.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES FROM FLY-LEAVES, NO. II.

DR. FARMER ON DRAYTON'S WORKS.

The following bibliographical memoranda, in the well-known hand of Dr.
Farmer, occur in a copy of the edition of Drayton's _Poems_ published in
1619, in small folio, by John Smethwick, which contains "The Barons'
Wars; England's Heroical Epistles; Idea; Odes; The Legends of Robert
Duke of Normandie, Matilda, Pierce Gaveston, and Great Cromwell; The
Owle; and Pastorals, containing Eglogues, with the Man in the Moone."

They may be of use to some future editor of Drayton, an author now
undeservedly neglected, whose _Nymphidia_ alone might tempt the tasteful
publisher of the "Aldine Poets" to include a selection, at least, of his
poems in that beautiful series:--

    "The works of Michael Drayton, Esq., were reprinted in folio,
    1748. The title-page 'promises all the writings of that
    _celebrated author_,' but his Pastorals (p.433. &c., first
    published imperfectly in 4to. 1593) and many other of his most
    considerable compositions (Odes, the Owle, &c., see the Appendix),
    are not so much as spoken of. See his article in the _Biog.
    Brit._ by Mr. Oldys, curiously and accurately written.

    "Another edition (which is called the _best_) was printed in 4
    vols. 8vo. 1753. Robson, 1765.

    "A Poem Triumphant, composed for the Society of the Goldsmiths of
    London, by _M. Drayton_. 4to. 1604. _Harl. Cat._ v.3. p. 357.

    "Charles Coffey was the editor of the folio edit. 1748, he had a
    large subscription for it, but died before the publication; and
    it was afterward printed for the benefit of his widow. See
    Mottley, p. 201.

    "The print of Drayton at the back of the title-page, is marked in
    Thane's Catalogue, 1774, 7s. 6d.

    "N.B. The copy of the _Baron's Warres_ in this edition differs in
    almost every line from that in the 8vo. edit. 1610.

    "It was printed under the title of Mortimeriados, in 7 line
    stanzaes.

    "Matilda was first printed 1594, 4to., by Val. Simmes. Gaveston
    appears by the Pref. to have been publish't before. Almost every
    line in the old 4to. of Matilda differs from the copy in this
    edit. A stanza celebrating Shakespeare's Lucrece is omitted in the
    later edition.

    "Idea. The Shepherd's Garland. Fashion'd in 9 Eglogs. Rowland's
    sacrifice to the 9 Muses, 4to. 1593. But they are printed in this
    Edition very different from the present Pastorals.

    "A sonnet of Drayton's prefixed to the 2nd Part of _Munday's
    Primaleon of Greece_, B.L. 4to. 1619."

[The stanza in _Matilda_, celebrating Shakespeare's _Lucrece_, to which
Dr. Farmer alludes, is thus quoted by Mr. Collier in his edition of
Shakespeare (viii. p. 411.):--

  "Lucrece, of whom proud Rome hath boasted long,
     Lately revived to live another age,
   And here arrived to tell of Tarquin's wrong,
     Her chaste denial, and the tyrant's rage, {29}
  Acting her passions on our stately stage:
     She is remember'd, all forgetting me,
     Yet I as fair and chaste as e'er was she;"--

who remarks upon it as follows:--

    "A difficulty here may arise out of the fifth line, as if
    Drayton was referring to a play upon the story of Lucrece, and
    it is very possible that one was then in existence. Thomas
    Heywood's tragedy, _The Rape of Lucrece,_ did not appear in print
    until 1608, and he could hardly have been old enough to have been
    the author of such a drama in 1594; he may, nevertheless, have
    availed himself of an elder play, and, according to the practice
    of the time, he may have felt warranted in publishing it as his
    own. It is likely, however, that Drayton's expressions are not to
    be taken literally; and that his meaning merely was, that the
    story of Lucrece had lately been revived, and brought upon the
    stage of the world: if this opinion be correct, the stanza we have
    quoted above contains a clear allusion to Shakespeare's _Lucrece_;
    and a question then presents itself, why Drayton entirely omitted
    it in the after-impression of his _Matilda_. He was a poet who, as
    we have shown in the Introduction to _Julius Caesar_ (vol. viii.
    p. 4.), was in the habit of making extensive alterations in his
    productions, as they were severally reprinted, and the suppression
    of this stanza may have proceeded from many other causes than
    repentance of the praise he had bestowed upon a rival."]

       *       *       *       *       *

BODENHAM, OR LING'S POLITEUPHUIA.

Sir,--The following is an extract from a Catalogue of Books for sale,
issued by Mr. Asher, of Berlin, in 1844:--

    "Bodenham? (Ling?), Politeuphuia. Wits commonwealth, _original
    wrapper, vellum_. VERY RARE.

    "80 fr. 8vo. London, for Nicholas Ling, 1597.

    "This book, 'being a methodical collection of the most choice
    and select admonitions and sentences, compendiously drawn from
    infinite varietie,' is quoted by Lowndes under Bodenham, as first
    printed in 1598; the Epistle dedicatory however of the present
    copy is signed: 'N. Ling', and addressed 'to his very good friend
    Maister I.B.,' so that Ling appears to have been the author, and
    this an edition unknown to Lowndes or any other bibliographer."

This seems to settle one point, perhaps a not very important one, in our
literary history; and as such may deserve a place among your "NOTES."

BOOKWORM.

       *       *       *       *       *

COLLEY CIBBER'S APOLOGY.

Mr. Editor,--No doubt most of your readers are well acquainted with
Colley Cibber's _Apology for his Life_, &c., first printed, I believe,
in 1740, 4to, with a portrait of himself, painted by Vanloo, and
engraved by Vandergucht. Chapters IV. and V. contain the celebrated
characters he drew of the principal performers, male and female, in, and
just before, his time, viz. Betterton, Montfort, Kynaston, &c. Upon
these characters I have two questions to put, which I hope some of your
contributors may be able to answer. The first is, "Were these characters
of actors reprinted in the same words, and without additions, in the
subsequent impressions of Cibber's _Apology_ in 8vo?" Secondly, "Had
they ever appeared in any shape before they were inserted in the copy of
Cibber's _Apology_ now before me, in 1740, 4to?" To this may be added,
if convenient, some account of the work in which these fine criticisms
originally appeared, supposing they did not first come out in the
_Apology_. I am especially interested in the history of the Stage about
the period when the publication of these characters formed an epoch.

I am, Mr. Editor, yours,

DRAMATICUS.

       *       *       *       *       *

A MAIDEN ASSIZE--WHITE GLOVES.

Mr. Editor.--I forward for insertion in your new publication the
following "Note," taken from the _Times_ of the 20th of August, 1847:--

"A Fortunate County.--In consequence of there being no prisoners, nor
business of any kind to transact at the last assizes for the county of
Radnor, the high sheriff, Mr. Henry Miles, had to present the judge, Mr.
Justice Cresswell, with a pair of white kid gloves, embroidered in gold,
and which have been forwarded to his lordship; a similar event has not
taken place for a considerable number of years in that county. His
lordship remarked that it was the first time it had occurred to him
since he had been on the Bench."

And I beg to append it as a "Query," which I shall gladly see answered
by any of your correspondents, or my professional brethren,--"What is
the origin of this singular custom, and what is the earliest instance of
it on record?"

A LIMB OF THE LAW. {30}

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES WANTED TO PURCHASE

JONES (EDMUND) GEOGRAPHICAL, HISTORICAL, AND RELIGIOUS ACCOUNT OF
ABERYSTWITH. 8VO. Trevecka, 1779.

CARTARI.--LA ROSA D'ORO PONTIFICIA, ETC. 4to. Rome. 1681.

SHAKSPEARE'S DRAMATIC WORKS.--The _Fourth_ Volume of WHITTINGHAM'S
Edition, in 7 vols, 24mo. Chiswick. 1814.

M. C. H. BROEMEL, FEST-TANZEN DER ERSTEN CHRISTEN. Jena, 1705.

*** Letters stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to be
sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

_The matter is so generally understood with regard to the management of
periodical works, that it is hardly necessary for the Editor to say
that_ HE CANNOT UNDERTAKE TO RETURN MANUSCRIPTS; _but on one point he
wishes to offer a few words of explanation to his correspondents in
general, and particularly to those who do not enable him to communicate
with them except in print. They will see, on a very little reflection,
that it is plainly his interest to take all he can get, and make the
most, and the best, of everything; and therefore he begs them to take
for granted that their communications are received, and appreciated,
even if the succeeding Number bears no proof of it. He is convinced that
the want of specific acknowledgment will only be felt by those who have
no idea of the labour and difficulty attendant on the hurried management
of such a work, and of the impossibility of sometimes giving an
explanation, when there really is one which would quite satisfy the
writer, for the delay or non-insertion of his communication.
Correspondents in such cases have no reason, and if they understood an
editor's position they would feel that they have no right, to consider
themselves undervalued; but nothing short of personal experience in
editorship would explain to them the perplexities and evil consequences
arising from an opposite course._

       *       *       *       *       *

MYTHOS is thanked for his kind hints, which shall not be lost sight of.
We have abundance of NOTES on the subject, not only of the SEVEN WISE
MASTERS, but of that other treasury of ancient fictions, the GESTA
ROMANORUM, which we shall bring forward as opportunity offers.

S.Y. The edition of Chaucer, in five volumes 12mo, edited by Singer,
in 1822, was the only modern library edition of the "_Works_" until the
appearance of Sir H. Nicolas's edition in the Aldine Poets. Bell's
edition, in 14 volumes, and Dolby's in 2, though they may have done much
to extend a knowledge of the writings of the Father of English Poetry,
can scarcely be called library editions.

A.P. will see the matter he refers to illustrated in an early number.

COMMUNICATIONS RECEIVED.--J.H.H.--M.--[Greek: ph]--T. Jones--[Greek:
S]--Buriensis.--G.H.B.--W.B.B.

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES WANTED. We believe that this will prove one of
the most useful divisions of our weekly Sheet. Gentlemen who may be
unable to meet with any book or volume, of which they are in want, may
upon furnishing name, date, size, &c, have it inserted in this list,
_free of cost_. Persons having such volumes to dispose of are requested
to send reports of price, &c. to Mr. Bell, our Publisher.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shortly will be published,

BIBLIOGRAPHIE BIOGRAPHIQUE ou Dictionnaire de 33,000 Ouvrages, tant
Anciens que Modernes relatifs, a l'Histoire de la Vie des Hommes
celebres. 1 vol. imp. 8vo., double columns; about 900 pages. Price about
2l. 12s. 6d.

A Prospectus may be had, and orders are received by WILLIAMS AND
NORGATE, 14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CAMDEN SOCIETY FOR THE PUBLICATION OF EARLY HISTORICAL AND LITERARY
REMAINS.

The following works are now ready for delivery to Members who have paid
their Annual Subscription of 1l., due on the first of May last.--

I. INEDITED LETTERS OF QUEEN ELIZABETH, AND KING JAMES VI. From the
Originals in the possession of the Rev. Edward Ryder, of Oaksey, Wilts.,
and from a MS. formerly belonging to Sir P. Thompson. Edited by JOHN
BRUCE, Esq., Treas. S.A.

II. THE CHRONICLE OF THE ABBEY OF PETERBOROUGH; from a MS. in the
Library of the Society of Antiquaries. Edited by THOMAS STAPLETON, Esq.,
F.S.A.

WILLIAM J. THOMS, Secretary.

Applications from Members who have not received their copies may be made
to Messrs. Nichols, 25. Parliament Street, Westminster, from whom
prospectuses of the Society (the annual subscription to which is 1l.)
may be obtained, and to whose care all communications for the Secretary
should be addressed. {31}

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES AND QUERIES; A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN,
ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

Among the many periodicals which issue from the press, daily, weekly,
monthly, or quarterly, there is not one especially intended to assist
Men of Letters and of research in their pursuits. Literary Journals
there are in abundance, many of them of the highest degree of merit,
which in their Reviews and Announcements show the current sayings and
doings of the literary world. There is not, however, one among them in
which the reading many may note, for the use of himself and his
fellow-labourers in the wide field of Literature, the minute facts which
he meets with from time to time, and the value of which he so well
knows, or insert his _Queries_, in the hope of receiving satisfactory
answers from some of his literary brethren.

NOTES AND QUERIES, A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, is,
as its name implies, intended to supply this deficiency. Those who meet
with facts worthy of preservation, may record them in its columns; while
those, again, who are pursuing literary inquiries, may, through this
MEDIUM, ask for information on points which have baffled their own
individual researches. How often is even the best informed writer
stopped by an inability to solve some doubt or understand some obscure
allusion which suddenly starts up before him! How often does a reading
man stumble upon some elucidation of a doubtful phrase, or disputed
passage;--some illustration of an obsolete custom hitherto
unnoticed;--some biographical anecdote or precise date hitherto
unrecorded;--some book, or some edition, hitherto unknown or imperfectly
described.

This Publication, as everybody's common-place book, will be a depository
for those who find such materials, and a resource for those who are in
search of them; and if the Editor is enabled by the inter-communication
of his literary friends, to realise his expectations, it will form a
most useful supplement to works already in existence,--a treasury for
enriching future editions of them,--and an important contribution
towards a more perfect history than we yet possess of our Language, our
Literature, and those to whom we owe them.

NOTES AND QUERIES will be published every Saturday, price 3d., or
stamped, 4d., and may be had, by order, of all Booksellers and Newsmen,
and will also be issued in Parts at the end of each Month.

Communications for the Editor may be addressed to the Publisher, Mr.
GEORGE BELL, No. 186. Fleet Street, by whom also Advertisements will be
received.

       *       *       *       *       *

Preparing for Publication, in One Vol. 8vo.

ILLUSTRATIONS of the REMAINS of ROMAN ART in CIRENCESTER, the SITE of
ANCIENT CORINIUM. By JAMES BUCKMAN, F.G.S. and C.H. NEWMARCH, Esq.

The work will have reference principally to the illustration of the
following subjects:

1. The remains of the architecture of Corinium, including detailed
drawings and descriptions of the fine Tesselated Pavements, especially
the one recently discovered, as also the beautiful specimen on the
estate of the Right Hon. Earl Bathurst.

2. The specimens of Roman Pottery--Vases, Urns, &c.

3. Works in Metals--Statuettes, Ornaments, &c. &c.

4. Coins.

In order that due justice may be done to the Illustration of these
Remains, it is intended to have them executed in the first style of art,
and only a limited number of impressions will be taken.

To secure early copies, orders must be addressed at once to Messrs.
BAILY and JONES, Cirencester, or Mr. GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

Price to Subscribers, 12s.

*** After the close of the Subscription List, the price will be raised
to 15s.

N.B.--Any person possessing Roman Antiquities from Cirencester, will
confer a great favour on the Authors by communicating intelligence of
them to Messrs. Baily and Jones.

London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nearly ready.

THE PRIMEVAL ANTIQUITIES of DENMARK. By J. J. A. WORSAAE, Member of the
Royal Society of Antiquaries of Copenhagen, and a Royal Commissioner for
the preservation of the National Monuments of Denmark. Translated and
applied to the Illustration of similar Remains in England. By WILLIAM J.
THOMS, F.S.A., Secretary of the Camden Society. Illustrated with
numerous Woodcuts.

While so many publications illustrative of the Archaeology of Egypt,
Greece, and Rome, have appeared in this country, few attempts have been
made to give a systematic view of the early Antiquities of the British
Islands.

The work, of which the present volume is a translation, was originally
written by Mr. Worsaae, for the Copenhagen Society for the Promotion of
Useful Knowledge, and intended in the first place, to show how the early
history of the country might be read through its monuments, and in the
second, to awaken a greater interest for their preservation. It has been
translated and applied to the History of similar Remains in England, in
the hope that it will be found a useful Handbook for the use of those
who desire to know something of the nature of the numerous Primeval
Monuments scattered over these Islands, and the light which their
investigation is calculated to throw over the earliest and most obscured
periods of our national history.

Oxford: JOHN HENRY PARKER, and 377. Strand. {32}

       *       *       *       *       *

ILLUSTRATED WORKS.

AN INTRODUCTION to the STUDY of GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE, with numerous
Illustrations. Nearly ready.

THE PRIMAEVAL ANTIQUITIES OF DENMARK. By J. J. A. WORSAAE, Member of the
Royal Society of Antiquaries of Copenhagen. Translated and applied to
the Illustration of similar Remains in England, by WILLIAM J. THOMS,
F.S.A., Secretary of the Camden Society. With numerous Illustrations.
8vo. 10s. 6d.

A MANUAL FOR THE STUDY OF SEPULCHRAL SLABS AND CROSSES OF THE MIDDLE
AGES. By the Rev. EDWARD L. CUTTS, B.A. 8vo. Illustrated by upwards of
300 Engravings. 12s.

WORKING DRAWINGS of STRIXTON CHURCH, NORTHAMPTONSHIRE--Views,
Elevations, Sections, and Details of. By EDWARD BARR, Esq., Architect.
12 Plates. Folio. 10s6d. A small Church in the Early English Style;
calculated for 200 persons; to cost about 800l.

A BOOK OF ORNAMENTAL GLAZING QUARRIES, collected and arranged from
Ancient Examples. By AUGUSTUS WOLLASTON FRANKS, B.A. With 112 Coloured
Examples. 8vo. 16s.

"Designed as a supplemental volume to Mr. Winston's Book on Painted
Glass, is an admirable collection. The subjects are accurately traced,
and the nicety of the tint and leading preserved. The examples are
classed, and an ingenious Introduction displays the taste and research
of the author."--_Christian Remembrancer_.

AN INQUIRY INTO THE DIFFERENCE OF STYLE OBSERVABLE IN ANCIENT PAINTED
GLASS, with Hints on Glass Painting, illustrated by numerous Coloured
Plates from Ancient Examples. By an AMATEUR. 2 vols. 8vo. 1l. 10s.

AN ATTEMPT TO DISCRIMINATE THE DIFFERENT STYLES OF ARCHITECTURE IN
ENGLAND. By the late THOMAS RICKMAN, F.S.A. With 30 Engravings on Steel
by Le Keux, &c., and 465 on Wood, of the best examples, from Original
Drawings by F. Mackenzie, O. Jewitt, and P. H. De la Motte. Fifth
Edition. 8vo. 21s.

A GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN BRITISH HERALDRY, with a Chronological Table
illustrative of its Rise and Progress. 8vo., with 700 engravings. 16s.

MEMORIALS OF THE COLLEGES AND HALLS IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, with
numerous Illustrations on Steel and Wood. By the Rev. JAMES INGRAM,
D.D., President of Trinity College. Second edition. 2 vols. 8vo. 1l.
10s.

       *       *       *       *       *

THEOLOGICAL WORKS.

A HISTORY OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND, from the Earliest Times to the
Revolution of 1688. By the late Rev. J. B. CARWITHEN. A New Edition,
revised and corrected. 2 vols. small 8vo. 12s.

OF THE IMITATION OF CHRIST. Four Books by THOMAS A KEMPIS. A new edition
revised, handsomely printed in fcp. 8vo. with vignettes, and red border
lines, cloth, 5s., morocco, 9s. Also kept in antique calf binding,
vermilion edges, 10s. 6d.

LECTURES ON THE FESTIVALS. By the Rev. C. J. ABRAHAM, M.A., Assistant
Master of the Upper School, Eton, 8vo. price 10s. 6d.

TRACTS FOR THE CHRISTIAN SEASONS, following the Course of the Christian
Year. The first series complete in 4 vols. fcp. 8vo. 18s.

RULES FOR HOLY LIVING AND DYING, containing the whole duty of a
Christian, and the part of Devotions fitted to all occasions and
furnished for all necessities. By Bishop JEREMY TAYLOR. Complete in 1
vol. 18mo. cloth, gilt edges, 4s.

THE PRACTICAL CHRISTIAN, OR THE DEVOUT PENITENT. By RICHARD SHERLOCK,
D.D. A New Edition, with a Memoir of the Author, by his pupil Bishop
Wilson. 18mo., complete in 1 vol. cloth 4s.

THE CHRISTIAN SCHOLAR. Thoughts on the Study of the Classics, in Prose
and Verse. By the author of "The Cathedral." fcp, 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.;
morocco, 14s.

THE CATHEDRAL; or, The Catholic and Apostolic Church in England.
Thoughts in Verse on Ecclesiastical Subjects, selected and arranged so
as to correspond with the different parts of a Gothic Cathedral. Sixth
edition, 32mo. with Engravings, price 4s. 6d. cloth; morocco, 6s. Also
in fcp. 8vo. with Engravings, 7s. 6d. cloth; morocco, 10s. 6d.

THE BAPTISTERY; or, The Way of Eternal Life. By the author of "The
Cathedral." Third edition, 8vo. cloth, 15s.; morocco, 1l. 1s. Also 32mo.
cloth, 3s. 6d.; morocco, 5s.

THE CHILD'S CHRISTIAN YEAR; Hymns for every Sunday and Holyday in the
Year. Fourth edition, 18mo. cloth, 2s; morocco, 4s 6d.

THE DAILY CHURCH SERVICES. Complete in 1 vol. 18mo. Price 10s. 6d.; or
bound in morocco, 16s.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186 Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, November 10, 1849.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, No. 2, November 10
1849, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, NO. 2 ***

***** This file should be named 11265.txt or 11265.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/1/2/6/11265/

Produced by Jon Ingram, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


