The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sky Line of Spruce, by Edison Marshall

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Sky Line of Spruce

Author: Edison Marshall

Release Date: March 2, 2004 [EBook #11402]
Last updated: March 20, 2013

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SKY LINE OF SPRUCE ***




Produced by Audrey Longhurst and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team.





[Illustration: He was leaning forward, aware of nothing in the
world but the forthcoming crisis.
FRONTISPIECE.]




                   THE SKY LINE
                    OF SPRUCE

                By EDISON MARSHALL



                    AUTHOR OF

"The Voice of the Pack," "The Strength of the Pines,"
"The Snowshoe Trail," "Shepherds of the Wild," etc.



                      1922





CONTENTS

PART ONE
THE WAKENING

PART TWO
THE WOLF-MAN

PART THREE
THE TAMING





PART ONE

THE WAKENING




I

The convict gang had a pleasant place to work to-day. Their road
building had taken them some miles from the scattered outskirts of Walla
Walla, among fields green with growing barley. The air was fresh and
sweet; the Western meadow larks, newly come, seemed in imminent danger
of splitting their own throats through the exuberance of their song.
Even the steel rails of the Northern Pacific, running parallel to the
stretch of new road, gleamed pleasantly in the spring sun.

The convicts themselves were in a genial mood, easily moved to wide
grins; and with a single exception they looked much like any other road
gang at work anywhere in the land. An expert might have recognized
purely criminal types among them: to a layman they suggested merely the
lower grades of unskilled labor. Some of the faces were distinctly
brutal; there was the sullen visage of a powerful negro who, with
different environment, might have been a Congo prince; but the face of
"Plug" Spanos, a notorious gunman who was by far the worst character in
the gang, might have been that of an artless plow-boy in a distant land
under a warm sun. There remained, however, the "exception." Curiously
enough, whenever the warden's thought dwelt upon the inmates of his
prison, classifying them into various groups, there was always one
wind-tanned, vivid face, one brawny, towering form that seemed to demand
individual consideration. The man who was listed on the records as Ben
Kinney was distinctly an individual. He some way failed to classify
among the groups of his fellows. Because he had been sent out to-day
with the road gang the two armed guards had an interesting subject of
conversation.

In the first place he habitually did two men's work. He did not do it
with any idea of trying to ingratiate himself with his keepers: no
inmate of the institution at Walla Walla made any such mistake as that.
He did it purely because he could not tone down his mighty strength and
energy to stay even with his fellows. To-day Sprigley, the guard in
first command of the gang, had placed him opposite Judy, the burly
negro, but the latter was being driven straight toward absolute
exhaustion. Yet Kinney at least knew how to subdue and direct the
pouring fountain of his vitality and energy, for the robust blows of his
pick fell with the regularity of a tireless machine. It was as if a wild
stallion, off the plains, had been trained to draw the plow. His great
muscles moved with marvelous precision; but for all the monotony and
rhythm of his motions he conveyed no image of stolidity and dullness.

He was a great, dark man, his skin darkly brown from exposure; his
straight hair showed almost coal black in spite of the fact that it had
but recently been clipped close; his eyebrows were similarly black; and
black hairs spread down his hands almost to the finger nails and
cropped up from his chest at his open throat. It was a mighty, deep,
full chest, the chest of a runner and a fighter, sustained by a strong,
flat abdomen and by powerful, sturdy legs. Yet physical might and
development were not all of Ben Kinney. The image conveyed was never one
of sheer brutality. For all their black hair, the large, brawny hands
were well-shaped and sensitive; he had a healthy, good-humored mouth
that could evidently, on occasion, be the seat of a most pleasant,
boyish smile. He had a straight, good nose, rather high cheek bones, and
a broad, brown forehead, straight rather than sloping swiftly like that
of the negro opposite. But none of his features, nor yet his brawny
form, caught and held the attention as did his vivid, dark-gray eyes.
They were deeply dark, even against his deeply tanned face, yet now and
then one caught distinct surface lights, denoting the presence of
unmeasured animal spirits, and perhaps, too, the surprising health and
vitality of the engine of his life. They were keen eyes, alert, fiery
with a zealot's fire: evidently the eyes of a steadfast, headstrong,
purposeful man. Some complexity of lines about them, hard to trace,
indicated a recklessness, too; a willingness to risk all that he had for
his convictions.

"That's the queerest case we ever had here at Walla Walla," Sprigley
told his fellow guard, as they watched the man's pick swing in the air.
"Sometimes I wonder whether he ought to be here or not. Look at that
face--he hasn't any more of a criminal face than I have."

The other guard, Howard, scanned his companion's face with mock care.
"That ain't sayin' so much for him," he observed. But at once he began
to evince real interest. "I maintain you can't tell anything from their
faces," he answered seriously. "There's nothin' in it. The man's a
crook, isn't he? Wasn't he caught red-handed?"

"Let me tell you about it. I was interested in the case and found out
all I could concerning it. He apparently showed up in Seattle some time
during the summer of 1919, a crook of the crooks, as you say. No one
knows where he came from--and that's queer in itself. You know very well
that his face and form are going to be remembered and noticed, yet he
wasn't in any rogue's gallery, in any city. Desperate crook though he
was, no one had ever heard of him before he showed up in Seattle.

"The crooks down there called him 'Wild' Kinney, and were pretty well
scared of him. Swanson, one of the lieutenants of the Seattle force,
whom I know well as I know you, told me that he was a power, sort of a
king in the underworld from the very first, largely because he was
afraid of nothing, absolutely desperate, and willing to take any chance.
He wasn't a hop-head, yet they all looked at him as sort of queer;
though ready to follow him to the last ditch, yet some way they thought
him off his head. And Swanson believes that his career of crime started
_after_ he reached Seattle, not before--that he hadn't grown up to crime
like most of the men in his gang. He didn't know anything about the
'profession'--as far as skill went he was a rank amateur, but he made it
up with daring and cunning. Once or twice he got in a fight down there,
and they all agree he fought like a mad man, the most terrible fighter
in the whole district, and it took about a half dozen to stop him."

"You don't have to tell me that. Anybody who can swing a pick like
that--"

"Now let me tell you how they happened to catch him. Maybe you heard--he
and Dago Frank were in the act of breaking into the Western-Danish
Bank. Part of this I'm giving you now came straight from Frank himself.
He says that they were in the alley, in the act of jimmying a window,
and all at once Kinney straightened up as if something had hit him and
let the jimmy fall with a thump to the pavement. Frank said he thought
that the man had 'gone off his nut,' but it's my private opinion that he
had been somewhat deranged all the time he was in Seattle, and he just
came to, more or less, that minute. The man hardly seemed to know what
he was doing. 'Have you lost your guts, Kinney?' Frank asked him; and
Kinney stood there, staring like he didn't know he was being spoken to.
He put his hands to his head, then, like a man with a headache. And the
next instant a cop came running from the mouth of the alley.

"Kinney was heeled, but he didn't even pull his gun. He still stood with
his hands to his head. All his pards in the underworld always said he'd
die before he'd give up, but he let the cop take him like he was a baby.
Frank got away, but they got him, you remember, three weeks later. After
some kind of a trial Kinney was sent down here."

Sprigley paused and shifted his gun from his right to his left shoulder.
"You'll say that's all common enough," he went on. "Now let me tell you
another queer thing. You know, the chief has started a system here to
keep track of all the prisoners, with the idea of making them good
citizens when they get out. He has them all fill out a card. Well, when
this man Kinney turned in his card, he had written 'Ben' on it, but the
rest was absolutely blank.

"Mr. Mitchell thought at first that the man couldn't write. It turned
out, though, that he can write--an intelligent hand, and spell good too.
Then Mitchell decided he was just sulking. But his second guess was no
better than his first. I haven't got Mitchell persuaded yet, and maybe
never will have him persuaded, but I'm confident I know the answer. The
reason he didn't fill out that card was because he couldn't remember.

"He couldn't remember where or when he was born, or who were his folks,
or where he had come from, or how he had spent his life. He knew that
'Ben,' his first name, sounded right to him, but 'Kinney' didn't--the
reason likely being that Kinney was an alias adopted during his life as
a criminal. I suppose you've noticed that queer, bewildered look he has
when any one calls him Kinney. What his real name is he doesn't know. He
can't even remember that. And the explanation is--complete loss of
memory.

"You mark my words, Howard--that man hasn't been a criminal always.
Something got wrong with his head, and he turned crook--you might say
that the criminal side that all of us has simply took possession of him.
That night in the alley he came to himself--only his mind was left a
blank not only in regard to his life as a criminal, but all that had
gone before."

"Then why don't you do something about it--besides talk? Mitchell says
you're gettin' so you talk of nothin' else."

"It's not for me to do anything about it. The man was a criminal. The
State can't go any further than that. I suppose if every man was set
free who wasn't, in the last analysis, responsible for his crimes, we
wouldn't have anybody left in the penitentiary. He's in for five
years--considering what he'll pick up here, it might as well be for
life. Amnesia--that's what the doctors call it--amnesia following some
sort of a mental trouble. In the end you'll see that I'm right."

Sprigley was right. To Ben Kinney life was like a single pale light in
a long, dark street. Complete loss of memory prevented him from looking
backward. Complete loss of hope kept him from looking ahead.

It had been this way for months now--ever since the night the policeman
had found him, the "jimmy" dropped from his hands, in the alley. Heaven
knows what he had done, what madness had been upon him, before that
time. But as Sprigley had said, that night had marked a change. It was
true that so far as facts went he was no better off: when he had come to
himself he had found his mind a blank regarding not only his career of
crime, but all the years that had gone before. Even his own name eluded
him. That of Kinney had an alien sound in his ears.

The past had simply ceased to exist for him; and because it is some way
the key to the future, the latter seemed likewise blank,--a toneless
gray that did not in the least waken his interest. Indeed the only light
that flung into the unfathomable darkness of his forgetfulness was that
which played in his dreams at night. Sometimes these were inordinately
vivid, quite in contrast to the routine of prison life.

He felt if he could only recall these dreams clearly they would
interpret for him the mystery of his own life. He wakened, again and
again, with the consciousness of having dreamed the most stirring,
amazing dreams, but what they were he couldn't tell. He could only
remember fragments, such as a picture of rushing waters recurring again
and again--and sometimes an amazing horizon, a dark line curiously
notched against a pale green background.

They were not all bad dreams: in reality many of them stirred him and
moved him happily, and he would waken to find the mighty tides of his
blood surging fiercely through the avenues of veins. Evidently they
recalled some happiness that was forgotten. And there was one phase, at
least, of this work in the road gangs that brought him moving, intense
delight. It was merely the sight of the bird life, abounding in the
fields and meadows about the towns.

There had been quite a northern migration lately, these late spring
days. The lesser songsters were already mating and nesting, and he found
secret pleasure in their cheery calls and bustling activity. But they
didn't begin to move him as did the waterfowl, passing in long V-shaped
flocks. That strange, wild wanderer's greeting that the gray geese
called down to their lesser brethren in the meadows had a really
extraordinary effect upon him. It always caught him up and held him,
stirring some deep, strange part of him that he hardly knew existed.
Sometimes the weird, wailing sound brought him quite to the edge of a
profound discovery, but always the flocks sped on and out of hearing
before he could quite grasp it. When the moon looked down, through the
barred window of his cell, he sometimes felt the same way. A great,
white mysterious moon that he had known long ago. It was queer that
there should be a relationship between the gray geese and the cold,
white satellite that rode in the sky. Ben Kinney never tried to puzzle
out what it was; but he always knew it with a knowledge not to be
denied.

The last of the waterfowl had passed by now, but the northern migration
was not yet done. The sun still moved north; warm, north-blowing winds
blew the last of the lowering, wintry clouds back to the Arctic Seas
whence they had come. And because the road work the convicts were doing
brought them, this afternoon, in sight of the railroad right-of-way, Ben
now and then caught sight of other wayfarers moving slowly, but no less
steadily, toward the north. The open road beckoned northward, these
full, balmy, late-April days, and various tattered men, mostly vagabonds
and tramps, passed the gang from time to time on this same, northern
quest.

Ben thought about them as birds of passage, and the thought amused him.
And at the sight of a small, stooped figure advancing toward him up the
railroad right-of-way he paused, leaning on his pick.

Because Ben had paused, for the first time in an hour, his two guards
looked up to see what had attracted his attention. They saw what seemed
to them a white-haired old wanderer of sixty years or more; but at first
they were wholly at a loss to explain Ben's fascinated look of growing
interest.

It was true that the old man scarcely represented the usual worthless,
criminal type that took to vagabondage. As he paused to scrutinize the
convict gang neither insolence nor fear, one of which was certainly to
be expected, became manifest in his face. They had anticipated certain
words in greeting, a certain look out of bleary, shifty eyes, but
neither materialized. True, the old man was following the cinder trail
northward, but plainly he did not belong to the brotherhood of tramps.
They saw that he was white-haired and withered, but upright; and that
undying youth dwelt in his twinkling blue eyes and the complexity of
little, good-natured lines about his mouth. Poverty, age, the hardships
of the cinder trail had not conquered him in the least. He was small
physically, but his skinny arms and legs looked as if they were made of
high-tension wire. His face was shrewd, but also kindly, and the gray
stubble on his cheeks and chin did not in the least hide a smile that
was surprisingly boyish and winning. And when he spoke his cracked
good-natured voice was perfectly in character, evidently that of a man
possessing full self-respect and confidence, yet brimming over with easy
kindliness and humor.

Both guards would have felt instantly, instinctively friendly toward him
if they had been free to feel at all. Instead they were held and amazed
by the apparent fact that at the first scrutiny of the man's outline,
his carriage and his droll, wrinkled face, the prisoner Kinney was moved
and stirred as if confronted by the risen dead.

The old man himself halted, returning Kinney's stare. The moment had,
still half concealed, an unmistakable quality of drama. In the contagion
of suppressed excitement, the other prisoners paused, their tools held
stiffly in their hands. Kinney's mind seemed to be reaching, groping for
some astonishing truth that eluded him.

The old man ran, in great strides, toward him. "My God, aren't you Ben
Darby?" he demanded.

The convict answered him as from a great distance, his voice cool and
calm with an infinite certainty. "Of course," he said. "Of course I'm
Darby."




II

For the moment that chance meeting thrilled all the spectators with the
sense of monumental drama. The convicts stared; Howard, the second
guard, forgot his vigilance and stared with open mouth. He started
absurdly, rather guiltily, when the old man whirled toward him.

"What are you doing with Ben Darby in a convict gang?" the old wanderer
demanded.

"What am I doin'?" Howard's astonishment gave way to righteous
indignation. "I'm guardin' convicts, that's what I'm a-doin'." He
composed himself then and shifted his gun from his left to his right
shoulder. "He's here in this gang because he's a convict. Ask my friend,
here, if you want to know the details. And who might you be?"

There was no immediate answer to that question. The old man had turned
his eyes again to the tall, trembling figure of Ben, trying to find
further proof of his identity. To Ezra Melville there could no longer be
any shadow of doubt as to the truth: even that he had found the young
man working in a gang of convicts could not impugn the fact that the
dark-gray vivid eyes, set in the vivid face under dark, beetling brows,
were unquestionably those of the boy he had seen grow to manhood's
years, Ben Darby.

It was true that he had changed. His face was more deeply lined, his
eyes more bright and nervous; there was a long, dark scar just under the
short hair at his temple that Melville had never seen before. And the
finality of despair seemed to settle over the droll features as he
walked nearer and took Darby's hand.

"Ben, Ben!" he said, evidently struggling with deep emotion. "What are
you doing here?"

The younger man gave him his hand, but continued to stare at him in
growing bewilderment. "Five years--for burglary," he answered simply.
"Guilty, too--I don't know anything more. And I can't remember--who you
are."

"You don't know me?" Some of Ben's own bewilderment seemed to pass to
him. "You know Ezra Melville--"

Sprigley, whose beliefs in regard to Ben had been strengthened by the
little episode, stepped quickly to Melville's side. "He's suffering loss
of memory," he explained swiftly. "At least, he's either lost his memory
or he's doing a powerful lot of faking. This is the first time he ever
recalled his own name."

"I'm not faking," Ben told them quietly. "I honestly don't remember
you--I feel that I ought to, but I don't. I honestly didn't remember my
name was Darby until a minute ago--then just as soon as you spoke it, I
knew the truth. Nothing can surprise me, any more. I suppose you're kin
of mine--?"

Melville gazed at him in incredulous astonishment, then turned to
Sprigley. "May I talk to you about this case?" he asked quietly. "If not
to you, who can I talk to? There are a few points that might help to
clear up--"

Ordering his men to their work, Melville and Sprigley stood apart, and
for nearly an hour engaged in the most earnest conversation. The
afternoon was shadow-flaked and paling when they had finished, and
before Sprigley led his men back within the gray walls he had arranged
for Melville to come to the prison after the dinner hour and confer with
Mitchell, the warden.

Many and important were the developments arising from this latter
conference. One of the least of them was that Melville's northward
journey was postponed for some days, and that within a week this same
white-haired, lean old man, dressed in the garb of the cinder trail, was
pleading his case to no less a personage than the governor of the State
of Washington in whom authority for dealing with Ben's case was
absolutely vested. It came about, from the same cause, that a noted
alienist, Forest, of Seattle, visited Ben Darby in his cell; and finally
that the prisoner himself, under the strict guard of Sprigley, was taken
to the capital at Olympia.

The brief inquisition that followed, changing the entire current of Ben
Darby's life, occurred in the private office of McNamara, the Governor.
McNamara himself stood up to greet them when they entered, the guard and
the convict. Ezra Melville and Forest, the alienist from Seattle, were
already in session. The latter conducted the examination.

He tried his subject first on some of the most simple tests for sanity.
It became evident at once, however, that except for his amnesia Ben's
mind was perfectly sound: he passed all general intelligence tests with
a high score, he conversed easily, he talked frankly of his symptoms. He
had perfect understanding of the general sweep of events in the past
twenty years: his amnesia seemed confined to his own activities and the
activities of those intimately connected with him. Where he had been,
what he had done, all the events of his life up to the night of his
arrest remained, for all his effort to remember them, absolutely in
darkness.

"You don't remember this man?" Forest asked him quietly, indicating
Ezra Melville.

Again Ben's eyes studied the droll, gray face. "With the vaguest kind of
memory. I know I've seen him before--often. I can't tell anything else."

"He's a good friend of your family. He knew your folks. I should say he
was a _very_ good friend, to take the trouble and time he has, in your
behalf."

Ben nodded. He did not have to be told that fact. The explanation,
however, was beyond him.

Forest leaned forward. "You remember the Saskatchewan River?"

Ben straightened, but the dim images in his mind were not clear enough
for him to answer in the affirmative. "I'm afraid not."

Melville leaned forward in his chair. "Ask him if he remembers winning
the canoe race at Lodge Pole--or the time he shot the Athabaska Rapids."

Ben turned brightly to him, but slowly shook his head. "I can't remember
ever hearing of them before."

"I think you would, in time," Forest remarked. "They must have been
interesting experiences. Now what do these mean to you?--Thunder
Lake--Abner Darby--Edith Darby--MacLean's College----"

Ben relaxed, focusing his attention on the names. For the instant the
scene about him, the anxious, interested faces, faded from his
consciousness. Thunder Lake! Somewhere, some time, Thunder Lake had had
the most intimate associations with his life. The name stirred him and
moved him; dim voices whispered in his ears about it, but he couldn't
quite catch what they said. He groped and reached in vain.

There was no doubt but that an under-consciousness had full knowledge
of the name and all that it meant. But it simply could not reach that
knowledge up into his conscious mind.

Abner Darby! It was curious what a flood of tenderness swept through him
as, whispering, he repeated the name. Some one old and white-haired had
been named Abner Darby: some one whom he had once worshipped with the
fervor of boyhood, but who had leaned on his own, strong shoulders in
latter years. Since his own name was Darby, Abner Darby was, in all
probability, his father; but his reasoning intelligence, rather than his
memory, told him so.

The name of Edith Darby conjured up in his mind a childhood playmate,--a
girl with towzled yellow curls and chubby, confiding little hands....
But these dim memory-pictures went no further: there were no later
visions of Edith as a young woman, blossoming with virgin beauty. They
stopped short, and he had a deep, compelling sense of grief. The child,
unquestionably a sister, had likely died in early years. The third name
of the three, MacLean's College, called up no memories whatever.

"I can hardly say that I remember much about them," he responded at
last. "I think they'll come plainer, though, the more I think about
them. I just get the barest, vague ideas."

"They'll strengthen in time, I'm sure," Forest told him. "Put them out
of your mind, for now. Let it be blank." The alienist again leaned
toward him, his eyes searching. There ensued an instant's pause,
possessing a certain quality of suspense. Then Forest spoke quickly,
sharply. "_Wolf_ Darby!"

In response a curious tremor passed over Ben's frame, giving in some
degree the effect of a violent start. "_Wolf_ Darby," he repeated
hesitantly. "Why do you call me that?"

"The very fact that you know the name refers to you, not some one else,
shows that that blunted memory of yours has begun to function in some
degree. Now think. What do you know about 'Wolf' Darby?"

Ben tried in vain to find an answer. A whole world of meaning lingered
just beyond the reach of his groping mind; but always it eluded him. It
was true, however, that the name gave him a certain sense of pleasure
and pride, as if it had been used in compliment to some of his own
traits. Far away and long ago, men had called _him_ "Wolf" Darby: he
felt that perhaps the name had carried far, through many sparsely
settled districts. But what had been the occasion for it he did not
know.

He described these dim memory pictures; and Forest's air of satisfaction
seemed to imply that his own theories in regard to Ben's case were
receiving justification. He appeared quite a little flushed, deeply
intent, when he turned to the next feature of the examination. He
suddenly spoke quietly to old Ezra Melville; and the latter put a small,
cardboard box into his hands.

"I want you to see what I have here," Forest told Ben. "They were your
own possessions once--you sent them yourself to Abner Darby, your late
father--and I want you to see if you remember them."

Ben's eyes fastened on the box; and the others saw a queer drawing of
the lines of his face, a curious tightening and clasping of his fingers.
There was little doubt but that his subconsciousness had full cognizance
of the contents of that box. He was trembling slightly, too--in
excitement and expectation--and Ezra Melville, suddenly standing erect,
was trembling too. The moment was charged with the uttermost suspense.

Evidently this was the climax in the examination. Even McNamara, the
Governor, was breathless with interest in his chair; Forest had the rapt
look of a scientist in some engrossing experiment. He opened the box,
taking therefrom a roll of white cotton. This he slowly unrolled,
revealing two small, ribboned ornaments of gold or bronze.

Ben's starting eyes fastened on them. No doubt he recognized them. A
look of veritable anguish swept his brown face, and all at once small
drops of moisture appeared on his brow and through the short hairs at
his temples. The dark scar at his temple was suddenly brightly red from
the pounding blood beneath.

"The Victoria Cross, of course," he said slowly, brokenly. "I won it,
didn't I--the day--that day at Ypres--the day my men were trapped--"

His words faltered then. The wheels of _his_ memory, starting into
motion, were stilled once more. Again the great darkness dropped over
him; there were only the medals left in their roll of cotton, and the
broken fragments of a story--of some wild, stirring event of the war
just gone--remaining in his mind. Yet to Forest the experiment was an
unqualified success.

"There's no doubt of it!" he exclaimed. He turned to McNamara, the
Governor. "His brain is just as sound as yours or mine. With the right
environment, the right treatment, he'd be on the straight road to
recovery. In a general way of speaking he has recovered now, largely,
from the purely temporary trouble that he had before."

McNamara focused an intent gaze first on Ben, then on the alienist. "It
is, then--as you guessed."

"Absolutely. The night of his arrest marked the end of his trouble; you
might say that his brain simply snapped back into health and began to
function normally again, after a period of temporary mania from
shell-shock. It is true that his memory was left blank, but there
doesn't seem to be any organic reason for it to be blank--other than
lack of incentive to remember. Catch me up, if you don't follow me. In
other words, he has been slowly convalescing since that night: under the
proper stimuli I have no doubt that everything would come back to him."

"And our friend here--Melville--offers to supply those stimuli."

"Exactly. And it's up to you to say whether he gets a chance."

Thoughtfully the executive drummed his desk with his pencil. Presently a
smile, markedly boyish and pleasant, broke over his face. More than
once, in the line of duty imposed by his high office, he had been
obliged to make decisions contrary to every dictate of mercy. He was all
the more pleased at this opportunity to do, with a clear conscience, the
thing that his kindness prompted. He turned slowly in his chair.

"Darby, I suppose you followed what the doctor said?" he asked easily.

"Fairly well, I think."

"I'll review it, if I may. It seems, Ben, that you have been the victim
of a strange set of unfortunate circumstances. Due to the efforts of an
old family friend--a most devoted and earnest friend if I may say
so--we've looked up your record, and now we know more about you than you
know about yourself. You served in France with Canadian troops and
there, you will be proud to know, you won among other honors the highest
honor that the Government of England can award a hero. There you were
shell-shocked, in the last months of the war.

"You did not return to your home. Shell-shock, Forest tells me, is a
curious thing, resulting in many forms of mania. Yours led you into
crime. For some months you lived as a desperate criminal in Seattle. You
came to yourself in the act of breaking into a bank, only to find that
your memory of not only your days of crime but all that had gone before
was left a blank. That night, as you know, marked your arrest.

"Forest has just explained that you are organically sound--that the
recovery of your memory is just a matter of time and the proper stimuli.
Now, Ben, it isn't the purpose of this State to punish men when they are
not responsible for their deeds. Melville tells me that your record, in
your own home, was the best; your war record alone, I believe, would
entitle you to the limit of mercy from the State. I don't see how we can
hold you responsible for deeds done while you were mentally disabled
from shell-shock.

"All you need for complete recovery, to call everything back in your
mind, is the proper stimuli. At least that is the opinion of Doctor
Forest. What those proper stimuli are of course no one knows for
sure--but Doctor Forest has a theory; and I think he will tell you that
he will share the credit for it with the same man who has been your
friend all the way through. They think they know what is best for you.
The final decision has been put up to me as to whether or not they shall
be permitted to give it a trial.

"This good friend of yours has offered to try to put it through. He has
a plan outlined that he'll tell you of later, that will not only be the
best possible influence toward recalling your memory, but will also give
you a clean, new start in life. A chance for every success.

"So you needn't return to Walla Walla, Darby. I'm going to parole
you--under the charge of your benefactor. Melville, from now on it's up
to you."

The little, withered gray man looked very solemn as he rose. The others
were stricken instantly solemn too, surprised that the droll smile they
were so used to seeing had died on the homely, kindly face. Even his
twinkling eyes were sobered too.

Vaguely amused, yet without scorn, McNamara and Forest got up to shake
his hand. "I'll look after him," Melville assured them. "Never fear for
that."

Slight as he was, wasted by the years, his was a figure of unmistakable
dignity as he thanked them, gravely and earnestly, for their kindness in
Ben's behalf. Soon after he and his young charge went out together.




III

There was a great house-cleaning in the dome of the heavens one
memorable night that flashed like a jewel from the murky desolation of a
rainy spring. The little winds came in troops, some from the sea, some
with loads of balsam from the great forests of the Olympic Peninsula,
and some, quite tired out, from the stretching sage plains to the east,
and they swept the sky of clouds as a housekeeper sweeps the ceiling of
cobwebs. Not a wisp, not one trailing streamer remained.

The Seattle citizenry, for the first time in some weeks, recalled the
existence of the stars. These emerged in legions and armies, all the way
from the finest diamond dust to great, white spheres that seemed near
enough to reach up and touch. Little forgotten stars that had hidden
away since Heaven knows when in the deepest recesses of the skies came
out to join in the celebration. Aged men, half blind, beheld so many
that they thought their sight was returning to them, and youths saw
whole constellations that they had never beheld before. They continued
their high revels until a magnificent moon rose in the east, too big and
too bright to compete with.

It was not just a crescent moon, about to fade away, or even a rain
moon--one of those standing straight up in the sky so that water can run
out as out of a dipper. It was almost at its full, large and nearly
round, and it made the whole city, which is rather like other cities in
the daylight, seem a place of enchantment. It was so bright that the
electric signs along Second Avenue were not even counter-attractions.

No living creature who saw it remained wholly unmoved by it. Wary young
men, crafty and slick as foxes, found themselves proposing to their
sweethearts before they could catch themselves; and maidens who had
looked forward to some years yet of independent gaiety found themselves
accepting. Old tom-cats went wooing; old spinsters got out old letters;
old husbands thought to return and kiss their wives before venturing
down to old, moth-eaten clubs. Old dogs, too well-bred to howl, were
lost and absent-minded with dreams that were older than all the rest of
these things put together.

But to no one in the city was the influence of the moon more potent than
to Ben Darby, once known as "Wolf" Darby through certain far-spreading
districts, and now newly come from the State capital, walking Seattle's
streets with his ward and benefactor, Ezra Melville. No matter how
faltering was his memory in other regards, the moon, at least, was an
old acquaintance. He had known it in the nights when its light had
probed into his barred cell; but his intimate acquaintance with it had
begun long, long before that. Not even the names that the alienist,
Forest, had spoken--the names of places and people close to his own
heart--stirred his memory like the sight of the mysterious sphere
rolling through the empty places of the sky. It recalled, clearer than
any other one thing, the time and place of his early years.

He could not put into words just how it affected him. From first to
last, even through his days of crime, it had been the one thing
constant--the unchanging symbol--that in any manner connected his
present with his shadowed past. It had served to recall in him, more
than any other one thing, the fact that there was a past to look
for--the assurance that somewhere, far away, he had been something more
than a reckless criminal in city slums. The love he had for it was an
old love, proving to him conclusively that his past life had been
intimately associated, some way, with moonlight falling in open places.
Yet the mood that was wakened in him went even farther. It was as if the
sight of the argent satellite stirred and moved deep-buried instincts
innate in him, in no way connected with any experience of his immediate
life. Rather it was as if his love for it were a racial love, reaching
back beyond his own life: something inborn in him. It was as if he were
recalling it, not alone from his own past, but from a racial existence a
thousand-thousand years before his own birth. His memory was strangely
stifled, but, oh, he remembered the moon! Forest had spoken of stimuli!
The mere sight of the blue-white beams was the best possible stimulus to
call him to himself.

Ezra Melville and he walked under it, talking little at first, and
mostly the old, blue twinkling eyes watched his face. Seemingly with no
other purpose than to escape the bright glare of the street lights they
walked northward along the docks, below Queen Anne Hill, passed old Rope
Walk, through the suburb of Ballard, finally emerging on the Great
Northern Railroad tracks heading toward Vancouver and the Canadian
border. For all that Ben's long legs had set a fast pace Melville kept
cheerfully beside him throughout the long walk, seemingly without trace
of fatigue.

They paused at last at a crossing, and Ben faced the open fields.
Evidently, before crime had claimed him, he had been deeply sensitive to
nature's beauty. Ezra saw him straighten, his dark, vivid face rise; his
quiet talk died on his lips. Evidently the peaceful scene before him
went home to him very straight. He was very near thralldom from some
quality of beauty that dwelt here, some strange, deep appeal that the
moonlit realm made to his heart.

For the moment Ben had forgotten the old, tried companion at his side.
Vague memories stirred him, trying to convey him an urgent message. He
could all but hear: the sight of the meadows, ensilvered under the moon,
were making many things plain to him which before were shadowed and
vague. The steel rails gleamed like platinum, the tree tops seemed to
have white, molten metal poured on them. It was hard to take his eyes
off those moonlit trees. They got to him, deep inside; thrilling to him,
stirring. Perhaps in his Lost Land the moon shone on the trees this same
way.

There were no prison walls around him to-night. The high buildings
behind him, pressing one upon another, had gone to sustain the feeling
of imprisonment, but it had quite left him now. There were no cold,
watchful lights,--only the moon and the stars and an occasional mellow
gleam from the window of a home. There was scarcely any sound at all;
not even a stir--as of prisoners tossing and uneasy in their cells. His
whole body felt rested.

The air was marvelously sweet. Clover was likely in blossom in nearby
fields. He breathed deep, an unknown delight stealing over him. He stole
on farther, into the mystery of the night--ravished, tingling and almost
breathless from an inner and inexplicable excitement. Melville walked
quietly beside him.

Forest had given over the case: it was Melville's time for experiments
to-night. All the way out he had watched his patient, sounding him,
studying his reactions and all that he had beheld had gone to strengthen
his own convictions. And now, after this moment in the meadows, the old
man was ready to go on with his plan.

"Let's set down here," he invited casually. Ben started, emerging from
his revery. The old man's cheery smile had returned, in its full charm,
to his droll face. "You'll want to know what it's all about--and what I
have in mind. And I sure think you've done mighty well to hold onto your
patience this long."

He sat himself on the rail, and Ben quietly took a seat beside him.
"There are plenty of things I'd like to know," he admitted.

"And plenty of things I ain't goin' to tell you, neither--for the reason
that Forest advised against it," Ezra went on. "I don't understand
it--but he says you've got a lot better chance to get your memory
workin' clear again if things are recalled to you by the aid of
'stimuli' instead of having any one tell you. I've agreed to supply the
'stimuli.'

"I don't see any harm in tellin' you that the guesses you've already
made are right. Your name is Ben Darby--and you used to be known as
'Wolf' Darby--for reasons that sooner or later you may know. Abner Darby
was your father. Edith Darby was your sister that ain't no more. You
went awhile to MacLean's College, in Ontario.

"Now, Ben, I'm going to put a proposition up to you. I'm hoping you'll
see fit to accept it. And I might as well say right here, that while
it's the best plan possible to bring you back your memory, and that
while it offers just the kind of 'stimuli' you're supposed to need,
neither 'stimuli' nor stimulus or stimulum has got very much to do with
it. I argued that point mighty strong because I knew it would appeal to
Forest, and through him, to the governor. I don't see it makes a whale
of a lot of difference whether you get your memory back or not.

"Maybe you don't foller me. But you know and I know you're all right
now, remembering clear enough everything that happened since you was
arrested, and I don't see what difference it makes whether or not you
remember who your great-aunt was, and the scrapes you got in as a kid.
You can talk and walk and figger, get by in any comp'ny, and you suit me
for a buddy just as you are. However, Forest seemed to think it was
mighty important--and it may be.

"The reason I'm goin' to take you where I'm goin' to take you is for
your own good. I'm sort of responsible for you, bein' your folks are
dead. I know you from head to heel, and I think I know what's good for
you, what you can do and what you can't do and where you succeed and
where you fail. And I'll say right here you wasn't born to be no gangman
in a big city like Seattle. You'll find that isn't your line at all."

"I'm willing to take your word for that, Mr. Melville," Ben interposed
quietly.

"And I might say, now a good time as any, to let up on the '_Mister_.'
My name is Ezra Melville, and I've been known as 'Ezram' as long as I
can remember, to my friends. The Darbys in particular called me that,
and you're a Darby.

"I'll say in the beginning I can't do for you all I'd like to do, simply
because I haven't the means. The first time you saw me I was walkin'
ties, and you'll see me walkin' some more of 'em before you're done. I
know you ain't got any money, and due to the poker habit I ain't got
much either--in spite of the fact I've done two men's work for something
over forty years. On this expedition to come we'll have to go on the
cheaps. No Pullmans, no hotels--sleeping out the hay when we're caught
out at night. Maybe ridin' the blinds, whenever we can. I'm awful sorry,
but it jest can't be helped. But I will say--when it comes to work I can
do my full share, without kickin'."

Ben stared in amazement. It was almost as if the old man were pleading a
case, rather than giving glorious alms to one to whom hope had seemed
dead. Ben tried to cut in, to ask questions, but the old man's words
swept his own away.

"To begin at the beginning, I've got a brother--leastwise I had him a
few weeks ago--Hiram Melville by name," Ezram went on. "You'd remember
him well enough. He was a prospector up to a place called Snowy Gulch--a
town way up in the Caribou Mountains, in Canada. Some weeks ago, herdin'
cattle in Eastern Oregon, I got a letter from him, and started north,
runnin' into you on the way up. The letter's right here."

He drew a white envelope from his coat pocket, opening it slowly. "This
is a real proposition, son," he went on in a sobered voice. "I'm mighty
glad that I've got something, at least worth lookin' into, to let you in
on. I only wish it was more."

"Why should you want to let me in on anything?" Ben asked clearly.

The direct question received only a stare of blank amazement from Ezram.
"Why should I--" he repeated, seemingly surprised out of his life by the
question. "Shucks, and quit interruptin' me. But I'll say right here
I've got my own ideas, if you must know. Didn't I hear that while you
was rampin' around the underworld, you showed yourself a mighty good
fighter? Well, there's likely to be some fightin' where we're goin', and
I want some one to do it besides myself. If there ain't fightin', at
least they'll be worklots of work. Maybe I'm gettin' a little too old
to do much of it. I want a buddy--some one who will go halfway with me."

"Therefore I suppose you go to the 'pen' to find one," Ben commented,
wholly unconvinced.

"I'm going to make this proposition good," Ezram went on as if he had
not heard, "probably a fourth--maybe even a third--to you. And I ain't
such a fool as I look, neither. I know the chances of comin' out right
on it are twice as good if somebody young and strong, and who can fight,
is in on it with me. Listen to this."

Opening the letter, he read laboriously:

    Snowy Gulch, B.C.

    DEAR BROTHER EZRA:--

    I rite this with what I think is my dying hand. It's my will too.
    I'm at the hotel at Snowy Gulch--and not much more time. You know
    I've been hunting a claim. Well, I found it--rich a pocket as any
    body want, worth a quarter million any how and in a district where
    the Snowy Gulch folks believe there ain't a grain of gold.

    It's yours. Come up and get it quick before some thieves up hear
    jump it. Lookout for Jeffery Neilson and his gang they seen some of
    my dust. I'm too sick to go to recorder in Bradleyburg and record
    claim. Get copy of this letter to carry, put this in some safe
    place. The only condition is you take good care of Fenris, the pet I
    raised from a pup. You'll find him and my gun at Steve Morris's.

    I felt myself going and just did get hear. You get supplies horses
    at Snowy Gulch go up Poor Man Creek through Spruce Pass over to Yuga
    River. Go down Yuga River past first rapids along still place to
    first creek you'll know it cause there's an old cabin just below and
    my canoe landing. Half mile up, in creek bed, is the pocket and new
    cabin. And don't tell no one in Snowy Gulch who you are and where
    you going. Go quick brother Ez and put up a stone for me at Snowy
    Gulch.

    Your brother

    HIRAM MELVILLE.

There was a long pause after Ezram's voice had died away. Ben's eyes
glowed in the moonlight.

"And you haven't heard--whether your brother is still alive?"

"I got a wire the hotel man sent me. It reached me weeks before the
letter came, and I guess he must have died soon after he wrote it. I
suppose you see what he means when he says to carry a copy of this
letter, instead of the original."

"Of course--because it constitutes his will, your legal claim. Just the
fact that you are his brother would be claim enough, I should think, but
since the claim isn't recorded, this simplifies matters for you. You'd
better make a copy of it and you can leave it in some safe place. And of
course this claim is what you offered to let me in on."

"That's it. Not much, but all what I got. What I want to know is--if
it's a go."

"Wait just a minute. You've asked me to go in with you on a scheme that
looks like a clear quarter of a million, even though I can't give
anything except my time and my work. You found me in a penitentiary,
busted and all in--a thief and a gangster. Before we go any further,
tell me what service I've done you, what obligation you're under to me,
that gives me a right to accept so much from you?"

It might have been in the moonlight that Ezram's eyes glittered
perceptibly. "You're in my charge," he grinned. "I guess you ain't got
any say comin'."

"Wait--wait." Ben sprang to his feet, and caught by his earnestness,
Ezram got up too. "I sure--I sure appreciate the trust you put in me,"
Ben went on slowly. "For my own part I'd give everything I've got and
all I'd hope to ever get to go with you. It's a chance such as I never
dared believe would come to me again--a chance for big success--a chance
to go away and get a new start in a country where I feel, instinctively,
that I'd make good. But that's only the beginning of it."

The dark vivid eyes seemed to glow in the soft light. "Forgive me if I
talk frank; and if it sounds silly I can't help it," Ben continued.
"You've never been in prison--with a five-year sentence hanging over
you--and nobody giving a damn. For some reason I can't guess you've
already done more for me than I can ever hope to repay. You got me out
of prison, you wakened hope and self-respect in me when I thought they
were dead, and you've proved a friend when I'd given up any thought of
ever knowing human friendship again. I was down and out, Ezram. Anything
you want me to do I'll do to the last ditch. You know I can fight--you
know how a man can fight if it's his last chance. I've got some bonus
money coming to me from the Canadian Government--and I'll put that in
too, because we'll be needing horses and supplies and things that cost
money. But I can't take all that from a stranger. You must know how it
is. A man can't, while he's young and strong, accept charity--"

"Good Lord, it ain't charity!" the old man shouted, drowning him out.
"I'm gettin' as much pleasure out of it as you." His voice sank again;
and there was no line of mirth in his face.

"It was long ago, in Montreal," Ezram went on, after a pause. "I knew
your mother, as a girl. She married a better man, but I told her that
every wish of hers was law to me. You're her son."




IV


Night is always a time of mystery in Snowy Gulch--that little cluster of
frame shacks lost and far in the northern reaches of the Caribou Range.
Shadows lie deep, pale lights spring up here and there in windows, with
gaping, cavernous darkness between; a wet mist is clammy on the face. At
such times one forgets that here is a town, an enduring outpost of
civilization, and can remember only the forests that stretch so heavy
and dark on every side. Indeed the town seems simply swallowed up in
these forests, immersed in their silence, overspread by their gloom, and
the red gods themselves walk like sentries in the main street.

The breath that is so fragrant and strange between the fronting rows of
shacks is simply that of the forest: inept the woodsman who would not
recognize it at once. The silence is a forest silence, and if the air is
tense and electric, it is because certain wilderness forces that no
white man can name but which surely dwell in the darker thickets have
risen and are in possession.

It is not a time when human beings are at their best and strongest.
There is an instinctive, haunting feeling which, though not fear, wakens
a feeling of inadequacy and meekness. Only a few--those who have given
their love and their lives to the wild places--have any idea of
sympathetic understanding with it. Among these was Beatrice Neilson, and
she herself did not fully understand the dreams and longings that swept
her ever at the fall of the mysterious wilderness night.

The forest had never grown old to her. Its mystery was undying. Born in
its shadow, her love had gone out to it in her earliest years, and it
held her just as fast to-day. All her dreams--the natural longings of an
imaginative girl born to live in an uninhabited portion of the
earth--were inextricably bound up in it; whatever plans she had for the
future always included it. Not that she was blind to its more terrible
qualities: its might and its utter remorselessness that all foresters,
sooner or later, come to recognize. Her thews were strong, and she loved
it all the more for the tests that it put to its children.

She was a daughter of the forests, and its mark was on her. To-night the
same moon that, a thousand miles to the south, was lighting the way for
Ben and Ezram on their northern journey, shone on her as she hastened
down the long, shadowed street toward her father's shack, revealing her
forest parentage for all to see. The quality could be discerned in her
very carriage--swift and graceful and silent--vaguely suggesting that of
the wild creatures themselves. But there was no coarseness or ruggedness
about her face and form such as superficial observation might have
expected. Physically she was like a deer, strong, straight-limbed,
graceful, slender rather than buxom, dainty of hands and feet. A perfect
constitution and healthful surroundings had done all this. And good
fairies had worked further magic: as she passed beneath the light at the
door of the rude hotel there was revealed an unquestioned and rather
startling facial beauty.

It seemed hardly fitting in this stern, rough land--the soft contour and
delicacy of the girl's features. It had come straight from her mother, a
woman who, in gold-rush days, had been the acknowledged beauty of the
province. Nor was it merely the attractive, animal beauty that is so
often seen in healthy, rural girls. Rather its loveliness was of a
mysterious, haunting kind that one associates with old legends and far
distant lands.

Perhaps its particular appeal lay in her eyes. They seemed to be quite
marvelously deep and clear, so darkly gray that they looked black in
certain lights, and they were so shadowed and pensive that sometimes
they gave the image of actual sadness. For all the isolation of her home
she was no stranger to romance; but the romance that was to be seen,
like a gentleness, in her face was that of the great, shadowed forest in
which she dwelt.

Pensive, wistful, enthralled in a dreamy sadness,--what could be nearer
the tone and pitch of the northern forest itself? There might have been
also depths of latent passion such as is known to all who live the full,
strong life of the woods. The lines were soft about her lips and eyes,
indicating a marked sweetness and tenderness of nature; but these traits
did not in the least deny her parentage. No one but the woodsman knows
how gentle, how hospitably tender, the forest may be at times.

She had fine, dark straight brows that served to darken her eyes, dark
brown hair waving enough to soften every line of her face, a girlish
throat and a red mouth surprisingly tender and childish. As might have
been expected her garb was neither rich nor smart, but it was pretty and
well made and evidently fitted for her life: a loose "middy," blue
skirt, woolen stockings and rather solid little boots.

As she passed the door of the hotel one of the younger men who had been
lounging about the stove strode out and accosted her. She half-turned,
recognized his face in the lamplight, and frankly recoiled.

She had been lost in dreams before, vaguely pensive, for Beatrice had
been watching the darkness overspread and encompass the dark fringe of
the spruce forest that enclosed the town. Now, because she recognized
the man and knew his type--born of the wild places even as herself, but
a bastard breed--the tender, wistful half-smile sped from her childish
mouth and her eyes grew alert and widened as if with actual fear. She
halted, evidently in doubt as to her course.

"Going home?" the man asked. "I'm going up to see your pop, and I'll see
you there, if you don't mind."

Ray Brent's voice had an undeniable ring of power. It was deeply bass,
evidently the voice of a passionate, reckless, brutal man. The covetous
caress of his thick hand upon her arm indicated that he was wholly sure
of himself in regard to her.

She stared with growing apprehension into his even-featured, not
unhandsome face. Evidently she found it hard to meet his eyes,--eyes
wholly lacking in humor and kindliness, but unquestionably vivid and
compelling under his heavy, dark brows. "I'm going home," she told him
at last. "I guess, if you're going up to see Pop, you can walk along
too."

The man fell in beside her, his powerful frame overshadowing hers. It
was plain at once that the manner of her consent did not in the least
disturb him. "You're just letting me because I'm going up there anyway,
eh?" he asked. "I'll walk along further than that with you before I'm
done."

The girl paused, as if in appeal. "Ray, we've thrashed that out long
ago," she responded. "I wish you wouldn't keep talking about it. If you
want to walk with me--"

"All right, but you'll be changing your mind one of these days." Ray's
voice rang in the silence, indicating utter indifference to the fact
that many of the loungers on the street were listening to the little
scene. "I've never seen anything I wanted yet that I didn't get--and I
want you. Why don't you believe what your pop says about me? He thinks
Ray Brent is the goods."

"I'm not going to talk about it any more. I've already given you my
answer--twenty times."

The man talked on, but the girl walked with lifted chin, apparently not
hearing. They followed the board sidewalk into the shadows, finally
turning in at a ramshackle, three-room house that was perched on the
hillside almost at the end of the street at the outer limits of the
village.

The girl turned to go in, but the man held fast to her arm. "Wait just a
minute, Bee," he urged. "I've got one thing more to say to you."

The girl looked into his face, now faintly illumined by the full moon
that was rising, incredibly large and white, above the dark line of the
spruce tops. For all the regularity of his rather handsome features, his
was never an attractive face to her, even in first, susceptible
girlhood; and in the moonlight it suddenly filled her with dread. Ray
Brent was a dangerous type: imperious willed, slave to his most
degenerate instincts, reckless, as free from moral restraint as the most
savage creatures that roamed his native wilds. Now his facial lines
appeared noticeably deep, dark like scars, and curious little flakes of
iniquitous fire danced in his sunken eyes.

"Just one minute, Bee," he went on, wholly rapt in his own, devouring
desires. The dark passions of the man, always just under the skin,
seemed to be getting out of bounds. "When I want something, I don't know
how to quit till I get it. It's part of my nature. Your pop knows
that--and that's why he's made me his pardner in a big deal."

"If my father wants men like you--for his pardners, I can't speak for
his judgment."

"Wait just a minute. He's told me--and I know he's told you too--that
I'd suit him all right for a son-in-law. He and I agree on that. And
this country ain't like the places you read about in your story
books--it's a man's country. Oh, I know you well enough. It's time you
got down to brass tacks. If you're going to be a northern woman, you've
got to be content with the kind of men that grow up here. Up here, the
best man wins, the hardest, strongest man. That's why I'm going to win
you."

Because he was secretly attacking her dreams, the dearest part of her
being, she felt the first surge of rising anger.

"You're not the best man here," she told him, straightening. "If you
were, I'd move out. You may be the strongest in your body, and certainly
the hardest, going further to get your own way--but a real man would
break you in two in a minute. Some one more than a brute to beat horses
to death and jump claims. I'm going in now. Please take away your hand."

"One thing more. This is the North. We do things in a man's way up
here--not a story-book way. The strong man gets what he wants--and I
want you. And I'll get you, too--just like I get this kiss."

He suddenly snatched her toward him. A powerful man; she was wholly
helpless in his grasp. His arms went about her and he pressed his lips
to hers--three times. Then he released her, his eyes glowing like red
coals.

But she was a northern girl, trained to self-defense. As he freed her,
her strong, slender arm swung out and up--with really startling force.
Her half-closed hand struck with a sharp, drawing motion across his
lips, a blow that extinguished his laughter as the wind extinguishes a
match-blaze.

"You little--devil!"

The tempest of the forest was upon her, and her eyes blazed as she
hastened around the house.




V

Jeffery Neilson and Chan Heminway were already in session when Ray
Brent, his face flushed and his eyes still angry and red, joined them.
Neilson was a tall, gaunt man, well past fifty--from his manner
evidently the leader of the three. He had heavy, grizzled brows and
rather quiet eyes, a man of deep passions and great resolve. Yet his
lean face had nothing of the wickedness of Brent's. There had evidently
been some gentling, redeeming influence in his life, and although it was
not in the ascendancy, it had softened his smile and the hard lines
about his lips. Notorious as he was through the northern provinces he
was infinitely to be preferred to Chan Heminway, who sat at his left
who, a weaker man than either Ray or Neilson, was simply a tool in the
latter's hand,--a smashing sledge or a cruel blade as his master wished.
He was vicious without strength, brutal without self-control. Locks of
his blond hair, unkempt, dropped over his low forehead into his eyes.

"Where's Beatrice?" Neilson asked at once. "I thought I heard her
voice."

Ray searched for a reply, and in the silence all three heard the girl's
tread as she went around the house. "She's going in the back door.
Likely she didn't want to disturb us."

Ray looked up to find Neilson's eyes firmly fixed upon his face. Try
hard as he might he couldn't restrain a surge of color in his cheeks.
"Yes, and what's the rest of it?" Neilson asked.

"Nothing--I know of."

"You've got some white marks on your cheeks--where it ain't red. The kid
can slap, can't she--"

Ray flushed deeper, but the lines of Neilson's face began to deepen and
draw. Then his voice broke in a great, hearty chuckle. He had evidently
tried to restrain it--but it got away from him at last. No man could
look at him, his twinkling eyes and his joyous face, and doubt but that
this soft-eyed, strong-handed daughter of his was the joy and pride of
his life. He had heard the ringing slap through the ramshackle walls of
the house, and for all that he favored Ray as his daughter's suitor, the
independence and spirit behind the action had delighted him to the core.

But Ray's sense of humor did not run along these lines. The first danger
signal of rising anger leaped like a little, hot spark into his eyes.
Many times before Ray had been obliged to curb his wrath against
Neilson: to-night he found it more difficult than ever. The time would
come, he felt, when he would no longer be obliged to submit to Neilson's
dictation. Sometime the situation would be reversed; he would be leader
instead of underling, taking the lion's share of the profit of their
enterprises instead of the left-overs, and when that time came he would
not be obliged to endure Neilson's jests in silence. Neilson himself, as
he eyed the stiffening figure, had no realization of Ray's true attitude
toward him. He thought him a willing helper, a loyal partner, and he
would not have sat with such content in his chair if he could have
beheld the smoldering fires of jealousy and ambition in the other's
breasts The time would come when Ray would assert himself, he
thought--when Beatrice was safe in his hands.

"It may seem like a joke to you, but it doesn't to me," he answered
shortly. Nor was he able to keep his anger entirely from his voice.
"Everything that girl does you think is perfect. Instead of encouraging
her in her meanness you ought to help me out." His tones harshened, and
he lost the fine edge of his self-control. "I've stood enough nonsense
from that little--"

Seemingly, Neilson made no perceptible movement in his chair. What
change there was showed merely in the lines of his face, and
particularly in the light that dwelt in the gray, straightforward eyes.
"Don't finish it," he ordered simply.

For an instant eyes met eyes in bitter hatred--and Chan Heminway began
to wonder just where he would seek cover in case matters got to a
shooting stage. But Ray's gaze broke before that of his leader. "I'm not
going to say anything I shouldn't," he protested sullenly. "But this
doesn't look like you're helping out my case any. You told me you'd do
everything you could for me. You even went so far as to say you'd take
matters in your own hands--"

"And I will, in reason. I'm keeping away the rest of the boys so you can
have a chance. But if you think I'm going to tie her up to anybody
against her will, you're barking up the wrong tree. She's my daughter,
and her happiness happens to be my first object." Then his voice
changed, good-humored again. "But cool down, boy--wait till you hear
everything I've got to tell you, and you'll feel better. Of course, you
know what it's about--"

"I suppose--Hiram Melville's claim."

"That's it. Of course we don't know that he had a claim--but he had a
pocket full of the most beautiful nuggets you ever want to see. No one
knows that fact but me--I saw 'em by accident--and I got 'em now. You
know he's always had an idea that the Yuga country was worth
prospecting, but we always laughed at him. Of course it is a pocket
country; but it's my opinion he found a pocket that would make many a
placer look sick, before he died."

"But he might have got the nuggets somewheres else--"

"Hold your horses. Where would he get 'em? There's something else
suspicious too. He wrote a letter, the day before he died, and addressed
it to Ezra Melville, somewhere in Oregon. He must just about got it by
now--maybe a few days ago. He had the clerk mail it for him, and got him
to witness it, saying it was his will--and what did that old hound have
to will except a mine? Next day he wrote another letter somewhere
too--but I didn't find out who it was to. If I'd had any gumption I'd
got ahold of 'em both. The point is--I'm convinced it's worth a trip, at
least."

"I should say it was worth a trip," Ray agreed. "And a fast one, too.
There might be some competition--"

"There won't be a rush, if that's what you mean. Everybody knows it's a
pocket country, and the men in this town wouldn't any more get excited
about the Yuga River--"

"True enough--but that Ezra Melville will be showin' up one of these
days. We want to be settin' pretty when he comes."

"You've got the idea. It ought to be the easiest job we ever did. It's
my idea he had his claim all laid out, monuments up and everything, and
was on his way down to Bradleyburg to record it when he died. He just
went out before he could make the rest of the trip. All we'll have to do
is go up there, locate in his cabin, and sit tight."

"Wait just a second." Ray was lost in thought. "There's an old cabin up
that way somewhere--along that still place--on the river. It was a
trapping cabin belonging to old Bill Foulks."

"That's true enough--but it likely ain't near his mine. Boys, it's a
clean, open-and-shut job--with absolutely nothing to interfere. If his
brother does come up, he'll find us in possession--and nothing to do but
go back. So to-morrow we'll load up and pack horses and light out."

"Up Poor Man creek, through Spruce Pass--"

"Sure. Then over to the Yuga. Old Hiram was hunting down some kind of a
scent in the vicinity of that old cabin you speak of, last heard of him.
And I wouldn't be surprised, on second thought, if it wasn't his base of
operations."

"All easy enough," Ray agreed. He paused, and a queer, speculative look
came into his wild-beast's eyes. "But what I don't see--how you can
figure all this is going to help me out with Beatrice."

Jeffery Neilson turned in his chair. "You can't, eh? You need
spectacles. Just think a minute--say you had fifty or sixty thousand all
your own--to spend on a wife and buy her clothes and automobiles. Don't
you think that would make you more attractive to the feminine eye?"

At first Ray made no apparent answer. He merely sat staring ahead. But
plainly the words had wakened riot in his imagination. Such a sum meant
_wealth_, the power his ambitious nature had always craved, idleness and
the gratification of all his lusts. He was no stranger to greed, this
degenerate son of the North. "It'd help some," he admitted in a low
voice. "But what makes you think it would be worth that much?"

"Because old Hiram talked a little, half-delirious, before he died. 'A
quarter of a million,' he kept saying. 'Right there in sight--a quarter
of a million.' If he really found that much stowed away in the rocks,
that's fifty or sixty apiece for you and Chan."

Ray's mind worked swiftly. Sixty thousand apiece--and that left one
hundred and thirty thousand for their leader's portion. The old rage and
jealousy that had preyed upon his mind so long swept over him, more
compelling than ever. "Go on," he urged. "What's the rest of it?"

"The second thing is--we'll need some one to cook, and look after us,
when we get up there. Who should it be but Beatrice? She wouldn't want
to stay here; you know how she loves the woods. And if you know anything
about girls, you know that nothing counts like having 'em alone. There
wouldn't be any of the other boys up there to trouble you. You'd have a
clear field."

Ray's dark eyes shone. "It'd help some," he admitted. "That means--hunt
up an extra horse for her to-morrow."

"No. I don't intend she should come up now. Not till we're settled."

"Why not?"

"Think a minute, and you'll see why not. You know how she regards this
business of jumping claims. She's dead against it if any one could
be--bless her heart!"

"Don't go getting sentimental, Neilson."

"And don't let that mouth of yours get you into trouble, either." Once
more their eyes locked: once more Ray looked away. "I hope she'll always
stay that way, too. As I say, she's dead against it, and she's been a
little suspicious ever since that Jenkins deal. Besides, it wouldn't be
any pleasure for her until we find a claim and get settled. When she
comes up we'll be established in a couple of cabins--one for her and me
and one for you two--and she won't know but that we made the original
find."

"How will she know just where to find us?"

"We're bound to be somewhere near that old cabin on the Yuga. We'll set
a date for her to come, and I can meet her there."

It was, Ray was forced to admit, a highly commendable scheme. He sat
back, contemplating all its phases. "It's slick enough," he agreed. "It
ought to do the trick."

But if he had known the girl's thoughts, as she sat alone in the back
part of the house, he wouldn't have felt so confident. She was watching
the moon over the spruce forest, and she was thinking, with repugnance
in her heart, of the indignity to which she had been subjected at her
father's door. Yet the kisses Ray had forced on her were no worse than
his blasphemy of her dreams. The spirit of romance was abroad
to-night--in the enchantment of the moon--and she was wistful and
imaginative as never before. This was just the normal expression of her
starved girlhood--the same childlike wistfulness with which a Cinderella
might long for her prince--just as natural and as wholesome and as much
a part of youth as laughter and happiness.

"I won't believe him, I won't believe him," she told herself. Her
thought turned to other channels, and her heart spoke its wish.
"Wherever he is--sometime he'll come to me."




VI

At a little town at the end of steel Ben and Ezram ended the first lap
of their journey. They had had good traveling these past days. Steadily
they had gone north, through the tilled lands of Northern Washington,
through the fertile valleys of lower British Columbia, traversing great
mountain ranges and penetrating gloomy forests, and now had come to the
bank of a north-flowing river,--a veritable flood and one of the monarch
rivers of the North. Every hour their companionship had been more close
and their hopes higher. Every waking moment Ben had been swept with
thankfulness for the chance that had come to him.

They had worked for their meals and passage--hard, manual toil--but it
had seemed only play to them both. Sometimes they mended fence,
sometimes helped at farm labor, and one gala morning, with entire good
will and cheer, they beat into cleanliness every carpet in a widow's
cottage. And the sign of the outcast was fading from Ben's flesh.

The change was marked in his face. His eye seemed more clear and
steadfast, his lips more firm, the lines of his face were not so hard
and deep. His fellows of the underworld would have scarcely known him
now,--his lips and chin darkening with beard and this new air of
self-respect upon him. Perhaps they had forgotten him, but it was no
less than he had done to them. The prison walls seemed already as if
they hadn't been true. He loved every minute of the journey, freshness
instead of filth, freedom instead of confinement, fragrant fields and
blossoming flowers. Ever the stars and the moon, remembered of old,
yielded him a peace and happiness beyond his power to tell. And his
gratitude to Ezram grew apace.

Besides self-confidence and the constant, slow unraveling of his memory
problems, each day yielded rich gifts: no less than added trust in each
other. Always they found each other steadfast, utterly to be relied
upon. Ezram never regretted for a moment his offer to Ben. The young man
had seemingly developed under his eye and was a real aid to him in all
the problems of the journey.

As the days passed, the whole tone and key of the land had seemed to
change. They were full in the mountains now, snow gleaming on the
heights, forests blue-black on the slopes; and Ben's response was a
growing excitement that at first he could not analyze. The air was
sweeter, more bracing, and sometimes he discerned a fleeting, delicate
odor that drew him up short in his talk and held him entranced. There
was a sparkle and stir in the air, unknown in the cities he had left;
and to breathe it deeply thrilled him with an unexplainable happiness.

Some way it was all familiar, all dear to him as if it had once been
close to his life. The sparkle in the air was not new, only recalled:
long and long ago he had wakened to find just such a delicate fragrance
in his nostrils. But the key hadn't come to him yet. His memory pictures
were ever stronger of outline, clearer in his mind's eye, yet they were
still too dim for him to interpret them. In these days Ezram watched him
closely, with a curious, intense interest.

It was no longer pleasant to sleep out in the hay. For the sake of
warmth alone they were obliged to hire their night's lodging at cheap
hotels. Spring was full in the land they had left: it was just
beginning here. The mountains, visible from the village of Saltsville
where they left the railroad, were still swept with snow.

Ben felt that he would have liked to take a day off at this point and
venture with his companion into the high, wooded hills that fronted the
town, but he agreed with Ezram that they could not spare the time. They
swiftly made preparations for their journey down-river. A canoe was
bought for a reasonable sum--they were told they had a good chance of
selling it again when they left the river near Snowy Gulch--and at the
general store they bought an axe, rudimentary fishing tackle, tobacco,
blankets, and all manner of simpler provisions, such as flour, rice,
bacon, coffee, canned milk, and sugar. And for a ridiculously small sum
which he mysteriously produced from the pocket of his faded jeans Ezram
bought a second-hand rifle--an ancient gun of large caliber but of
enduring quality--and a box of shells to match.

"Old Hiram left me a gun, but we'll each need one," Ezram explained.
"And they tell me there's a chance to pick up game, like as not, goin'
down the river."

They would have need of good canoe-craft before the journey's end, the
villagers told them. Ezram had not boasted of any such ability, and at
first Ben regarded the plan with considerable misgivings. And it was
with the most profound amazement that, when they pushed off, he saw
Ezram deliberately seat himself in the bow, leaving the more important
place to his young companion.

"Good heavens, I'll capsize you in a minute," Ben said. "How do you dare
risk it----"

"Push off and stop botherin' me," Ezram answered. "There's a paddle--go
ahead and shoot 'er."

The waters caught the canoe, speeding it downstream; and in
apprehension of immediate disaster Ben seized the paddle. Swiftly he
thrust it into the streaming water at his side.

He was not further aware of Ezram's searching gaze. He did not know of
the old man's delight at the entire incident--first the anxious, hurried
stroke of the paddle, then the movement of Ben's long fingers as he
caught a new hold, finally the white flame of exultation that came into
his face. For himself, Ben instantly knew that this was his own sphere.
He suddenly found himself an absolute master of his craft: at the touch
of the paddle controlling it as a master mechanic controls a delicate
machine.

The white waters were no more to be feared. He found that he knew, as if
by instinct, every trick of the riverman's trade,--the slow stroke, the
fast stroke, the best stroke for a long day's sail, the little half-turn
in his hands that put the blade on edge in the water and gave him the
finest control. It was all so familiar, so unspeakably dear to him.
Clear, bright memories hovered close to him, almost within his grasp.

"Do you remember when you shot the Athabaska Rapids?" Ezram had asked.
It was all clear enough. In that life that was forgotten he had
evidently lived much in a canoe, knowing every detail of river life.
Perhaps he had been a master canoeist; at least he felt a strange,
surging sense of self-confidence and power. He understood, now, why the
image of rushing waters had come so often into his dreams. Dim pictures
of river scenes--cataracts white with foam, rapids with thunderous
voices, perilous eddies, and then, just beyond, glassy waters where the
shadow of the canoe was unbroken in the blue depths--streamed through
his mind, but they were not yet bright enough for him to seize and hold.

He enjoyed the first few hours of paddling, but in the long, warm
afternoon came indolence, and they were both willing to glide with the
current and watch the ever-changing vista of the shore. For the first
time since they had come into the real North, Ben found opportunity to
observe and study the country.

Already they were out of sight of the last vestige of a habitation; and
the evergreen forests pushed down to the water's edge. From the middle
of the stream the woods appeared only as a dark wall, but this was
immeasurably fascinating to Ben. It suggested mystery, adventure; yet
its deeper appeal, the thing that stirred him and thrilled him to the
quick, he could neither understand nor analyze.

Sometimes a little clump of trees stood apart, and from their shape he
identified them as the incomparable spruce, perhaps the most
distinguished and beautiful of all the evergreens. He marked their great
height, their slender forms, their dark foliage that ever seemed to be
silvered with frost; and they seemed to him to answer, to the fullest
extent, some vague expectation of which he had scarcely been aware.

The wild life of the river filled him with speechless delight. Sometimes
he saw the waters break and gleam at the leap of a mighty salmon--the
king fish of the North on his spring rush to the headwaters where he
would spawn and die--and often the canoe sent flocks of waterfowl into
flight. Ben dimly felt that on the tree-clad shores larger, more
glorious living creatures were standing, hiding, watching the canoe
glide past. The thought thrilled him.

Late afternoon, and they worked closer to the shore. They were watching
for a place to land. But because the shadows of twilight were already
falling, the forest itself was hardly more vivid to their eyes. Once it
seemed to Ben that he saw the underbrush move and waver at the water's
edge, and his heart leaped; but whatever stirred kept itself concealed.
And now, in the gray of twilight, Ezram saw the place to land.

It was a small lagoon into which a creek emptied, and beyond was an open
meadow, found so often and so unexpectedly in the North woods. Swiftly
Ben turned the canoe into shore.

Ezram climbed out and made fast, and so busy was he with his work that
he did not glance at Ben, otherwise he might have beheld a phenomenon
that would have been of keen interest to the alienist, Forest. His young
charge had suddenly grown quite pale. Ben himself was neither aware of
this nor of the fact that his heart was hammering wildly in his breast
and his blood racing, like wild rivers, through his veins: he was only
thrilled and held by a sense of vast, impending developments. Every
nerve tingled and thrilled, and why he did not know.

Ezram began to unload; but now, his blue eyes shining, he began a covert
watch of his young companion. He saw the man from prison suddenly catch
his breath in inexpressible awe and his eye kindle with a light of
unknown source. A great question was shaping itself in Ben's mind, but
as yet he could not find the answer.

All at once Ben knew this place. Here was nothing strange or new: it was
all as he had known it would be in his inmost heart. All of it spoke to
him with familiar voice, seemingly to welcome him as a son is welcomed
after long absence. There was nothing here that had not been known and
beloved of old. Vivid memories, bright as lightning, swept through him.

He had always known this wholesome, sweet breath that swept into his
face. It was merely that of the outdoors, the open places that were his
own haunts. It was wholly fitting and true that the silence should lie
over the dark spruce that ringed about him, a silence that, in its
infinite harmony with some queer mood of silence in his own heart, was
more moving than any voice. All was as he had secretly known: the hushed
tree aisles, the gray radiance--soft as a hand upon the brow--of the
afterglow; the all-pervading health and peace of the wilderness. Except
for an old and trusted companion, he was alone with it all, and that too
was as it should be. Just he and the forest, his companion and the
gliding river.

He didn't try to understand, at first, the joy and the wonder that
thrilled him, nor could he speak aloud the thoughts that came to him.
Ravished and mystified, he walked softly to the dark, still edge of the
forest, penetrated it a distance, then sat down to wait.

For the first time in years, it seemed to him, he was at peace. A
strange sense of self-realization--lost to him in his years of
exile--climbed like fire through him; and with it the return of a lost
virility, a supreme vigor tingling each little nerve; a sense of
strength and power that was almost blinding.

He sat still. He saw the twilight descending, ever heavier, over the
forest. The sharp edges of the individual trees faded and blended, the
trunks blurred. He turned one fleeting glance of infinite, inexpressible
gratitude toward Ezram--the man who had brought him here and who now was
busily engaged in unpacking the canoe and making camp--then looked back
to his forests. The wind brought the wood smells,--spruce and moldering
earth and a thousand more no man could name. The great, watchful,
brooding spirit of the forest went in to him.

All at once his heart seemed to pause in his breast. He was
listening,--for what he did not know. His eyes strained into the
shadows. Brush wavered, a twig cracked with a miniature explosion. And
then two figures emerged into the beaver meadow opposite him.

They were only creatures of the wild, an old cow moose, black and
ungainly, and her long-legged, awkward calf. Yet they supplied the
detail that was missing. They were the one thing needed to complete the
picture--the crowning touch that revealed this land as it was--the
virgin wilderness where the creatures of the wild still held full sway.

But it did more. All at once a great clarity seemed to take possession
of his mind. Here, in these dark forests, were the _stimuli_ of which
Forest, the alienist, had spoken; and his brain seemed to leap, as in
one impulse, to the truth. Suddenly he knew the answer to all the
questions and problems that had troubled him so long.

Many times, in the past years, he had seen logs jammed in the water, a
veritable labyrinth that defied dissolution. Suddenly, as if by magic,
the key log would be ejected, and the whole jam would break, shatter
down in one stupendous crash, settle and dissolve, leaving at last only
drift logs floating quietly in the river. Thus it was with the confusion
in his brain. All at once it seemed to dissolve, the tangled skeins
straightened out, the association areas of his mind stirred full into
life once more. As he sat there, pale as the twilight sky, the mists of
amnesia lifted from him. He was cured as if by the touch of a holy man.

No wonder these forests depths were familiar. His boyhood and early
manhood, clear until the vortex of war had engulfed him, had been spent
amid just such surroundings, in just such silences, on the banks of
just such wilderness rivers. The same sky line of dark, heaven-reaching
spruce had fronted him of old. He sprang up, his eyes blazing. "I
remember everything," an inaudible voice spoke within him. Then he
whispered, fervently, to his familiar wilds. "And I have come home."




VII


Everything was as it should be, as he and Ezram made the camp. He
himself cut the boughs for their beds, laid them with his remembered
skill, spread the blankets, and kept the fire blazing while Ezram
cooked; afterwards he knew the indescribable peace of a pipe smoke
beside the glowing coals. He saw the moon come up at last, translating
the spruce forest into a fairy land.

Of course he had remembered the moon. How many times had he watched for
its argent gleam on the sky line, the vivid, detailed silhouette of the
spruce against it; and then its slow-spreading glory through the still,
dark forests! The spires of the trees grew ensilvered, as always;
immense nebulous patches lay between the trunks, shadows stole
mysteriously, phantoms met, lingered, and vanished.

This was his own North! The stir and vigor in the very air told him
that. This was the land he had dreamed of, under the moon; the primeval
forests that had tried him, tested him, staked their cruel might against
him, but yet had blessed him with their infinite beneficence and
hospitality. It was ever somber, yet its dusky beauty stirred him more
than any richness he had seen in bright cities. He knew its every mood:
ecstasy in spring; gentleness in summer; brooding melancholy in the gray
days of fall; remorseless, savage, but unspeakably beautiful in the
winter. He felt his old pity for the spring flowers, blossoming so
hopefully in this gentle season. How soon they would be covered with
many feet of snow!

"It's all come clear again," he told Ezram. And the two men talked over,
quietly and happily, old days at Thunder Lake. He remembered now that
Ezram had always been the most intimate friend of his own family: a spry
old godfather to himself and young sister, a boon companion to his once
successful rival, Ben's father. Ben did not wonder, now, at his own
perplexity when Forest had spoken of "Wolf" Darby. That was his own name
known throughout hundreds of square miles of forest and in dozens of
little river hamlets in an Eastern province. Partly the name was in
token of his skill as a woodsman and frontiersman, partly in recognition
of certain traits that his fellow woodsmen had seen and wondered at in
him. It was not an empty nickname, in his case. It was simply that the
name suited him.

"The boys had reason a-plenty for callin' you that," Ezram told him. "Up
here, as you know, men don't get no complimentary epithets unless they
deserve 'em. Some men, Ben, are like weasels. You've seen 'em. You've
seen human rats, too. As if the souls they carried around with 'em was
the souls of rats. Of course you remember 'Grizzly' Silverdale? Did you
ever see any one who in disposition and looks and walk and everything
reminded you so much of a grizzly bear? I've known men like sheep, and
men with the faithful souls of dogs. You remember when you got in the
big fight in the Le Perray bar?"

"I don't think I'll ever forget it again."

"That's the night the name came on you, to stay. You remember how you'd
drive into one of them, leap away, then tear into another. Like a wolf
for all the world! You was always hard to get into a fight, but you
know as well as I do, and I ain't salvin' you when I say it, that you're
the most terrible, ferocious fighter, forgettin' everything but blood,
that ever paddled a canoe on the Athabaska. Some men, Ben, seem to have
the spirit of the wolf right under their skins, a sort of a wild
instinct that might have come straight down from the stone age, for all
I know. You happen to be one of 'em, the worst I ever saw. Maybe you
don't remember, but you took your bull moose before you was thirteen
years old."

Ben sat dreaming. The Athabaska Rapids was not an empty name to him now.
He remembered the day he had won the canoe race at Lodge Pole. Other
exploits occurred to him,--of brutal, savage brawls in river taverns, of
adventures on the trail, of struggling with wild rivers when his canoe
capsized, of running the great logs down through white waters. It was
his world, these far-stretching wildernesses. And he blessed, with all
the fervency of his heart, the man who had brought him home.

He went to his bed, but sleep did not at once come to him. He lay with
hushed breathing, listening to the little, secret noises, known so well,
of the wilderness night. He heard the wild creatures start forth on
their midnight journeys. Once a lynx mewed at the edge of the forest;
and he laughed aloud when some large creature--probably a moose--grunted
and splashed water in the near-by beaver meadow.

Thus ended the first of a brilliant succession of joyous days,
descending the stream in the daylight hours and camping on the bank at
night. Every day they plunged deeper into the heart of the wilderness,
and every hour Ben felt more at home.

It was only play for him,--to meet and shoot successfully the rapids of
the river. In the long stillnesses he paddled hour upon hour, not only
to make time but to find an outlet for his surging energy. His old-time
woodsman's pleasures were recalled again: shooting waterfowl for their
mess in the still dawns, racing the swimming moose when they ran on him
in the water. One day, fish hungry, he rigged up the elementary fishing
tackle that they had brought from Saltsville and tried for a salmon.

To a long, tough rod cut on the river bank he attached thirty feet of
cheap, white cord, and to the cord he fastened a bright spoon hook--the
spinner that salmon fishers know. He had no leader, no reel, no
delicately balanced salmon rod--and Ezram was full of scorn for the
whole proceeding. And it was certainly true that, by all the rules of
angling, Ben had no chance whatever to get a bite.

The cord was visible in the clear water, and the spoon itself was
scarcely more than twenty feet from the rear of the boat. But this
northern stream was not at all like the famous salmon rivers known to
sportsmen. In years to come, when the lines of communication are better
and tourist hotels are established on its banks, the river may then
begin to conform to the qualifications of a conventional fishing stream,
and then Ben's crude tackle will be unavailing. But at present the
salmon were not so particular. As fishermen came but rarely, the fish
were in countless numbers; and in such a galaxy there were bound to be
few misguided fish that did not know a sportsman's tackle from a dub's.

The joy of angling, once known, dwells in the body until death, and Ben
was a born fisherman. The old delight that can never die crept back to
him the instant he felt the clumsy rod in his hands and the faint throb
of the line through the delicate mechanism of his nerves. And
apparently for no other reason than that the river hordes wished to
welcome him home, almost at once a gigantic bull salmon took his spoon.

Ezram's first knowledge of it was a wild yell that almost startled him
over the side--the same violent outcry that old anglers still can not
restrain when the fish takes hold, even after a lifetime of angling.
When he recovered himself he looked to see Ben kneeling frantically in
the stern, hanging for dear life to his rod and seemingly in grave
danger of being pulled overboard.

No man who has felt that first, overpowering jolt of a striking salmon
can question the rapture of that first moment. The jolt carried through
all the intricacies of the nerves, jarred the soul within the man, and
seemingly registered in the germ plasm itself an impression that could
be recalled, in dreams, ten generations hence. Fortunately the pole
withstood that first, frantic rush, and then things began to happen in
earnest.

The great trout seemed to dance on the surface of the water. He tugged,
he swam in frantic circles, he flopped and darted and sulked and rushed
and leaped. If he hadn't been securely hooked, and if it had not been
for a skill earned in a hundred such battles, Ben would not have held
him a moment.

But the time came at last, after a sublime half-hour, when his steam
began to die. His rushes were less powerful, and often he hung like a
dead weight on the line. Slowly Ben worked him in, not daring to believe
that he was conquering, willing to sell his soul for the privilege of
seeing the great fish safe in the boat. His eyes protruded, perspiration
gleamed on his brow, he talked foolishly and incessantly to Ezram, the
fish, the river-gods, and himself. Ezram, something of an old Isaac
Walton himself, managed the canoe with unusual dexterity and chuckled in
the contagion of Ben's delight. And lo--in a moment more the thing was
done.

"You'd think you never had a rod in your hand before," Ezram commented
in mock disgust. "Such hollerin' and whoopin' I never heard."

Ben grinned widely. "That's fishing--the sport that keeps a man an
amateur all his days--with an amateur's delight." His vivid smile
quivered at his lips and was still. "That's why I love the North; it can
never, never grow old. You're just as excited at the close as at the
beginning. Ezram, old man, it's life!"

Ezram nodded. Perhaps, in the moment's fire, Ben had touched at the
truth. Perhaps _life_, in its fullest sense, is something more than
being born, breathing air, consuming food, and moving the lips in
speech. _Life_ is a thing that wilderness creatures know, realized only
when the blood, leaping red, sweeps away lifeless and palsied tissue and
builds a more sentient structure in its place; invoked by such forces as
adventure and danger and battle and triumph. For the past half-hour Ben
had lived in the fullest sense, and Ezram was a little touched by the
look of unspeakable gratitude with which his young companion regarded
him.

But the journey ended at last. They saw the white peak they had been
told to watch for, and soon after they came to a green bank from which
the forest had been cut away. Softly, rather regretfully, they pushed up
and made landing on the banks of a small stream, tributary to the great
river, that marked the end of the water route.

This stream, Ezram knew, was Poor Man's Creek, the stream of which his
brother had written and which they must ascend to reach Spruce Pass.
Only five miles distant, in a quartering direction from the river, was
Snowy Gulch, the village where they were to secure supplies and, from
Steve Morris, the late Hiram's gun and his pet, Fenris.

For a time, at least, they had left the utter solitudes of the wild. Men
had cut away the forest and had built a crude wagon road to Snowy Gulch.
And before they were fully unpacked they made out the figure of a
middle-aged frontiersman, his back loaded, advancing up the road toward
them.

Both men knew something of the ways of the frontier and turned in
greeting. "Howdy," Ezram began pleasantly.

"Howdy," the stranger replied. "How was goin'?"

"Oh, good enough."

"Come all the way from Saltsville?"

"Yes. Goin' to Snowy Gulch."

"It's only five miles, up this road," the stranger ventured. "I'm goin'
up Saltsville way myself, but I won't have no river to tow me. I've got
to do my own paddlin'. Thank the lord I'm only goin' a small part of the
way."

"You ain't goin' to swim, are you? Where's your boat."

"My pard's got an old craft, and he and I are goin' to pack it out next
trip." The stranger paused, blinking his eyes. "Say, partners--you don't
want to sell your boat, do you?"

Ben started to speak, but the doubtful look on Ezram's face checked him.
"Oh, I don't know," the old man replied, in the discouraging tones of a
born tradesman. In reality the old Shylock's heart was leaping gayly in
his breast. This was almost too good to be true: a purchaser for the
boat in the first hour. "Yet we might," he went on. "We was countin' on
goin' back in it soon."

"I'd just as leave buy it, if you want to sell it. In this jerked-off
town there ain't a fit canoe to be had. Our boat is the worst tub you
ever seen. How much you want for it?"

Ezram stated his figure, and Ben was prone to believe that he had
adopted a highwayman for a buddy. The amount named was nearly twice that
which they had paid. And to his vast amazement the stranger accepted the
offer in his next breath.

"It's worth something to bring it up here, you dub," Ezram informed his
young partner, when the latter accused him of profiteering.

After the sale was made Ezram and the stranger soon got on the intimate
terms that almost invariably follow a mutually satisfactory business
deal, and in the talk that ensued the old man learned a fact of the most
vital importance to their venture. And it came like a bolt from the
blue.

"So you don't know any folks in Snowy Gulch, then?" the stranger had
asked politely. "But you'll get acquainted soon enough--"

"I've got a letter to a feller named Morris," Ezram replied. "And I've
heard of one or two more men too--Jeffery Neilson was one of 'em--"

"You'll find Morris in town all right," the stranger ventured to assure
him. "He lives right next to Neilson's. And--say--what do you know about
this man Neilson?"

"Oh, nothin' at all. Why?"

"If you fellows is prospectin', Jeffery Neilson is a first-class man to
stay away from--and his understrapers, too--Ray Brent and Chan Heminway.
But they're out of town right now. They skinned out all in a bunch a
few weeks ago--and I can't tell you what kind of a scent they got."

Ezram felt cold to the marrow of his bones. He glanced covertly at Ben;
fortunately his partner was busy among the supplies and was not
listening to this conversation. Yet likely enough it was a false alarm!
Doubtless the ugly possibility that occurred to him had no justification
whatever in fact. Nevertheless, he couldn't restrain the question that
was at his lips.

"You don't know where they went, do you?" he asked.

"Not exactly. They took up this creek here a ways, through Spruce Pass,
and over to Yuga River--the country that kind of a crazy old chap named
Hiram Melville, who died here a few weeks ago, has always prospected."

The stranger marvelled that his old listener should have suddenly gone
quite pale.




VIII

Ezram had only a moment's further conversation with his new friend. He
put two or three questions--in a rather curious, hushed voice--and got
his answer. Yes, it was true that the shortest way to go to the Yuga
River was to follow up the creek by which he was now standing. It was
only out of the way to go into Snowy Gulch: they would have to come back
to this very point. And yes, a pedestrian, carrying a light pack, could
make much better time than a horseman with pack animals. The horses
could go no faster than a walk, and the time required to sling packs and
care for the animals cut down the day's march by half.

These things learned, Ezram strolled over to his young partner. And at
that moment he revealed the possession of a talent that neither he nor
any of his friends had ever suspected. The stage had lost an artist of
no mean ability when Ezra Melville had taken to the cattle business.
Outwardly, to the last, little lines about his lips and eyes, he was his
genial, optimistic, droll old self. His eye twinkled, his face beamed in
the gray stubble, his voice was rollicking with the fun of life the same
as ever. And like Pagliacci in his masque there was not the slightest
exterior sign of the fear and despair that chilled his heart.

"What have you and your poor victim been talking about, all this time?"
Ben asked.

"Oh, just a gab-fest--a tat-i-tat as you'd call it. But you know, Ben,
I've got a idea all a-sudden." Ben straightened, lighted his pipe, and
prepared to listen.

"This old boy tells me that we'd save just twelve miles by striking off
front here, instead of goin' into town. Snowy Gulch is six miles, and we
have to come back to this very place. What's the use of goin' into town
at all?"

"Good heavens, Ez? Have you forgotten we've got to get supplies? And
your brother's gun--and his dog?"

"How do you know he's got a dog?"

"He said a pup, didn't he? But it may be an elephant for all I know. Of
course, we've got to go on in."

"Yes, I know--one of us has. But, Ben, it seems to me that one of us
ought to strike off now and figure out the way and sort of get located.
One of us could take a little food and a couple of blankets and make it
through in less than a day. Half a day, almost. Then we could have the
cabin all ready, and everything laid out for to begin work. He could
blaze any dim spots in the trail and save time for the other feller,
comin' with the horses."

"Oh, it would be all right," Ben began rather doubtfully. "I don't see
that much is to be gained by it. But I'll strike off on foot, if you
want me to."

Ezram's mind was flashing with thoughts like lightning, and his answer
was ready. "Ben, if you don't mind, I'll do that," he said. "I can get
along without gazin' at the sky-scrapers of Snowy Gulch, and to tell the
truth, that twelve miles of extra walkin' don't appeal to me one bit.
I'd as soon have you tend to all the things in town."

"But you'd get a ride, if you waited--"

"I hate a horse, anyway--"

"You've surely changed a lot since the war."

"I was thrown off not long ago--and have been leery of the dum things
ever since. I'd walk, sooner than ride, even if I did have a horse. So
you roll me that big Hudson Bay blanket and give me a couple of day's
rations. I'll make a pack for my back that I can't feel. Then you strike
off into town."

Without especial enthusiasm Ben agreed. Ezram gave a great sigh of
satisfaction. He had put through the deal: Ben's secret thought was that
Ezram's curiosity--always a pronounced trait with the old--had mastered
him, and he could not wait longer to explore the mine. Not one glimpse
of the truth as to Ezram's real reason for desiring to push on alone as
much as occurred to him.

Ezram was wholly deliberate. He knew what waited him on arrival at his
brother's claim. Jeffery Neilson and his gang had assembled there, had
already jumped the claim just as his brother had warned him that they
would do; and coolly and quietly he had resolved to face them alone.
They were desperate men, not likely to be driven from the gold by
threats or persuasion only. But there was no law in his life, no precept
in his code, whereby he could subject his young partner to the risk.

It was true that the desire to arrive on the scene at the earliest
possible moment had been a factor in his decision. One of them could
hurry on, unimpeded by the pack animals, and the other must linger to
secure their supplies; and there could really be no question, in Ezram's
mind, which should go and which should stay. He had known perfectly that
if Ben had realized the true need for haste, he would never have
submitted so tamely to Ezram's will. The old man knew Wolf Darby. The
strong dark eyes in the lean, raw-boned face reassured him as to this
knowledge. Ben would go too, if he knew the truth. Likely he would
insist on going alone.

Ezram had decided the whole thing in a flash, realizing that a lone
pedestrian would be practically as effective in dealing with the
usurpers as two horsemen, impeded by the pack animals. If they didn't
shoot to kill at first sight of him Ezram would have time in plenty to
seek refuge in the forest and do a sharpshooter's business that would
fill his old heart with joy. And there really wasn't any question as to
which of the two should go. Their partnership was of long duration;
their comradeship was deep; Ben was young, and Ezram himself was old!

Ezram made his decision entirely casually, and he would have been
surprised out of his wits if any one had expressed wonder of it. He knew
no self-pity or sentimentality, only the knowledge that he did not
desire that his young buddy should be shot full of holes in the first
moment of play. The only fear that had visited him was that Ben might
catch on and not let him go. And now he could scarcely restrain his
triumphant chuckles in Ben's hearing.

He made his pack--a few simple provisions wrapped in his blanket--and a
knife and camp axe swung on his belt. He took his trusted pipe--because
he knew well that he could never acquit himself creditably in a fight
without a few lungfuls of tobacco smoke first--and he also took his
rifle. "You'll be gettin' my brother's gun when you get to Snowy Gulch,"
he explained, "and I may see game on the way out. And you keep this copy
of the letter." He handed Ben the copy he had made of Hiram's will. "I'm
the worst hand for losin' things you ever seen."

"You're sure you've got the directions straight?"

"Sure.--And I guess that's all."

They said their simple good-bys, shaking hands over a pile of stores.
"I've only got one decent place to keep things safe," Ezra confided,
"and that ain't so all-fired decent, either. When I get any papers that
are extra precious, I always stick 'em down the leg of these high old
boots, between the sock and the leather. But it's too much work to take
the boot off now, so you keep the letter."

"I suppose you've got a million-dollar bank note hidden down there now,"
Ben remarked.

"No, not a cent. Just the same, if ever I get shuffled off all of a
sudden--rollin' down one of these mountains, say--I want you to look
there mighty careful. There may be a document or two of
importance--letter to my old home, and all that."

"I won't forget," Ben promised.

"See that you don't." They shook hands again, lightly and happily. "So
good-by, son, and--'_take keer of yerself_!'"

The old man turned away, and soon his withered figure vanished into the
thickets farther up the river. He was following a fairly well-worn moose
trail, and he went swiftly. Soon he was out of hearing of the sound of
the great river.

Then the little woods people--marten and ermine and rodent and such
other small forest creatures that--who can say?--might watch with
exceeding interest the travelers on the trails, could have thought that
old Ezram was already fatigued. He sat down beside a tree and drew a
soiled sheet of paper from his pocket. Searching further he found then
the stub of a pencil. Then he wrote.

Having written he unlaced his boot on the right foot, folded the paper,
and thrust it into the bootleg. Then, relacing the shoe, he arose and
journeyed blithely on.




IX

On arriving in Snowy Gulch, Ben's first efforts were to inquire in
regard to horses. Both pack and saddle animals, he learned, were to be
hired of Sandy McClurg, the owner of the general store and leading
citizen of the village; and at once he made his way to confer with him.

"Most of my mustangs are rented out," the merchant informed him when
they met in the rear of the general store, "but if you can get along
with three, I guess I can fix you up. You can pack two of 'em, and ride
the third."

"Good enough," Ben agreed. "And after I once get in, I'd like to turn
back two of them, and maybe all three--to save the hire and the bother
of taking care of them. I suppose, after the fashion of cayuses, they'll
leg it right home."

"Just a little faster than a dog. Horses don't much care to grub their
food out of them spruce forests. They're good plugs, so of course I
don't want to rent 'em to any one who'll abuse 'em, or take 'em on too
hard trips. Where are you heading, if the question's fair?"

"Through Spruce Pass and down into the Yuga River."

"Prospecting, eh? There's been quite a movement down that way lately,
considering it never was anything but a pocket country. By starting
early you can make it through in a day. And you said your name was--"

"Darby. Ben Darby."

The merchant opened his eyes. "Not the Ben Darby that took all the
prizes at the meet at Lodge Pole--"

Ben's rugged face lit with the brilliancy of his smile. "The same
Darby," he admitted.

"Well, well! I hope you'll excuse them remarks about abusing the horses.
If I had known who you was, 'Wolf' Darby, I'd have known you knew how to
take care of cayuses. Take 'em for as long as you want, or where you
want. And when did you say you was going?"

"First thing to-morrow."

"Well, you're pretty likely to have companionship on the road, too.
There is another party that is going up that way either to-morrow or the
day after. Pretty lucky for you."

"I'm glad of it, if he isn't a tenderfoot. That must be a pretty thickly
settled region--where I'm heading."

"On the contrary, there's only three human beings in the whole
district--and there's a thousand of square miles back of it without even
one. These three are some men that went up that way prospecting some
time ago, and this other party will make four." He paused, smiling.
"Yes, I think you will enjoy this trip to-morrow, after you see who it
is. I'd enjoy it, and I'm thirty years older than you are."

Ben's thought was elsewhere, and he only half heard. "All right--I'll be
here before dawn to-morrow and get the horses. And now will you tell
me--where Steve Morris lives? I've got some business with him."

"Right up the street--clear to the end of the row." McClurg's humor had
quite engulfed him by now, and he chuckled again. "And if I was you,
I'd stop in the door just this side--and get acquainted with your fellow
traveler."

"What's his name?" Ben asked.

"The party is named Neilson."

Unfortunately the name had no mental associations for Ben. It wakened no
interest or stirred no memories. He had read the letter the copy of
which he carried but once, and evidently the name of the man Ezram had
been warned against had made no lasting impression on Ben's mind.

"All right. Maybe I'll look him up."

Ben turned, then made his way up the long, straggly row of unpainted
shacks that marked the village street. A few moments later he was
standing in the Morris home, facing the one friend that Hiram Melville
had possessed on earth.

Ben stated his case simply. He was the partner of Hiram's brother, he
said, and he had been designated to take care of Fenris and such other
belongings as Hiram had left. Morris studied his face with the quiet,
far-seeing eyes of a woodsman.

"You've got means of identification?" he asked.

Ben realized with something of a shock that he had none at all. The
letter he carried was merely a copy without Hiram's signature; besides,
he had no desire to reveal its contents. For an instant he was
considerably embarrassed. But Morris smiled quietly.

"I guess I won't ask you for any," he said. "Hiram didn't leave
anything, far as I know, except his old gun and his pet. Lord knows, I'd
let anybody take that pet of his that's fool enough to say he's got any
claim to him, and you can be sure I ain't going to dispute his claim."

"Fenris, then, is,--something of a problem?"

"The worst I ever had. His old gun is a good enough weapon, but I'm
willing to trust you with it to get rid of Fenris. If you don't turn out
to be the right man, I'll dig up for the gun--and feel lucky at that. I
won't be able to furnish another Fenris, though, and I guess nobody'll
be sorry. And if I was you--I'd take him out in a nice quiet place and
shoot him."

He turned, with the intention of securing the gun from an inner room. He
did not even reach the door. It was as if both of them were struck
motionless, frozen in odd, fixed attitudes, by a shrill scream for help
that penetrated like a bullet the thin walls of the house.

Instinctively both of them recognized it, unmistakably, as the piercing
cry of a woman in great distress and terror. It rose surprisingly high,
hovered a ghastly instant, and then was almost drowned out and
obliterated by another sound, such a sound as left Ben only wondering
and appalled.

The sound was in the range between a growl and a bay, instantly
identifying itself as the utterance of an animal, rather than a human
being. And it was savage and ferocious simply beyond power of words to
tell. Ben's first thought was of some enormous, vicious dog, and yet his
wood's sense told him that the utterance was not that of a dog. Rather
it contained that incredible fierceness and savagery that marks the
killing cries of the creatures of the wild.

He heard it even as he leaped through the door in answer to the scream
for aid. His muscles gathered with that mysterious power that had always
sustained him in his moments of crisis. He took the steps in one leap,
Morris immediately behind him.

"Fenris is loose," he heard the man say. "He'll kill some one----!"

Ben could still hear the savage cries of the animal, seemingly from
just behind the adjoining house. A girl's terrified voice still called
for help. And deeply appalled by the sounds, Ben wished that the rifle,
such a weapon as had been his trust since early boyhood, was ready and
loaded in his hands.

He raced about the house; and at once the scene, in every vivid detail,
was revealed to him. Pressed back against the wall of a little woodshed
that stood behind her house a girl stood at bay,--a dark-eyed girl whose
beautiful face was drawn and stark-white with horror. She was screaming
for aid, her fascinated gaze held by a gray-black, houndlike creature
that crouched, snarling, twenty yards distant.

Evidently the creature was stealing toward her in stealthy advance more
like a stalking cat than a frenzied hound. Nor was this creature a
hound, in spite of the similarity of outline. Such fearful, lurid
surface-lights as all of them saw in its fierce eyes are not
characteristic of the soft, brown orbs of the dog, ancient friend to
man, but are ever the mark of the wild beast of the forest. The fangs
were bared, gleaming in foam, the hair stood erect on the powerful
shoulders; and instantly Ben recognized its breed. It was a magnificent
specimen of that huge, gaunt runner of the forests, the Northern wolf.
Evidently from the black shades of his fur he was partly of the Siberian
breed of wolves that beforetime have migrated down on the North American
side of Bering Sea.

A chain was attached to the animal's collar, and this in turn to a stake
that had been freshly pulled from the ground. This beast was
Fenris,--the woods creature that old Hiram Melville had raised from
cubdom.

There could be no doubt as to the reality of the girl's peril. The
animal was insane with the hunting madness, and he was plainly stalking
her, just as his fierce mother might have stalked a fawn, across the
young grass. Already he was almost near enough to leap, and the girl's
young, strong body could be no defense against the hundred and fifty
pounds of wire sinew and lightning muscle that constituted the wolf. The
bared fangs need flash but once for such game as this. And yet, after
the first, startled glance, Ben Darby felt himself complete master of
the situation.

No man could tell him why. No fact of his life would have been harder to
explain, no impulse in all his days had had a more inscrutable origin.
The realization seemed to spring from some cool, sequestered knowledge
hidden deep in his spirit. He knew, in one breathless instant, that he
was the master--and that the girl was safe.

He seemed to know, again, that he had found his ordained sphere. He knew
this breed,--this savage, blood-mad, fierce-eyed creature that turned,
snarling, at his approach. He had something in common with the breed,
knowing their blood-lusts and their mighty moods; and dim, dreamlike
memory reminded him that he had mastered them in a long war that went
down to the roots of time. Fenris was only a fellow wilderness creature,
a pack brother of the dark forests, and he had no further cause for
fear.

"Fenris!" he ordered sharply. "Come here!" His voice was commanding and
clear above the animal's snarls.

There followed a curious, long instant of utter silence and infinite
suspense. The girl's scream died on her lips: the wolf stood tense,
wholly motionless. Morris, who had drawn his knife and had prepared to
leap with magnificent daring upon the wolf, turned with widening eyes,
instinctively aware of impending miracle. Ben's eyes met those of the
wolf, commanding and unafraid.

"Down, Fenris," Ben said again. "Down!"

Then slowly, steadily, Ben moved toward him. Watching unbelieving,
Morris saw the fierce eyes begin to lose their fire. The stiff hair on
the shoulders fell into place, tense muscle relaxed. He saw in wonder
that the animal was trembling all over.

Ben stood beside him now, his hand reaching. "Down, down," he cautioned
quietly. Suddenly the wolf crouched, cowering, at his feet.




X

Ben straightened to find himself under a wondering scrutiny by both
Morris and the girl. "Good Lord, Darby!" the former exclaimed. "How did
you do it--"

Now that the suspense was over, Ben himself stood smiling, quite at
ease. "Can't say just how. I just felt that I could--I've always been
able to handle animals. He's tame, anyway."

"Tame, is he? You ought to have had to care for him the last few weeks,
and you'd think tame. Not once have I dared go in reach of his rope. And
there he is, crouched at your feet! I was always dreading he'd get
away--" Morris paused, evidently remembering the girl. "Beatrice, are
you hurt?"

The girl moved toward them. "No. He didn't touch me. But you came just
in time--" The girl's voice wavered; and Ben stepped to her side. "I'm
all right now--"

"But you'd better sit down," Ben advised quietly. "It was enough to
scare any one to death--"

"Any one--but you--" the girl replied, her voice still unsteady. But she
paused when she saw the warm color spread over Ben's rugged, brown face.
And his embarrassment was real. Naturally shy and unassuming, such
effusive praise as this always disturbed him--just as it would have
embarrassed any really masculine man alive. Women, more extravagant in
speech and loving flattery with a higher ardor, would have found it hard
to believe how really distressed he was; but Morris, an outdoor man to
the core, understood completely. Besides, Ben knew that the praise was
not deserved. Excessive bravery had played no part in the scene of a
moment before. He had been brave just as far as Morris was brave,
leaping freely in response to a call for help: the same degree of
bravery that can be counted on in most men, over the face of the earth.
Bravery does not lie alone in facing danger: there must also be the
consciousness of danger, the conquest of fear. In this case Ben had felt
no fear. He knew with a sure, true knowledge that he was master of the
wolf. He knew the wolf's response to his words before ever he spoke. And
now all the words in the language could not convey to these others
whence that knowledge had come.

He vaguely realized that this had always been some way part of his
destiny,--the imposition of his will over the beasts of the forest. He
had never tried to puzzle out why, knowing that such trial would be
unavailing. He had instinctively understood such creatures as these.
To-day he felt that he knew the wild, fierce heart beating in the lean
breast as a man might know his brother's heart. The bond between them
was hidden from his sight, something back of him, beyond him, enfolded
within a secret self that was mysterious as a dream, and it reached into
the countless years; yet it was real, an ancient relationship that was
no less intimate because it could not be named. In turn, the wolf had
seemed to know that this tall form was a born habitant of the forests,
even as himself, one that would kill him as unmercifully as he himself
would kill a fall, and whose dark eyes, swept with fire, and whose cool,
strong words must never be disobeyed.

"You never seen this wolf before?" Morris asked him, calling him from
his revery.

"Never."

"Then you must be old Hiram's brother himself, to control him like you
did. Lord, look at him. Crouching at your feet."

Suddenly Ben reached and took the wolf's head between his hands. Slowly
he lifted the savage face till their eyes met. The wolf growled, then,
whimpering, tried to avert its gaze. Then a rough tongue lapped at the
man's hand.

"There's nothing to be afraid of, now," he told the girl.

"He's right, Beatrice," Morris agreed. "He's tamed him. Even I can see
that much. And I never saw anything like it, since the day I was born."

It was true: as far as Ben was concerned, the terrible Fenris--named by
a Swedish trapper, acquaintance of Hiram Melville's, for the dreadful
wolf of Scandinavian legend--was tamed. He had found a new master; Ben
had won a servant and friend whose loyalty would never waver as long as
blood flowed in his veins and breath surged in his lungs. "Lay still,
now, Fenris," he ordered. "Don't get up till I tell you."

It seems to be true that as a rule the lower animals catch the meaning
of but few words; usually the tone of the voice and the gesture that
accompanies it interpret a spoken order in a dog's brain. On this
occasion, it was as if Fenris had read his master's thought. He lay
supine, his eyes intent on Ben's rugged face.

And now, for the first time, Ben found himself regarding Beatrice. He
could scarcely take his eyes from her face. He knew perfectly that he
was staring rudely, but he was without the power to turn his eyes. Her
dark eyes fell under his gaze.

The truth was that Ben's life had been singularly untouched by the
influence of women. Mostly his life had been spent in the unpeopled
forest, away from women of all kinds; and such creatures as had admired
him in Seattle's underworld had never got close to him. He had had many
dreams; but some way it had never been credible to him that he should
ever know womanhood as a source of comradeship and happiness. Love and
marriage had always seemed infinitely apart from his wild, adventurous
life.

In his days in prison he had given up all dream of this happiness; but
now he could begin to dream again. Everything was changed now that he
had come home. The girl's regard for him was friendly, even somewhat
admiring, and the speculations of ripening womanhood were in her eyes.
He returned her gaze with frankest interest and admiration. His senses
had been made sharp in his wilderness life; and his respect for her grew
apace. She was not only innocent and girlish; she had those traits,
innate, that a strong man loves in women: such worth and depth of
character as he wishes bequeathed to his children.

Ben drew a long breath. It was good to be home. He had not only found
his forests, just as he had left them, but now again he was among the
forest people. This girl was of his own breed, not a stranger; her
standards were his; she was a woods girl no less than he was a woodsman.
It is good to be among one's own people, those who can follow through
and understand. She too knew the urge of unbridled vitality and spirit,
common to all the woods children; and life's vivid meaning was her
inheritance, no less than his. Her arms and lips were warm from
fast-flowing blood, her nerves were vibrant and singing like his own. A
virgin still, her eyes were tender with the warmheartedness that is such
a dominant trait of frontier peoples; but what fire, what passion might
burn in them to-morrow! They were dark, lovely eyes, rather somber now
in their earnestness, seeming shadowed by the dark shadows of the spruce
themselves.

No human face had ever given him such an image of beauty as that of this
dark-eyed forest child before him. Yet she was not piquant, demure, like
the girls he had met in France; not stylish and sophisticated like those
of the great cities he had visited since his return. Her garb became
her: simple, not holding the eye in itself but calling attention to the
brunette beauty of her throat and face, the warm redness of her childish
mouth, and the brown, warm color of her arms. She had dark, waving hair,
lovely to touch, wistful red lips. Because he was the woodsman, now and
always, he marked with pleasure that there was no indication of
ill-health or physical weakness about her. Her body was lithe and
strong, with the grace of the wild creatures.

It would be good to know her, and walk beside her in the tree aisles.
All manner of delectable possibilities occurred to him. But all at once
he checked his dreams with an iron will.

There must be no thought of women in his life--for now. He still had his
way to make. A few hours more would find him plunging deeper into the
forest, perhaps never to see her again. He felt an all-pervading sense
of regret.

"There's nothing I can say--to thank you," the girl was murmuring. "I
never saw anything like it; it was just as if the wolf understood every
word you said."

"Old Hiram had him pretty well trained, I suspect." The man's eyes fell
to the shaggy form at his feet. "I'm glad I happened along Miss--"

"Miss Neilson," the girl prompted him. "Beatrice Neilson. I live here."

Neilson! His mind seemed to leap and catch at the name. Just that day he
had heard it from the lips of the merchant. And this was the house next
door where dwelt his fellow traveler for the morrow.

"Then it's your father--or brother--who's going to the Yuga--"

"No," the girl answered doubtfully. "My father is already there. I'm
here alone--"

Then the gray eyes lighted and a smile broke about Ben's lips. Few times
in his life had he smiled in quite this vivid way.

"Then it's you," he exulted, "who is going to be my fellow traveler
to-morrow!"




XI

Ben found, rather as he had expected, that the girl was not at all
embarrassed by the knowledge that they were to have a lonely all-day
ride together. She looked at the matter from a perfectly natural and
wholesome point of view, and she could see nothing in it amiss or
improper. The girls of the frontier rarely feel the need of chaperones.
Their womanhood comes early, and the open places and the
fresh-life-giving air they breathe give them a healthy confidence in
their ability to take care of themselves. Beatrice had a pistol, and she
could shoot it like a man. She loved the solitude of the forest, but she
also knew it was good to hear the sound of a human voice when journeying
the lonely trails.

The frontier had also taught her to judge men. Here foregathered many
types, strong-thewed frontiersmen whose reverence for women surpassed,
perhaps, that of any other class of men on earth, as well as the most
villainous renegades, brutish offspring of the wilds, but she knew them
apart. She realized from the first that this tall woodsman would have
only kindness and respect for her; and that he was to be trusted even in
those lonely forest depths beyond Spruce Pass.

Ben knew the wild beasts of the field better than he knew women, so her
actual reception of the plan was lost to him. He felt that she was not
displeased: in reality the delight and anticipation she felt were beyond
any power of hers to tell. She had been tremendously thrilled and
impressed by his dominance over the wolf. She liked his bright, steady,
friendly eyes; because she was a woods girl her heart leaped at the
sight of his upright, powerful body; but most of all she felt that he
was very near indeed to an ideal come true, a man of terrific strength
and prowess yet not without those traits that women love best in
men,--courage and character and gentleness.

"I'm surely glad I'm going to have a companion," he told her. "I won't
miss Ez--"

But just then remembrance came to him, cutting the word off short. The
letter he carried in his pocket contained certain advice in regard to
silence, and perhaps now was a good time to follow it. There was no need
to tell the people of Snowy Gulch about Ezram and the claim. He
remembered that he had been warned of the danger of claim jumpers.

For an instant his mind seemed to hover at the edge of a more elusive
memory; but he could not quite seize upon it. He only knew that it
concerned the matter in hand, and that it left him vaguely troubled.

"You were saying," the girl prompted him.

"Nothing very important--except how glad I am you are going my way. The
woods are certainly lonesome by yourself. I suppose you'll be willing to
make an early start."

"The earlier the better. I've got a long way to go."

They made their plans, and soon they parted to complete preparations for
the journey. The girl went into her house: Ben took the rifle, and
followed by the wolf, struck down the main street of the village.

It can be said for Ben that he aroused no little conjecture and interest
in the minds of the townspeople, striding through the street with the
savage woods creature following abjectly at his heels. Evidently Ben's
conquest was complete: the animal obeyed his every command as quickly
as an intelligent dog. It was noticeable, however, that even the
hardiest citizens kept an apprehensive eye on the wolf during the course
of any conversation with Ben.

He bought supplies--flour and salt and a few other essentials--simple
tools and utensils such as are carried by prospectors, blankets, shells
for his rifle, and a few, simple, hard-wearing clothes. He went to bed
dead tired, his funds materially reduced. But before dawn he was up,
wholly refreshed; and after a hasty breakfast went to pack his horses
for the trip.

Beatrice came stealing out of the shadows, more than ever suggestive of
some timid creature of the forest, and the three of them saddled and
packed the animals. As daylight broke they started out, down the
shadowed street of the little town.

"The last we'll see of civilization for a long, long time," the girl
reminded him.

The man thrilled deeply. "And I'm glad of it," he answered. "Nothing
ahead but the long trail!"

It was a long trail, that which they followed along Poor Man's creek in
the morning hours. The girl led, by right of having some previous
acquaintance with the trail. The three pack horses walked in file
between, heads low, tails whisking; and Ben, with Fenris at his horse's
hoofs, brought up the rear. Almost at once the spruce forest dropped
over them, the silence and the gloom that Ben had known of old.

This was not like gliding in a boat down-river. The narrow, winding
trail offered a chance for the most intimate study of the wilderness.
From the river the woodsfolk were but an occasional glimpse, the stir of
a thicket on the bank: here they were living, breathing
realities,--vivid pictures perfectly framed by the frosty green of the
spruce.

From the first mile these two riders were the best of companions. They
talked gaily, their voices carrying to each other with entire ease
through the still glades. He found her spirited, warm-hearted,
responding with an eager gladness to every fresh manifestation of the
wild; and in spite of his gay laughter she read something of the dark
moodiness and intensity that were his dominant traits. But he was kind,
too. His attitude toward the Little People met with on the trail--the
little, scurrying folk--was particularly appealing: like that of a
strong man toward children. She saw that he was sympathetic,
instinctively chivalrous; and she got past his barrier of reserve as few
living beings had ever done before.

She saw at once that he was an expert horseman. Riding a half-broken
mustang over the winding, brush-grown moose trails of the North is not
like cantering a thoroughbred along a park avenue, and a certain amount
of difficulty is the rule rather than the exception; but he controlled
his animal as no man of her acquaintance had ever done. He rode a bay
mare that was not, by a long way, the most reliable piece of horseflesh
McClurg owned, yet she gave him the best she had in her, scrambling with
a burst of energy on the pitches, leaping the logs, battling the mires,
and obeying his every wish. The joy of the Northern trails depends
largely upon the service rendered by the horse between one's knees, and
Ben knew it to the full.

Before the first two hours were past Beatrice found herself thrilling
with admiration at Ben's woodcraft. Not only by experience but by
instinct and character he was wholly fitted for life in the waste
places. Just as some artists are born with the soul of music, he had
come to the earth with the Red Gods at his beck and call; the spirit of
the wild things seemed to move in his being. She didn't wholly
understand. She only knew that this man, newly come from "The States,"
riding so straight and talking so gaily behind her, had qualities native
to the forest that were lacking not only in her, but in such men as her
father and Ray Brent. Seemingly he had inherited straight from the
youngest days of the earth those traits by which aboriginal man
conquered the wild.

The first real manifestation of this truth occurred soon after they
reached the bank of Poor Man's creek. All at once he had shouted at her
and told her to stop her horse. She drew up and turned in her saddle,
questioning.

"There's something stirring in the thicket beside you. Don't you hear
him?"

Beatrice had sharp ears, but she strained in vain for the sound that,
forty feet farther distant, Ben heard easily. She shook her head, firmly
believing his imagination had led him astray. But an instant later a
coyote--one of those gray skulkers whose waging cries at twilight every
woodfarer knows--sprang out of his covert and darted away.

Beatrice was amazed. The significance of the incident went further than
the fact of mere good hearing. The coyote, except when he chooses to
wail out his wrongs at the fall of night, is one of the forest shadows
for silence--yet Ben had heard him. It meant nothing less than that
strange quickening of the senses found in but few--master woodsmen--that
is the especial trait and property of the beasts themselves.

Now that they climbed toward Spruce Pass their talk died away, and more
and more they yielded themselves to the hushed mood of the forest. Their
trail was no longer clearly pronounced. It was a wilderness
thoroughfare in the true sense,--a winding path made by the feet of the
great moose journeying from valley to valley.

Wild life became ever more manifest. They saw the grouse, Franklin's
fowl so well beloved by tenderfeet because of their propensity to sit
still under fire and give an unsteady marksman a second shot. Fool hens,
the woodsman called them, and the motley and mark of their weak
mentality were a red badge near the eye. The fat birds perched on the
tree limbs over the trail, relying on their mottled plumage, blending
perfectly with the dull grays and browns of the foliage, to keep them
out of sight. But such wiles did not deceive Ben. And once, in provision
for their noon lunch, a fat cock tumbled through the branches at
Beatrice's pistol shot.

The pine squirrels seemed to be having some sort of a competitive field
meet, and the tricks they did in the trees above the trail filled the
two riders with delight. They sped up and down the trunks; they sprang
from limb to limb; they flicked their tails and turned their heads
around backward and stood on their haunches, all the time chattering in
the greatest excitement. Once a porcupine--stupid, inoffensive old Urson
who carries his fort around on his back--rattled his quills in a near-by
thicket; and once they caught a glimpse of a mule deer on the hillside.
This was rather too cold and hard a country, however, to be beloved by
deer. Mostly they dwelt farther upriver.

All manner of wild creatures, great and small, had left signs on the
trails. There were tracks of otter and mink, those two river hunters
whose skins, on ladies' shoulders, are better known than the animals
themselves. They might be only patches of fur in cities, but they were
living, breathing personages here. Particularly they were personages to
the trout. Ben knew perfectly how the silver fish had learned to dart
with such rapidity in the water. They learned it keeping out of the way
of the otter and the mink.

They saw the tracks of marten--the mink that has gone into the tree tops
to live; the doglike imprints of a coyote at which Fenris whimpered and
scratched in excitement (doubtless wishing to run him down and bite him,
as is the usual reception to the detested coyote by the more important
woods creatures) and once the fresh mud showed that an old grizzly--the
forest monarch, the ancient, savage despot of the woods of which all
foresters, near and far, speak with deep respect--had passed that way
but a few minutes before. Foresters both, the two riders had every
reason to believe that the old gray tyrant was lurking somewhere in the
thickets beside the trail, half in anger, half in curiosity watching
them ride past. And of course the tracks of moose, and of their fellows
of mighty antlers, the caribou, were in profusion.

To all these things Beatrice responded with the joy of a true nature
lover. Her heart thrilled and her eyes were bright; and every new track
was a fresh surprise and delight. But Ben was affected more deeply
still. The response he made had its origin and font in deeply hidden
centers of his spirit; mysterious realms that no introspection could
reveal or words lay bare.

He knew nothing of Beatrice's sense of constant surprise. In his own
heart he had known that all these woodspeople would be waiting for
him--just as they were--and he would have known far greater amazement to
have found some of them gone. And instead of sprightly delight he knew
only an all-pervading sense of comfort, as a man feels upon returning to
his home country, among the people whom he knows and understands.




XII

At the very headquarters of Poor Man's Creek, where the stream had
dwindled to a silver thread between mossy banks, Beatrice and Ben made
their noon camp. They were full in the heart of the wild, by now, and
had mounted to those high levels and park lands beloved by the caribou.
They built a small fire beside the stream and drew water from the deep,
clear pools that lay between cascade and cascade.

Ben Darby slowly became aware that this was one of the happiest hours
of his life. He watched, with absorbed delight, the deft, sure motions
of the girl as she fried the grouse and sliced bread, while Ben
himself tended to the coffee. Already the two were on the friendliest
terms, and since they were to be somewhere in the same region, the
future offered the most pleasing vistas to both of them. When the
horses were rested and Ben's pipe was out, they ventured on. Following
a caribou trail, they ascended a majestic range of mountains--a trail
too steep to ride and which the pack horses accomplished only with
great difficulty--emerging onto a high plateau of open parks and small
clumps of the darkest spruce. It was, of course, the most scenic part
of the journey; and the inclination to talk died speedily from the
lips.

They rode in silence, watching. Both of them were sure that words, no
matter how beautiful and eloquent, could be only a sacrilege. The very
tone of the high ranges is that of silence vast and eternal beyond scope
of thought, and the only sounds that can fittingly shatter that mighty
breathlessness are the great, calamitous phenomena of nature,--the
thunder crashing in the sky and the avalanche on the slope. The forests
they had just left were deeply silent, but the far hush had been
alleviated by the soft noises of wild creatures stirring about their
occupations; perhaps also by the feeling that the thickets were full of
sound pitched just too high or just too low for human ears to hear; but
even this relief was absent here. The high peaks stretched before them,
one after another, until they faded into the horizon,--majestic, aloof,
utterly and grandly silent.

The snow still lay deep over the plateau, packed to the consistency of
ice, and the marmots had not yet emerged to welcome the spring with
their shrill, joyous whistling. From their high place they could see the
hills spread out below them,--fold after fold as of a great cloak,
deeply green, seemingly infinite in expanse, broken only by the blue
glint of the Agnes lakes, like two great twin sapphires hidden in the
forest. But they couldn't make out a single roof top of Snowy Gulch. The
forest had already claimed it utterly.

This was the caribou range; wherever they looked they saw the tracks of
the noble animals in the snow. Later they caught a glimpse of the
creatures themselves, a small herd of perhaps half a dozen swinging
along the snow in their indescribable pacing gait. They were in fitting
surroundings, their color inexpressibly vivid against the snow, and
Ben's heart warmed and thumped in his breast at the sight.

But the trail descended at last into the great valley of the Yuga. Mile
after mile, it seemed to them, they went down, leaving the snow, leaving
the open glades, into the dark, still glens of spruce. At last they
paused on the river bank.

Ben was somewhat amazed at the size of the stream when it emerged below
the rapids. It was, at its present high stage, fully one hundred and
fifty yards across, such a stream as would bear the traffic of commerce
in any inhabited region. They turned down the moose trail that followed
its bank.

But it was not to be that this journey should hold only delight for Ben.
A half-mile down the river he suddenly made a most momentous and
disturbing discovery.

He had stopped his horse to reread the copy of Hiram Melville's letter,
intending to verify his course. In the shadow of the tall, dark
spruce--darkening ever as the light grew less--his eye sped swiftly over
it. His gaze came to rest upon a familiar name.

"Look out for Jeff Neilson and his gang," the letter read. "They seen
some of my dust."

Neilson--no wonder Ben had been perplexed when Beatrice had first spoken
her name. No wonder it had sounded familiar. And the hot beads moistened
his brow when he conceived of all the dreadful possibilities of that
coincidence of names.

Yet because he was a woodsman of nature and instinct, blood and birth,
he retained the most rigid self-control. He made no perceptible start.
At first he did not glance at Beatrice. Slowly he folded the letter and
put it back into his pocket.

"I'm going all right," he announced. He urged his horse forward. His
perfect self-discipline had included his voice: it was deep, but wholly
casual and unshaken. "And how about you, Miss Neilson?"

He pronounced her name distinctly, giving her every chance to correct
him in case he had misunderstood her. But there was no hope here. "I'm
going all right, I know."

"It seems to me we must be heading into about the same country," Ben
went on. "You see, Miss Neilson, I'm going to make my first permanent
camp somewhere along this still stretch; I've had inside dope that
there's big gold possibilities around here."

"It has never been a gold country except for pockets, some of them
remarkably rich," she told him doubtfully, evidently trying not to
discourage him. "But my father has come to the conclusion that it's
really worth prospecting. He's in this same country now."

"I suppose I'll meet him--I'll likely meet him to-night when I take you
to the cabin on the river. You said his name was--"

"Jeffery Neilson."

For all that he was prepared for it, the name was a straight-out body
blow to Ben. He had still dared to hope that this girl was of no blood
kin of the claim-jumper, Jeffery Neilson. The truth was now only too
plain. By the girl's own word he was operating in Hiram Melville's
district and unquestionably had already jumped the claim. His daughter
was joining him now, probably to keep house for him; and for all that
Ben knew, already possessing guilty knowledge of her father's crime.

It was hard to hold the head erect, after that. Already he had builded
much on his friendship with this girl, only to find that she was allied
with the enemy camp. He saw in a flash how unlikely it would be that
Ezram and himself could drive the usurpers out: the claim-jumper is a
difficult problem, even when the original discoverer is living and in
possession, much more so when he is silent in his grave.

Ben had known the breed since boyhood, and he hated them as he hated
coyotes and pack-rats. They lacked the manhood to brave the unknown in
pursuit of the golden fleece; they waited until after years of grinding
labor the strike was made and then pounced down upon the claim like
vultures on the dead. Ben was glad he had not obeyed his impulse to tell
the girl of his true reason for coming to the Yuga. He knew now, with
many foes against him, he could best operate in the dark.

His thought flashed to Ezram. The recovery of the mine had been the old
man's fondest dream, the last hope of his declining years, and this
setback would go hard with him. The blow was ever so much more cruel on
Ezram's account than his own. Ben could picture his downcast face,
trying yet to smile; his sobered eyes that he would try to keep bright.
But there would be certain planning, when they met again over their camp
fire. And there were three of them allied now. Fenris the wolf had come
into his service.

He glanced back at the gray-black creature that followed at the heels of
his horse; and now, at twilight's graying, he saw that a significant and
startling change had come over him. He no longer trotted easily behind
them. He came stalking, almost as if in the hunt, his ears pointing, his
neck hairs bristling, and there were the beginnings of curious, lurid
lightnings in his eyes. There could be but one answer. He had been swept
away in the current of madness that sweeps the forest at the fall of
darkness: the age-old intoxication of the wilderness night. The hunting
hours were at hand. The creatures of claw and fang were coming into
their own. Fenris was shivering all over with those dark wood's passions
that not even the wisest naturalist can fully understand.

The air was tingling and electric, just as Ben recalled it a thousand
nights. Everywhere the hunters were leaving their lairs and starting
forth; grasses moved and brush-clumps rustled; blood was hot and savage
eyes were shot with fire. The mink, with unspeakable savagery, took the
trail of a snow-shoe rabbit beside the river-bed; a lynx with pale,
green, luminous eyes began his stalk of a tree squirrel, and various of
Fenris' fellows--pack brothers except for his own relations with
men--sang a song that was old when the mountains were new as they raced,
black in silhouette against the paling sky, along a snowy ridge.

Ben felt a quickening of his own senses, not knowing why. _His_ blood,
too, spurted inordinately fast through his veins, and his flesh seemed
to creep and tingle. There could be no surer proof of his legitimacy as
a son of the wilderness. The passions that maddened the first men, near
to the beasts they hunted in their ancient forests, returned in all
their fullness. The dusk deepened. The trail dimmed so that the eye had
to strain to follow it.

Complex and weird were the passions invoked to-night, but not even to
the gray wolf that is, beyond all other creatures, the embodiment of the
wilderness spirit, did there come such a madness, such a dark and
terrible lust, as that which cursed a certain wayfarer beyond the next
bend in the river. This was not one of the forest people, neither the
lynx, nor the hunting otter, nor even the venerable grizzly with whom no
one contests the trail. It was a human being,--a man of youthful body
and strong, deeply lined, yet savage face.

A close observer would have noticed the faintest tremor and shiver
throughout his body. His eyes were very bright, vivid even in the dying
day. He was deeply lost in his own mood, seemingly oblivious to the
whole world about him. He carried a rifle in his hands.

He was on his way to report to his chief; and just what would be
forthcoming he did not know. But if too much objection were raised and
affairs got to a crucial stage, he had nothing to fear. He had learned a
certain lesson--an avenue to triumph. It was strange that he had never
hit upon it before.

His blood was scalding hot, and he was swept by exultation. Not for an
instant had he hesitated, nor Would he ever hesitate again. There was no
one in the North of greater might than he! No one could bend his will
from now on. He had found the road to triumph.

Ray Brent had discovered a new power within himself. Perhaps even his
chief, Jeffery Neilson, must yield before his new-found strength.




XIII

As twilight darkened to the full gloom of the forest night, Ben and
Beatrice rode to a lonely cabin on the Yuga River,--one that had been
built by Hiram Melville years past and was just at the mouth of the
little creek on which, less than a half-mile distant, he had his claim.
They had seen a lighted window from afar, marking the end of Beatrice's
hard day's ride.

"Of course you won't try to go on to-night?" she asked Ben. "You'll stay
at the cabin?"

"There likely won't be room for three," he answered. "But it's a clear
night. I can make a fire and sleep out."

It was true. The stars were emerging, faint points of light through the
darkening canopy of the sky; and to the East a silver glint on the
horizon forecast the rising moon.

They halted at last; and Beatrice saw her father's form, framed in the
doorway. She hastened into his arms: waiting in the darkness Ben could
not help but hear his welcome. Many things were doubtful; but there
could be no doubt of the love that Neilson bore his daughter. The
amused, half-teasing words with which he received her did not in the
least disguise it. "The joy and the light of his life," Ben commented to
himself. The gray old claim-jumper had this to redeem him, at least.

"But why so many horses, Beatrice?" he asked. "You--brought some one
with you?"

Ben was not so far distant that he failed to discern the instant change
in Neilson's tone. It had a strained, almost an apprehensive quality
such as few men had ever heard in his voice before. Plainly all visitors
in this end of the mountains were regarded with suspicion.

"He's a prospector--Mr. Darby," the girl replied. "Come here, Ben--and
be introduced." She turned toward her new-found friend; and the latter
walked near, into the light that streamed over him from the doorway.
"This is my father, Mr. Darby--Mr. Neilson. Some one told him this was a
good gold country."

Ben had already decided upon his course of action and had his answer
ready. He knew perfectly that it would only put Neilson on his guard if
he stated his true position; and besides, he wanted word of Ezram. "I
may have a wrong steer, Mr. Neilson," he said, "but a man I met down on
the river-trail, out of Snowy Gulch, advised me to come here. He said
that he had some sort of a claim up here that his brother left him, and
though it was a pocket country, he thought there'd soon be a great rush
up this way."

"I hardly know who it could have been that you met," Neilson began
doubtfully. "He didn't tell you his name--"

"Melville. I believe that was it. And if you'll tell me how to find him,
I'll try to go on to-night. I brought him some of his belongings from
Snowy Gulch--"

"Melville, eh? I guess I know who you mean now. But no--I don't know of
any claim unless it's over east, beyond here. Maybe further down the
river."

Ben made no reply at once; but his mind sped like lightning. Of course
Neilson was lying about the claim: he knew perfectly that at that moment
he was occupying one of Hiram Melville's cabins. He was a first-class
actor, too--his voice indicating scarcely no acquaintance with or
interest in the name.

"He hasn't come up this way?" Ben asked casually.

"He hasn't come through here that I know of. Of course I'm working at my
claim--with my partners--and he might have gone through without our
seeing him. It seems rather unlikely."

Ben was really puzzled now. If Ezram had already made his presence known
and was camping somewhere in the hills about, there was no reason
immediately evident why Neilson should deny his presence. Ben found
himself wondering whether by any chance Ezram had been delayed along the
trail, perhaps had even lost his way, and had not yet put in an
appearance.

"He told me, in the few minutes that I talked to him, that his cabin was
somewhere close to this one--I thought he said up this creek."

"There is a cabin up the creek a way," Neilson admitted, "but it isn't
the one he meant. It's on my claim, and my two partners are living in
it. But when he said near to this one, he might have meant ten miles.
That's the way we Northern men speak of distance."

There was nothing more to say, nothing to do at present. He said his
farewells to the girl, refused an invitation to pass the night in the
cabin, and made his way to the green bank of the stream. Four hundred
yards from the cabin, and perhaps a like number from the cabin of Ray
and Charley--obscured from both by the thickets--he pitched his camp.

In the cabin he had left Jeffery Neilson catechized his daughter, trying
to learn all he could concerning Ben. It was true that he carried the
dead Hiram's rifle, and that the latter's pet wolf followed at his
heels, but it was wholly probable that the old man, Hiram's brother,
with whom he had conversed at the river, had designated him to get them.
He had been courteous and respectful throughout the journey to the Yuga,
Beatrice said, and he had also saved her from possible death in the
fangs of the wolf the evening previous. Neilson decided that he would
take no steps at present but merely wait and watch developments.

Meanwhile Ben had made his fire and unpacked his horses. He confined his
riding horse with a picket rope; the others he turned loose. Then he
cooked a simple meal for himself and the gaunt servant at his heels.

When the night had come down in full, and as he sat about the glowing
coals of his supper fire, he had time to devote serious thought to the
fate of Ezram. It occurred to him that perhaps the old man had
discovered, at a distance, the presence of the claim-jumpers; and was
merely waiting in the thickets for a chance to take action. If such were
the case, sooner or later they could join their fortunes again. It was
also easy to imagine that Ezram had lost his way on the journey out.

He stood at the edge of the firelight, gazing out into the darkened
forest. The wolf crouched beside him: alert, watching his face for any
command. It was wholly plain that the gaunt woods creature had accepted
him at once as his master; and that the bond between them, because of
some secret similarity of spirit, was already far closer than between
most masters and their pets.

Ben sensed another side of the forest to-night because of his inborn
love of the waste places not often seen. The thickets were menacing,
sinister to-night. The spruce crept up to the skyline with darkness and
mystery: he realized the eternal malevolence that haunts their silent
fastnesses. They would have tricks in plenty to play on such as would
lose their way on their dusky trails! Oh, they would have no mercy or
remorse for any one who was lost, _out there_, to-night! Ben felt a
heavy burden of dread!

Even now, old Ezram might be wandering, vainly, through the gloomy,
whispering woods, ever penetrating farther into their merciless
solitudes. And no homes smoked in the clearings, no camps glowed in the
immensity of the dark--out there. This was just the beginning of the
forest; clear into the shadow of the Arctic Circle, where the woodlands
gave way to the Weary wastes of barrens, there was no break, no tilled
fields or fisher's villages, only an occasional Indian encampment which
not even a wolf, running through the night, might find. His supply of
food would quickly be exhausted, fatigue would break his valiant spirit.
Ben planned an extensive search for his tracks as soon as the morning
light permitted him to see.

He missed the old man's comradeship with a deep and fervid longing. They
had come to count on each other, these past weeks. It wasn't alone
infinite gratitude that he felt for him now. The thing went too deep to
tell. Yet there was no use seeking for him to-night.

He turned to the wolf and dropped his hand upon the animal's shoulder.
Fenris started, then quivered in ecstasy. "I wish I had your nose,
to-night, old boy," Ben told him. "I'd find that old buddy of mine. I
wish I had your eyes to see in the dark, and your legs to run. Fenris,
do you know where he is?"

The wolf turned his wild eyes toward his master's face, as if he were
trying to understand.




XIV

Impelled by an urge within himself Ben suddenly knelt beside his lupine
friend. He could not understand the flood of emotion, the vague sense of
impending and dramatic events that stirred him to the quick. He only
knew, with a knowledge akin to inspiration, that in Fenris lay the
answer to his problem.

The moment was misted over with a quality of unreality. In the east rose
the moon, shining incredibly on the tree tops, showering down through
the little rifts in the withholding branches, enchanting the place as by
the weaving of a dream. The moon madness caught up Ben like a flame,
enthralling him as never before. He knew that white sphere of old. And
all at once he realized that here, at his knees, was one who knew it
too,--with a knowledge as ancient and as infinite as his own. Not for
nothing had the wolf breed lived their lives beneath it through the long
roll of the ages. Its rising and its setting had regulated the hunting
hours of the pack time without end; its beams had lighted the game
trails where the gray band had bayed after the deer; its light had
beheld, since the world was young, the rapturous mating of the old pack
leader and his female. Fenris too knew the moon-madness; but unlike Ben
he had a means of expression of the wonder and mystery and vague longing
that thrilled his wild heart. No man who has heard the pack song to the
moon could doubt this fact. It is a long, melancholy wail, poignant with
the pain of living, but it tells what man can not.

Ben knew, now, why he was a forester, a woodsman famed even among
woodsmen. Most of his fellows had been tamed by civilization; they had
lived beneath roofs instead of the canopy of heaven, and they had almost
forgotten about the moon. Ben, on the other hand, was a recurrence of an
earlier type, inheriting little from his immediate ancestors but
reverting back a thousand centuries to the Cave and the Squatting Place.
His nature was that of prehistoric man rather than that of the son of
civilization; and in this lay the explanation for all that had set him
apart from the great run of men and had made him the master woodsman
that he was. And because his spirit was of the wildwood, because he also
knew the magic of the moon, he was able to make this wildwood thing at
his feet understand and obey his will.

The world of to-day seemed to fade out for him and left only the wolf,
its fierce eyes on his own. Time swung back, and this might have been a
scene of forgotten ages,--the wolf, the human hunter, the smoldering
camp fire, the dark, jagged line of spruce against the sky. It was thus
at the edge of the ice. Wolf and man--both children of the wild--had
understood each other then; and they could understand each other now.

"Fenris, old boy," the man whispered. "Can you find him for me, Fenris?
He's out there somewhere--" the man motioned toward the dark--"and I
want him. Can you take me to him?"

The wolf trembled all over, struggling to get his meaning. This was no
creature of subordinate intelligence: the great wolf of the North. He
had, besides the cunning of the wild hunters, the intelligence that is
the trait of the whole canine breed. Nor did he depend on his sense of
hearing alone. He watched his master's face, and more than that, he was
tuned and keyed to those mysterious vibrations that carry a message from
brain to brain no less clearly and swift than words themselves,--the
secret wireless of the wild.

"He's my buddy, old boy, and I want you to find him for me," Ben went
on, more patiently. He searched his pockets, drawing out at last the
copy of the letter Ezram had given him that morning, and, because the
old man had carried it for many days, it could still convey a message to
the keen nose of the wolf. He put it to the animal's nostrils, then
pointed away into the darkness.

Fenris followed the motion with his eyes; and presently his long body
stiffened. Ben watched him, fascinated. Then the wolf sniffed at the
paper again and trotted away into the night.

In one leap Ben was on his feet, following him. The wolf turned once,
saw that his master was at his heels, and sped on. They turned up a
slight draw, toward the hillside.

It became clear at once that Fenris was depending upon his marvelous
sense of smell. His nose would lower to the ground, and sometimes he
tacked back and forth, uncertainly. At such times Ben watched him with
bated breath. But always he caught the scent again.

Once more he paused, sniffing eagerly; then turned, whining. Just as
clearly as if they had possessed a mutual language Ben understood: the
animal had caught the clear scent at last. The wolf loped off, and his
fierce bay rang through the hushed forest.

It was a long-drawn, triumphant note; and the wild creatures paused in
their mysterious, hushed occupations to listen. It was also significant
that it made certain deadly inroads in the spirit of Ray Brent, sitting
in his distant cabin. He marked the direction of the sound, and he
cursed, half in awe, under his breath. He had always hated the gray
rangers. They were the uncanny demons of the forest.

Ben followed the running wolf as fast as he could; and in his eagerness
he had no opportunity for conjecture as to what he would find at the end
of the pursuit. Yet he did not believe for an instant this was a false
trail. The wolf's deep, full-ringing bays were ever more urgent and
excited, filling the forest with their uproar. But quite suddenly the
silence closed down again, seemingly more deep and mysterious than ever.

Ben's first sensation was one of icy terror that crept to the very
marrow of his bones. He knew instantly that there was a meaning of
dreadful portent in the abrupt cessation of the cries. He halted an
instant, listening, but at first could hear no more than the throb of
his heart in his breast and the whisper of his own troubled breathing.
But presently, at a distance of one hundred yards, he distinguished the
soft whining of the wolf.

Fenris was no longer running! He had halted at the edge of a distant
thicket. The cold sweat sprang out on Ben's forehead, and he broke into
a headlong run.

There was no later remembrance of traversing that last hundred yards.
The hillside seemed to whip under his feet. He paused at last, just at
the dark margin of an impenetrable thicket. The wolf whined
disconsolately just beyond the range of his vision.

"Ezram!" he called, a curious throbbing quality in his voice. "Are you
there, Ez? It's me--Ben."

But the thickets neither rustled nor spoke. The cracked old voice he had
learned to love did not speak in relief, in that moment of unutterable
suspense. Indeed, the silence seemed to deepen about him. The spruce
trees were hushed and impassive as ever; the moon shone and the wind
breathed softly in his face. Fenris came whimpering toward him.

Together, the man and the wolf, they crept on into the thicket. They
halted at last before a curious shadow in the silvered covert. Ben knew
at once he had found his ancient comrade.

He and Ezram had had their last laugh together. He lay very still, the
moonlight ensilvering his droll, kindly face,--sleeping so deeply that
no human voice could ever waken him. An ugly rifle wound yawned darkly
at his temple.




XV

The first effect of a great shock is usually a semi-paralysis of the
entire mental mechanism and is, as a rule, beneficent. The brain seems
to be enclosed in a great preoccupation, like a wall, and the messages
of pain and horror brought by the nerves batter against it in vain. The
senses are dulled, the perceptions blunted, and full realization does
not come.

For a long time, in which time itself stood still, Ben sat beside the
dead body of his old counselor and friend as a child might sit among
flowers. He half leaned forward, his arms limp, his hands resting in his
lap, a deep wonder and bewilderment in his eyes. Dully he watched the
moon lifting in the sky and felt the caress of the wind against his
face, glancing only from time to time at the huddled body before him.
The wolf whined softly, and sometimes Ben reached his hand to caress the
furry shoulder.

But slowly his wandering faculties returned to him. He began to
understand. Ezram was dead--that was it--gone from his life as smoke
goes in the air. Never to hear him again, or see him, or make plans with
him, or have high adventures beside him along the lonely trails. Fenris
had found him in the darkness: here he lay--the old family friend, the
man who had saved him, redeemed him and given him his chance, his old
"buddy" who had brought him home. The thing was not credible at first:
that here, dead as a stone, lay the shell of that life that had been his
own salvation. He studied intently the gray face, missed its habitual
smile and for really the first time his gaze rested upon the yawning
wound in the temple.

He gazed at it in speechless, growing horror, and something like an
incredible cold descended upon him. The entire hydraulic system of his
blood seemed to be freezing. His hands were cold, his vitals icy and
lifeless. There was, however, the beginning of heat somewhere back of
his eyes. He could feel it but dimly, but it was increasing, slowly,
like a smoldering coal that eats its way into wood and soon will burst
into a flame. Slowly he began to grow rigid, his muscles flexing. His
face underwent a tangible change. The lines deepened, the lips set in a
hard line, the eyes were like those of a reptile,--cold, passionless,
unutterably terrible. His face was pale like the paleness of death, but
it appeared more like hard, white metal than flesh. His mind began to
work clear again; he began to understand.

Ezram had been shot, murdered by the men who had jumped his claim.
Beatrice's father, who had talked to him, had probably committed the
crime: if not he, one of his understrappers at his order. He found
himself recalling what Jeffery Neilson had said. Oh, the man had been
sharp! Believing that in the depth of the forest the body would never be
discovered, he had tried to send Ben farther into the interior in search
of him.

He arose, wholly self-mastered, and with hard, strong hands made a
detailed examination of Ezram's wound. He had evidently been shot by a
rifle of large caliber, probably at close range. Ezram's own gun lay at
his feet, loaded but not cocked.

"They shot you down in cold blood, old boy, didn't they?" he found
himself asking. "You didn't have a chance!"

But the gray lips were setting with death, and could not answer. Ben
had forgotten for the instant; he must keep better hold of himself. The
time was not ripe to turn himself loose. But he did wish for one more
word with Ezram, just a few little minutes of planning. They could
doubtless work out something good together. They could decide what to
do.

From this point his mind naturally fell to Ezram's parting advice to
him. "I've only got one decent place to keep things safe, and that ain't
so all-fired decent," the old man had told him. "I always put 'em down
my bootleg, between the sock and the leather. If I ever get shuffled
off, all of a sudden, I want you to look there careful."

Still with the same deathly pallor he crept over the dead leaves to
Ezram's feet. His hands were perfectly steady as he unlooped the laces,
one after another, and quietly pulled off the right boot. In the boot
leg, just as Ezram had promised, Ben found a scrap of white paper.

He spread it on his knee, and unfolded it with care. The moonlight was
not sufficiently vivid, however, for him to read the penciled scrawl. He
felt in his pocket for a match.

Because his mind was operating clear and sure, his thoughts flashed at
once to his enemies in their cabins along the creek. He did not want
them to know he had found the body. His first instinct was to work in
the dark, to achieve his ends by stealth and cunning! It was strange
what capacity for cunning had come upon him. Oh, he would be
crafty--sharp--sure in every motion.

It was unlikely, however, that the faint glare of a match could carry so
far. To make sure he walked behind the covert, then turned his back to
the canyon through which the creek flowed. The match cracked,
inordinately loud in the silence, and his eyes followed the script.
Ezram had been faithful to the last:

    To WHOM IT MAY CONCERN:

    In case of my death I leave all I die possessed of including my
    brother Hiram's claim near Yuga River to my pard and buddy, Ben
    Darby.

    (Signed) EZRA MELVILLE.

The document was as formal as Ezram could make it, with a carefully
drawn seal, and for all its quaint wording, it was a will to stand in
any court. But Ezram had not been able to hold his dignity for long. He
had added a postscript:

    Son, old Hiram made a will, and I guess I can make one too. I just
    found out about them devils that jumped our claim. I left you back
    there at the river because I didn't want you taking any dam fool
    risks till I found out how things lay.

    I just got one thing to ask. If them devils get me--get them. My
    life ain't worth much but I want you to make them pay for the little
    it is worth. Never stop till you've done it.

Ben lighted match after match until he had absorbed every word. Then he
folded the paper and placed it in his pocket; but the action did not in
the least take his eyes from the words. He could still see them, written
in fire. They were branded on his spirit.

He stood wholly motionless for a space of almost a minute, as if
listening. The heat back of his eyes was more intense now. The red coals
were about to burst into flame. All the blood of his huge body seemed to
be collecting there, searing his brain.

The moon was no longer white in the sky. It had turned a fiery red. The
stars were red too,--all of them more red than the Star of War. "I want
you to make them pay," a voice said clearly in his ears. "Never stop
till you've done it."

And now Ben was no longer pale. His face was no longer hard and set.
Rather it was dark--dark as dark earth. His eyes glowed like coals
beneath his black brows. He was not standing still and lifeless now. He
was shivering all over with the blackest hate, the most deadly fury.

"Make them pay," he said aloud again, "and never stop till you've done
it."

A sudden snarl from the lips of the wolf drew his eyes downward. Heaven
help him; for the moment he had forgotten Fenris! But he must not forget
him again. They had work to do, the two of them.

Fenris was no longer whining disconsolately. His master's fury had
passed to him, and Ben looked and saw before him not the docile pet, but
the savage beast of the wild. The hair was erect on his shoulders, his
lips were drawn, too; he was crouched as if for battle. The eyes, sunken
in their sockets, were red and terrible to see. Yet he was still Ben's
servant. That quality could never pass from him. The eyes of two
met,--the wolf and the man.

At that instant the little tongue of flame that had been mounting in
Ben's brain burst into a dreadful conflagration. It was the explosion at
last, no less terrible because of its silence--because the sound of the
least, little wind was still discernible in the distant thickets. He
dropped to his knees before the wolf, seizing its head in a terrific
grasp. He half jerked it off its feet, till he held it so that its eyes
burned straight into his.

"Fenris, Fenris!" he breathed. "We've got to make them pay. And we must
not stop till we're done."

It was more than a command. It had the quality of a vow. And now, as
they knelt, eyes looking into eyes, it was like a pagan rite in the
ancient world.

Their separate identities were no longer greatly pronounced. They were
not man and beast, they were simply the wolves of the forest. The old
qualities most often associated with manhood--gentleness, forbearance,
mercy--seemed to pass away from Ben as a light passes into darkness.
Only the Wolf was left, the dominant Beast--that darker, hidden side of
himself from which no man can wholly escape and which civilization has
only smothered, as fresh fuel smothers a flame. Not for nothing had his
fellows known him as "Wolf" Darby; and now the name was true.

The Beast that dwells under every man's skin, in a greater or less
degree, was in the full ascendancy at last. The unnamable ferocity that
marks the death-leap of the wild hunters was in his face. In his eyes
was cunning,--such craft as marks the pack in its hunting. All over him
was written that unearthly rage that is alone the property and trait of
the woods creatures: the fury with which a she-wolf fights for her cubs
or a rattlesnake avenges the death of its mate. Mercy, remorse,
compassion there was none.

And the demon gods of the wilderness rejoiced. For uncounted thousands
of years the tide of battle had flowed against them; and it was long and
long since they had won such a victory as this. Mostly their men
children had forsaken their leafy bowers to live in houses. They tilled
the ground rather than hunt in the forest. The cattle that had once run
wild in the marshes now fed dully in enclosed pastures; the horses--that
mighty breed that once mated and fought and died in freedom on the high
lands--pulled lowly burdens in the cultivated fields. Even some of the
canine people too--first cousins to the wolves themselves--had sold
themselves into slavery for a gnawed bone and a chimney corner. But
to-night the wild had claimed its own again.

Here was one, at least, who had come back into his own. The forest
seemed to whisper and thrill with rapture.





PART TWO

THE WOLF-MAN




XVI

As a wolf might plan a hunt in the forest, Ben planned his war against
Neilson and his subordinates. He knew perfectly that he must not attempt
open warfare. The way of the wolf is the way of cunning and stealth: the
stalk through the thicket and the ferocious attack upon the
unsuspecting; and such example must guide Ben in his operations. He
could not be too careful, too furtive.

His foes were three against one, and they were on their own ground. They
knew the trails and the lay of the country; and as always, in the
science of warfare, this was an advantage hardly to be overcome. Ben
knew that his only hope lay in the finest strategy. First he must make a
surprise attack, and second, he must utilize all natural advantages.

He was well aware that he could lie in ambush, close to the mine, and
probably send one man to a speedy death with a rifle bullet. But he did
not have one enemy; he had three. The survivors of the first shot would
immediately seek shelter--probably returning shot for shot--and that
would insert an element of uncertainty into the venture. At the distance
he would be obliged to shoot, he would possibly only succeed in wounding
one of his enemies, and he might miss him altogether. Such a plan as
this was wholly too uncertain for adoption.

There must be no sporting chances in his strategy. The way of the wolf
is to cover every opening, to prepare for every contingency that his
brute mind can foresee. He would give and receive no quarter, and the
ancient fairness and honor must be likewise forgotten. He must take no
risk with his own life until the last of the three was down. What
happened thereafter did not greatly concern him. The world could shatter
to atoms after that for all he would care. He was a son of forest
solitude; and he had but one dream left in life.

It was not his aim to give his foes the least chance to fight back, the
slightest hope of battle. He would use any advantage, descend to any
wile. This was not to be a sportsmen's war, but a grim battle to the
death, inexorable and merciless.

These things were all fully known to him before ever he left the
hillside, and like a man asleep, walked down to his camp. The fire had
burned down to coals--sullen and angry--but he heaped on fuel, and they
broke into a blaze. Then, Fenris at his side, he squatted on the ground
beside the dancing flame.

He watched it, fascinated; mostly silent but sometimes muttering and
whispering half-enunciated words. His red eyes and the black hair,
matted about his lips and shadowing the backs of his hands, gave him a
wild, fierce look; and it was as if the primal blood-lust and hatred
that seared him had literally swept him back into the forgotten
centuries,--the first, savage human hunter at the edge of the retreating
glaciers. The scene had not changed: dark spruce and the red glow of
fire; and there was atavism in his very posture. The first men had
squatted beside their camp fires this same way, their wolfine pets
beside them, as they made their battle plans.

The eager flames held Ben's fascinated gaze as a crystal ball might hold
the eyes of a seer. They seemed to have a message for him if he could
just grasp it, a course whereby he might achieve success. Oh, they could
be cruel, relentless--mercilessly eating their way into sensitive flesh.
They were no respecters of persons, these creeping, leaping tongues. Nor
must _he_ have any scruples or qualms as to how he gained his ends. He
too must be merciless, and if necessary, strike down the innocent in
order to reach the guilty.

As he watched certain knowledge reached him of life and death. The
conclusion slowly came to him that just blind killing was not enough.
For all he knew death might bring instant forgetfulness--and thus not
constitute in itself a satisfactory measure of vengeance. The _fear_ of
death was a reality and a torment: for all he knew, the thing itself
might be a change for the better. It might be that, suddenly hurled out
of this world of three dimensions, his enemies would have no knowledge
nor carry no memories of the hand that struck them down. There could be
no satisfaction in this. To murder from ambush might be a measure of
expedience, but never one of self-gratification. When Ben struck he
wanted them to know who was their enemy, and for what crime they were
laid low.

The best way of all, of course, was to strike indirectly at them,
perhaps through some one they loved. Soon, perhaps, he would see the
way.

He went to his blankets, but sleep did not come to him. The wolf stood
on guard. Beatrice Neilson had fallen into happy dreams long since, but
there was further wakefulness in Hiram Melville's newer cabin, farther
up-creek. Ray Brent and Chan Heminway still sat over their cups, the
fiery liquid running riot in their veins, but slumber did not come
easily to-night. And when Beatrice was asleep, Neilson stole down the
moonlit moose trail and joined his men.

"I've brought news," he began, when the door had closed out the stars
and the breath of the night. Chan, his small eyes glazed from strong
drink, staggered to his feet to offer his chair to his chief. Brent,
however, was in no mood for servility to-night. He had done man's work
in the early evening; and his triumph and his new-found sense of power
had not yet died in his body. Perhaps he had learned the way to all
success. There was a curious sullen defiance in the blearing gaze over
his glass.

"What's your news?" Ray's voice harshened, possessing a certain quality
of grim levity. "I guess old Hiram's brother hasn't come to life again,
has he?"

It was a significant thing that both Chan and Neilson looked oppressed
and uneasy at the words. Like all men of low moral status they were
secretly superstitious, and these boasting words crept unpleasantly
under their skins. It is never a good thing to taunt the dead! Ray had
spoken sheerly to frighten and shock them, thus revealing his own
fearlessness and strength; yet his voice rang louder than he had meant.
He had no desire for it to carry into the silver mystery of the night.

"The less you say about Hiram's brother the better," Neilson answered
sternly. "We've thrashed it out once to-night." He straightened as he
read the insolence, the gathering insubordination in the other's
contemptuous glance; and his voice lacked its old ring of power when he
spoke again. "Jumpin' claims is one thing and murder is another."

Ray, spurred on by the false strength of wickedness, drunk with his new
sense of power, was already feeling the first surge of deadly anger in
his veins. "I suppose if you had been doin' it, you'd let that old whelp
take back this claim, worth a quarter million if it's worth a cent. Not
if I know it. It was the only way--and the safe way too."

"Safe! What if by a thousandth chance some one would blunder on to that
body you left in the brush? What if some sergeant of mounted police
would say to his man, 'Go get Ray Brent!' Where would you be then?
You've always been a murderer at heart, Brent--but some time you'll slip
up--"

"Only a fool slips up. Don't think I didn't figure on everything. As you
say, there's not one chance in a thousand any one will ever find him. If
they do, there wouldn't be any kind of a case. Likely the old man hasn't
got a friend or relation on earth. I've searched his pockets--there's
nothing to tell who he is. We'll have our claim recorded soon, and it
would be easy to make him out the claim-jumper rather than us--"

"Wait just a minute before you say he ain't got any friends, or at least
acquaintances. That's what I came to see you about to-night." Neilson
paused, for the sake of suspense. "Beatrice came up to-night, as agreed,
and she had a prospector with her--and he knew old Hiram's brother."

A short, tense silence followed his words, and Ray stared into his cup.
It might be that just for an instant the reckless light went out of his
eyes and left them startled and glazing. Then he got to his feet. "Then
God Almighty!" he cried. "What you waiting for? Why don't you croak him
off before this night's over?"

"Wait, you fool, till you've heard everything," Neilson replied.
"There's no hurry about killing. As I told you, the less work of that
kind we do, the more chance we've got of dying in our beds. It may be
reasonable for one prospector to disappear, but some one's going to be
suspicious if two of 'em do. I think I've already handled the matter."

"I'd handle it, and quick too," Ray protested.

"You'd handle yourself up a gallows, too. He doesn't seem to be a close
friend of this old man; he just seems to have met up with him at the
river, and the old man steered him up here. He asked me where the old
man's claim was, and said he wanted to go over and see him. He was
taking Hiram's wolf and his gun up to him. I told him I hadn't heard of
the claim, that it must be farther inside, and I think I put it over. He
ain't got the least suspicion. What he'll do is hang around here a
while, I suppose, prospecting--and likely enough soon forget all about
the old devil. I just came down here to tell you he was here and to
watch your step."

"Then the first thing up," Chan Heminway suggested, "is to bury the
stiff."

"Spoke up like a fool!" Ray answered. "Not till this man is dead or out
of the country. It's well hidden, and don't go prowling anywheres near
it. If he's the least bit suspicious, or even if he's on the lookout for
gold, he'd likely enough follow you. But there's one thing we can
do--and that quick."

"And what's that?"

"Start Chan off to-morrow to the office in Bradleyburg and record this
claim in our names. We've waited too long already."

"Ray, you're talking like a man now," Neilson agreed. "You and I stay
here and work away, innocent as can be, on the claim. Chan, put that
bottle away and get to bed. Take the trail down first thing to-morrow.
Then we can laugh at all the prospectors that want to come."




XVII

Soon after the break of dawn Ben put his pick and shovel on his
shoulder, and leisurely walked up the creek past Ray's cabin. Since Chan
Heminway had already departed down the long trail to Bradleyburg--a town
situated nearly forty miles from Snowy Gulch--Ray alone saw him pass;
and he eyed him with some apprehension. Daylight had brought a more
vivid consciousness of his last night's crime; and a little of his
bravado had departed from him. He moved closer to his rifle.

Yet in a moment his suspicions were allayed. Ben was evidently a
prospector, just as he claimed to be, and was venturing forth to get his
first "lay of the land." The latter continued up the draw, crossed a
ridge, halted now and then in the manner of the wild creatures to see if
he were being followed, and finally by a roundabout route returned to
the lifeless form of his only friend. The wolf still trotted in silence
behind him.

The vivid morning light only revealed the crime in more dreadful detail.
The withered form lay huddled in the stained leaves; and Ben stood a
long time beside it, in deep and wondering silence, even now scarcely
able to believe the truth. How strange it was that this old comrade
could not waken and go on with him again! But in a moment he remembered
his work.

Slowly, laboriously, with little outward sign of the emotion that rent
his heart, he dug a shallow grave He knew perfectly that this was a
serious risk to his cause. Should the murderer return for any purpose,
to his dead, the grave would of course show that the body had been
discovered and would put him on his guard against Ben. Nevertheless, the
latter could not leave these early remains to the doubtful mercy of the
wilderness: the agents of air and sun, and the wild beasts.

He threw the last clod and stood looking down at the upturned earth.
"Sleep good, old Ez," he murmured in simple mass for the dead. "I'll do
what you said."

Then, at the head of the grave, he thrust the barrel of Ezram's rifle
into the ground, a monument grim as his own thoughts. The last rite was
completed; he was free to work now. From now on he could devote every
thought to the work in hand,--the payment of his debts.

By the same roundabout route he circled back to his camp, cooked his
meager lunch, and in the afternoon ventured forth again. But he was
prospecting in earnest this time, though the prospects that he sought
were those of victory to his cause, rather than of gold. He was seeking
simply a good, general idea of the nature and geography of the country
so that he might know better how to plan his attack.

His excursion took him at last to the wooded bank of the river. He stood
a long time, quite motionless, listening to the water voices that only
the wise can understand. This was really a noble stream. It flowed with
such grandeur in its silence and solitude; old and gray and austere, it
was a mighty expression of wilderness power,--resistless, immortal,
eternally secretive. The waters flowed darkly, icy cold from the melting
snow; but like a sleeping giant they would be quick to seize upon and
destroy such as would try to brave their currents, likely never to
yield them up again. Flowing forever through the uninhabited forest no
man would ever know the fate of those the river claimed.

He was above the camp when he descended to its banks, but he worked his
way down through the thickets toward Jeffery Neilson's cabin. The river
flowed quietly here, a long, still stretch that afforded safe boating.
Yet the smooth waters did not in the least alleviate Ben's haunting
sense of their sinister power and peril. The old gray she-wolf is not to
be trusted in her peaceful moments. His keen ears could distinctly hear
the roar and rumble of wild waters, just below.

The river was of great depth as well as breadth,--one of the king rivers
of the land. Ben found himself staring into its depths with a quickening
pulse. He had a momentary impression that this great stream was his
ally, a mighty agent that he could bend to his will.

He approached the long, sloping bank on which stood Neilson's cabin; and
he suddenly drew up short at the sight of a light, staunch canoe on the
open water. It was a curious fact that he noticed the craft itself
before ever he glanced at its occupant. A thrill of excitement passed
over him. He realized that this boat simplified to some degree his own
problem, in that it afforded him means of traversing this great
water-body, certainly to be a factor in the forthcoming conflict. The
boat had evidently been the property of Hiram Melville.

Then he noticed, with a strange, inexplicable leap of his heart, that
its lone occupant was Beatrice Neilson. His eye kindled at the
recognition, and the beginnings of a smile flashed to his lips. But at
once remembrance came to him, crushing his joy as the heel crushes a
tender flower. The girl was of the enemy camp, the daughter of the
leader of the triumvirate of murderers. While she herself could have had
no part in the crime, perhaps she already had guilty knowledge of it,
and at least she was of her father's hated blood.

He had builded much on his friendship with this girl; but he felt it
withering, turning black--like buds under frost--in his cold breast.
There could be no friendly words, except in guile; no easy comradeship
between them now. They were on opposite sides, hated foes to the last.
Perhaps she would be one of the innocents that must suffer with the
guilty; but he felt no remorse. Not even this lovely, tender wood child
must stand in his way.

Nevertheless, he must not put her on guard. He must simulate friendship.
He lifted his hat in answer to her gay signal.

She wore a white middy blouse, and her brown, bare forearms flashed
pleasantly in the spring sun. Her brown hair was disarranged by the wind
that found a passway down the river, and her eyes shone with the sheer,
unadorned love of living. Evidently she had just enjoyed a brisk paddle
through the still stretches of the river. With sure, steady strokes she
pushed the craft close to the little, board landing where Ben stood. She
reached up to him, and in an instant was laughing--at nothing in
particular but the fun of life--at his side.

The man glanced once at Fenris, spoke in command, then turned to the
girl. "All rested from the ride, I see," he began easily.

Her instincts keyed to the highest pitch, for an instant she thought she
discerned an unfamiliar tone, hard and hateful, in his voice. But his
eyes and his lips were smiling; and evidently she was mistaken. "I never
get tired," she responded. She glanced at the tools in his arms. "I
suppose you've found a dozen rich lodes already this morning."

"Only one." He smiled, significantly, into her eyes. Because she was a
forest girl, unused to flattery, the warm color grew in her brown
cheeks. "And how was paddling? The water looks still enough from here."

"It's not as still as it looks, but it is easy going for a half-mile
each way. If you aren't an expert boatman, however--I hardly think--I'd
try it."

"Why not? I'm fair enough with a canoe, of course--but it looks safe as
a lake."

"But it isn't." She paused. "Listen with those keen ears of yours, Mr.
Darby. Don't you hear anything?"

Ben did not need particularly keen ears to hear: the far-off sound of
surging waters reached him with entire clearness. He nodded.

"That's the reason," the girl went on. "If something should happen--and
you'd get carried around the bend--a little farther than you meant to
go--you'd understand. And we wouldn't see any more of Mr. Darby around
these parts."

Her dark eyes, brimming with light and laughter, were on his face, but
she failed to see him slowly stiffen to hide the sudden, wild leaping of
his heart. Could it be that he saw the far-off vision of his triumph?

His eyes glowed, and he fought off with difficulty a great preoccupation
that seemed to be settling over him.

"Tell me about it," he said at last, casually. "I was thinking of making
a boat and going down on a prospecting trip."

"I'll tell you about it, and then I think you'll change your mind. The
first cataract is the one just above where we first saw the
river--coming in; then there's this mile of quiet water. From that
point on the Yuga flows into a gorge--or rather one gorge after another;
and sometime they'll likely be almost as famous as some of the great
gorges of your country. The walls are just about straight up on each
side, and of course are absolutely impassable. I don't know how many
miles the first gorge is--but for nearly two hundred miles the river is
considered impassable for boats. Two hundred and fifty miles or so below
there is an Indian village--but they never try to go down the river from
here. A few white men, however, have tried to go down with canoe-loads
of fur."

"And all drowned?" Ben asked.

"All except one party. Once two men went down when the river was
high--just as it is now. They were good canoeists, and they made it
through. No one ever expected they would come out again."

"And after you've once got into the rapids, there's no getting out--or
landing?"

"Of course not. I suppose there are places where you might get on the
bank, but the gorge above is impassable."

"You couldn't follow the river down--with horses?"

"Yes, in time. Of course it would be slow going, as there are no trails,
the brush is heavy, and the country is absolutely unexplored. You see it
has never been considered a gold country--and of course the Indians
won't go except where they can go in canoes. Some of the hills must be
impassable, too. I've heard my father speak about it--how that if any
criminal--or any one like that--could take down this river in a canoe in
high water--and get through into that great, virgin, trackless country a
hundred miles below, it would be almost impossible to get him out.
Unless the officers could chase him down the same way he went--by
canoe--it would take literally weeks and months for them to get in, and
by that time he could be hidden and located and his tracks covered up."

"And with good ambushes, able to hold off and kill a dozen of them, eh?"
Ben's hands shook, and he locked them behind him. "They call that
country--what?"

"'Back There.' That's all I've ever heard it called--'Back There.'"

"It's as good a name as any. Of course, the reason they were able to
make it through in high water was due to the fact that most of the rocks
and ledges were submerged, and they could slide right over them."

"Of course. Many of our rivers are safer in high water. But you
seriously don't intend to take such a trip--"

He looked up to find her eyes wide and full upon his. Yet her concern
for him touched him not at all. She was his enemy: that fact could never
be forgotten or forgiven.

"I want to hear about it, anyway. I heard in town the river is higher
than it's been for years--due to the Chinook--"

"It _is_ higher than I've ever seen it. But it's reached its peak and
has started to fall, and it won't come up again, at least, till fall.
When the Yuga rises it comes up in a flood, and it falls the same way.
It's gone down quite a little since this morning; by the day after
to-morrow no one could hope to get through Devil's Gate--the first
cataract in the gorge."

"Not even with a canoe? Of course a raft would be broken to pieces."

"Not a canoe, either, in two or three days, if the river falls like it
usually does. But tell me--you aren't serious--"

"I suppose not. But it gets my imagination--just the same. I suppose a
man would average better than twenty miles an hour down through that
gorge, and would come out at _Back There_."

Their talk moved easily to other subjects; yet it seemed to Ben that
some secondary consciousness held up his end of the conversation. His
own deeper self was lost in curious and dark conjectures. Her
description of the river lingered in his thoughts, and he seemed to be
groping for a great inspiration that was hovering just beyond his
reach--as plants grope for light in far-off leafy jungles. He felt that
it would come to him in a moment: he would know the dark relation that
these facts about the river bore to his war with Neilson. It was as if
an inner mind, much more subtle and discerning than his normal
consciousness, had seen great possibilities in them, but as yet had not
divulged their significance.

"I must be going now," the girl was saying. "Father pretty near goes
crazy when I stay away too long. You can't imagine how he loves me and
worries about me--and how fearful he is of me--"

His mind seemed to leap and gather her words. It was true: she was the
joy and the pride and the hope of the old man's life. All his work, his
dreams were for her. And now he remembered a fact that she had told him
on the outward journey: that Ray Brent, the stronger of Neilson's two
subordinates, loved her too.

"To strike at them indirectly--through some one they love--" such had
been his greatest wish. To put them at a disadvantage and overcome his
own--to lead them into his own ambushes. And was it for the Wolf to care
what guiltless creatures fell before his fangs in the gaining of his
dreadful ends? Was the gratification of his hate to be turned aside
through pity for an innocent girl? Mercy and remorse were two things
that he had put from him. It was the way of the Wolf to pay no attention
to methods, only to achieve his own fierce desires. He stood lost in
dark and savage reverie.

"Good-by," the girl was saying. "I'll see you soon--"

He turned toward her, a smile at his lips. His voice held steady when he
spoke.

"It'll have to be soon, if at all," he replied. "I've got to really get
to work in a few days. How about a little picnic to-morrow--a grouse
hunt, say--on the other side of the river? It's going to be a beautiful
day--"

The girl's eyes shone, and the color rose again in her tanned cheeks.
"I'd think that would be very nice," she told him.

"Then I'll meet you here--at eight."



XVIII

Alone by the fire Ben had opportunity to balance one thing with another
and think out the full consequences of his plan. As far as he could
discern, it stood every test. It meant not only direct and indirect
vengeance upon Neilson and his followers; but it would also, past all
doubt, deliver them into his hands. That much was sure. When finally
they came to grips--if indeed they did not go down to a terrible death
before ever that time came--he would be prepared for them, with every
advantage of ground and fortress, able to combat them one by one and
shatter them from ambush. Best of all, they would know at whose hands,
and for what crime, they received their retribution.

One by one he checked the chances against him. First of all, he had to
face the great chance of failure and the consequent loss of his own
life. But there was even recompense in this. He would not die unavenged.
The blow that he would thereby deal to his enemies would be terrible
beyond any reckoning, but he would have no regrets.

There were two outstanding points in his favor, one of them being that
the river was rapidly falling. By the time a canoe could be built the
river would be wholly unnavigable. There were no canoes procurable in
Snowy Gulch, if indeed a lightning trip could be made there and back to
secure one, before the river fell. The conversation with the
frontiersman at the river bank brought out this fact. Lastly, a raft
could not live a moment in the rapids.

Very methodically he began to make his preparations. He untied his
horse, leaving it free to descend to Snowy Gulch. Then he packed a few
of his most essential supplies, his gun and shells, such necessary camp
equipment as robes, matches, soap and towels, cooking and table ware, an
axe and similar necessaries. In the way of food he laid out flour, rice,
salt, and sugar, plus a few pounds of tea--nothing else. The entire
outfit weighed less than two hundred pounds, easily carried in three
loads upon the back.

In the still hour of midnight, when the forest world was swept in
mystery, he carried the equipment down to the canoe that Beatrice had
left the evening before. He loaded the craft with the greatest care,
balancing it now and then with his hands at the sides, and covering up
the food supplies with robes and blankets. Then he drew from his pocket
a sheet of paper--evidently a paper sack that had once held provisions,
cut open and spread--and wrote carefully, a long time, with a pencil.

He had no envelope to enclose it, no wax to seal it. He did, however,
carry a stub of a candle--a requisite to most northern men who are
obliged to build supper fires in wet forest. Folding his letter
carefully, he sealed it with tallow. Then wrapping one of his blankets
about him, he prepared to wait for the dawn. Fenris growled and murmured
in his sleep.

Ben himself had not slept the night before; and moved and stirred by his
plan of the morrow, slumber did not come easily to him now. He too
murmured in his sleep and had weird, tragic dreams between sleep and
wakefulness. But the shadows paled at last. A ribbon of light spread
along the eastern horizon; the more familiar landmarks emerged--ghosts
at first, then in vivid outline, the wooded sky line strengthened; the
nebulous magic of the moon died in the forest. Birds wakened and sang;
the hunting creatures crept to their lairs; sleeping flowers opened.
Morning broke on a clear, warm day.

Ben devoured a heavy breakfast--all that he could force himself to
swallow--then prepared to wait for Beatrice. He knew perfectly that
explanations would be difficult if Neilson or one of his followers found
him with the loaded boat. It was not likely, however, that any of his
enemies--except, of course, Beatrice herself--would venture down that
way.

Just before eight he saw her come,--first the glint of her white blouse
in the green of the forest, and then the flash of her brown arms. Her
voice rang clear and sweet through the hushed depths as she called a
greeting. A moment later she was beside him.

"Go back and get your heavy coat," he commanded. "I've already been out
on the water, and it'll freeze you stiff."

He was not overly pleased with himself for speaking thus. He had
resolved to put mercy from him; and he was taking a serious risk to his
own cause by the delay of sending her back for her warmer garments. She
smiled into his eyes, but she came of a breed of women that had learned
obedience to men, and she immediately turned. But Ben had builded better
than he thought. His eyes were no longer on her radiant face. They had
dropped to the pistol, in its holster, that she carried in her hands,
preparatory to strapping it about her waist. It was disconcerting that
he had forgotten about her pistol. It was one of those insignificant
trifles that before now have disrupted the mightiest plans of nations
and of men. His mind sped like lightning, and he thanked his stars that
he had seen it in time. This pistol and a small package, the contents
of which he did not know, were the only equipment she had.

"It's going to be a bright day," the girl said hesitatingly. "I don't
think I'll need the fur coat--"

"Get it, anyway," Ben advised. "The wind's keen on the river. Leave your
pistol and your package here--and go up and back at top speed. I'll be
arranging the canoe--"

She laid down the things, and in a moment the thickets had hidden her.
Swiftly Ben reached for the gun, and for a few speeding seconds his
fingers worked at its mechanism. He was busy about the canoe when the
girl returned.

Evidently Beatrice was in wonderful spirits. The air itself was
sparkling, the sun--beloved with an ardor too deep for words by all
northern peoples--was warm and genial in the sky; the spruce forest was
lush with dew, fragrant with hidden blossoms. It was a Spring
Day--nothing less. Both of them knew perfectly that miracle was abroad
in the forest,--flowers opening, buds breaking into blossoms, little
grass blades stealing, shy as fairies, up through the dead leaves; birds
fluttering and gossiping and carrying all manner of building materials
for their nests.

Spring is not just a time of year to the forest folk, and particularly
to those creatures whose homes are the far spruce forests of the North.
It is a magic and a mystery, a recreation and a renewed lease on life
itself. It is hope come again, the joy of living undreamed of except by
such highly strung, nerve-tingling, wild-blooded creatures as these; and
in some measure at least it is the escape from Fear. For there is no
other name than Fear for the great, white, merciless winter that had
just departed.

High and low, every woods creature knows this dread, this age-old
apprehension of the deepening snow. Perhaps it had its birth in eons
past, when the great glaciers brought their curse of gold into the
temperate regions, locking land and sea under tons of ice. Never the
frost comes, and the snow deepens on the land, and the rivers and lakes
are struck silent as if by a cruel magician's magic, but that this old
fear returns, creeping like poison into the nerves, bowing down the
heart and chilling the warm wheel of the blood. For the rodents and the
digging people--even for the mighty grizzly himself--the season means
nothing but the cold and the darkness of their underground lairs. For
those that try to brave the winter, the portion is famine and cold; the
vast, far-spreading silence broken only by the sobbing song of the wolf
pack, starving and afraid on the distant ridges. Man is the conqueror,
the Mighty One who can strike the fire, but yet he too knows the creepy,
haunting dread and deep-lying fear of the northern winter. But that
dread season was gone now, yielding for a few happy months to a gay
invader from the South; and the whole forest world rejoiced.

Both Beatrice and Ben could sense the new wakening and revival in the
still depths about them. The forest was hushed, tremulous, yet vibrant
and ecstatic with renewed life. The old grizzly bear had left his winter
lair; and good feeding was putting the fat again on his bones; the old
cow moose had stolen away into the farther marshes for some mystery and
miracle of her own. Everywhere young calves of caribou were breathing
the air for the first time, trying to stand on wobbly legs and pushing
with greedy noses into overflowing udders. The rich new grass yielded
milk in plenty for all these wilderness nurslings. Even the she-wolf
forgot her wicked savagery to nurse and fondle her whelps in the lair;
even the she-lynx, hunting with renewed fervor through the branches,
knew of a marvelous secret in a hollow log that she would be torn to
scraps of fur rather than reveal.

The she-ermine, her white hair falling out, was brooding a litter of
cutthroats and murderers in a nest of grass and twigs, and each one of
them was a source of pride and joy to her mother heart. Even the
wolverine had some wicked-eyed little cubs that, to her, were precious
beyond rubies; but which would ultimately receive all the oaths in the
language for stealing bait on the trap lines out from the settlements.

Beatrice, a woods creature herself, knew the stir and thrill of spring;
but there were also more personal, more deeply hidden reasons why she
was happy to-day. She was certainly a very girlish-girl in most ways,
with even more than the usual allowance of romance and sentiment, and
the idea of an all-day picnic with this stalwart forester went straight
home to her imagination. She had been tremendously impressed with him
from the first, and the day's ride out from Snowy Gulch had brought him
very close to her indeed. And what might not the day bring forth! What
mystery and wonder might come to pass!

Her dark eyes were lustrous, and the haunting sadness they often held
was quite gone. Her face was faintly flushed, her red lips wistful,
every motion eager and happy as a child's. But Ben looked at her
unmoved.

Coldly his eye leaped over her supple, slender form. He saw with relief
that she was stoutly clad in middy and skirt of wool, wool stockings,
and solid little boots. The heavy coat she had brought was not
particularly noteworthy in these woods, but it would have drawn instant
admiration from knowing people of a great city. It was not cut with
particular style, neither was it beautifully lined, but the fabric
itself was plucked otter,--the dark, well-wearing fur of many lights and
of matchless luster and beauty.

"For goodness sake, Mr. Darby," the girl cried. "What have you got in
this boat? Surely that isn't just the lunch--" She pointed to the pile
of supplies, covered by the blankets, in the center of the craft.

"It looks like we had enough to stay a month, doesn't it?" he laughed.
"There's blankets there, of course--for table cloths and to make us
comfortable--and the lunch, and a pillow or two--and some little
surprises. The rest is just some stores that I'm going to take this
opportunity to put across the river--to my next camp. Now, Miss
Neilson--if you'll take the seat in the bow. Fenris is going to ride in
the middle--"

The girl's eyes fell with some apprehension on the shaggy wolf. "I
haven't established very friendly relations with Fenris--"

"I'd leave him at home, but he won't stand for it. Besides I'd like to
teach him how to retrieve grouse. Lie down, old boy." Ben motioned, and
Fenris sprawled at his feet. "Now come here and pet him, Miss Neilson.
His fur, at this season, is wonderful--"

Reluctant to show her fear before Ben, the girl drew near. The wolf
shivered as the soft hand touched his side and moved slowly to his
fierce head; but he gave no further sign of enmity.

"He understands," Ben explained. "He realizes that I've accepted you,
and you're all right. Until he's given orders otherwise, he'll treat you
with the greatest respect."

She was deeply and sincerely pleased. It did not occur to her, in the
least, little degree, that occasion could possibly arise whereby
contradictory orders would be given. Ben started to help her into the
boat.

"You've not forgotten anything?" he asked casually.

"Nothing I can think of."

"Got plenty of extra shells?"

"Part of a box. It's a small caliber automatic, you see, and a box holds
fifty."

"It is, eh?" Ben's tone indicated deep interest. "May I see 'em a
minute? I think I had a gun like it once. Not the gun--just the box of
shells."

She had strapped the weapon around her waist, by now, so she didn't
attempt to put it in his hands. From her pocket she procured a small box
of shells, and these she passed to him. He examined them with a great
show of interest, balancing their weight in the palm of his hand; then
he carelessly threw the box down among the duffle in front of the stern
seat. Presently he started to push off.

"You're not taking the other paddle?" the girl asked curiously.

"No. I don't believe in letting young ladies work when I take 'em on an
outing. You are just to sit in the bow and enjoy yourself. Fenris, sit
still and don't rock the boat!"

Just one moment more he hesitated. From his pocket he drew a piece of
paper, carefully folded and sealed with tallow. This he inserted into a
little crack in the blade of the second paddle--the one that was to be
left at the landing.

"Just a little note for your father," he explained, "to tell him where
we are, in case he worries about you."

"That's very considerate of you," the girl answered in a thoughtful
voice.

She wondered at the curious glowings, lurid as red coals, that came and
went in his eyes.



XIX

After the manner of backwoods fathers Jeffery Neilson had offered no
objections to his daughter's all-day excursion with Ben. The ways of the
frontier are informal; and besides, he had every confidence in her
ability to take care of herself. The only unfortunate phase of the
affair concerned Ray. The latter would look with no favor upon the
venture; and in all probability a disagreeable half-hour would ensue
with him if he found it out.

The control of Ray Brent had been an increasingly difficult problem.
Always sullen and envious, once or twice he had not been far from open
rebellion. There is a certain dread malady that comes to men at the
sight of naked gold, and Ray's degenerate type was particularly subject
to it. Every day the mine had shown itself increasingly rich, and Ray's
ambition had given way to greed, and his greed to avarice of the most
dangerous sort. For instance, he had a disquieting way of gathering the
nuggets into his hands, fondling them with an unholy love. Neilson
realized perfectly, now, that the younger man would not be content with
a fourth share or less; and on the other hand he resolutely refused to
yield any of his own, larger share. Sometime the issue would bring them
to grips. Ray's dreadful crime of a few days past had given him an added
insolence and self-assurance that complicated the problem still further.
The leopard that has once tasted human flesh is not to be trusted again.
Finally, there remained this matter of Beatrice.

Neilson's love for his daughter forbade that he should force her to
receive unwelcome attentions. Ray, on the other hand, had always
insisted that his chief allow him a clear field. He would be infuriated
when he heard of the trip she was taking with Ben to-day. Neilson
straightened, resolving to meet the issue with old-time firmness.

When he heard his daughter's voice on the canoe landing, one hundred
yards below, he was inordinately startled. She had not told him that
their picnic would take them on to the water. The reason had been, of
course, that Beatrice knew her father's distrust of the treacherous
stream and either feared his refusal to her plan or wished to save him
worry. Even now they were starting. He could hear the first stroke of
the paddle through the hushed woods.

He turned toward the door, instinctively alarmed; then hesitated. After
all, he could not tell her to come back. Beatrice would be mortified;
and besides, there was nothing definite to fear. The river was almost as
still as a lake for a long stretch immediately in front of the landing;
even a poor canoeist could cross with ease. It was true that rapids,
mile after mile of them past counting, lay just below, but surely the
canoeists would stay at a safe distance above them. And if by any chance
this young prospector had no skill with a canoe, Beatrice herself was an
expert.

Yet what, in reality, did he know of Ben Darby? He had liked the man's
face: whence he came and what was his real business on the Yuga he had
not the least idea. All at once a baffling apprehension crept like a
chill through his frame.

He could not laugh it away. It laid hold of him, refusing to be
dispelled. It was as if an inner voice was warning him, telling him to
rush down to the river bank and check that canoe ride at all costs. It
occurred to him, for the moment, that this might be premonition of a
disastrous accident, yet vaguely he sensed a plot, an obscure design
that filled him with ghastly terror. Once more the man started for the
door.

Unaware of his ground, he did not hurry at first. He hardly knew what to
say, by what excuse he could call Beatrice back to the landing. His
heart was racing incomprehensibly in his breast, and all at once he
started to run.

At the first step he fell sprawling, and stark panic was upon him when
he got to his feet again. And when he reached the landing the canoe was
already near the opposite shore, heading swiftly downstream.

He saw in one glance that the craft was rather heavily laden, Fenris
atop the pile of duffle, and that Ben was paddling with a remarkably
fast, easy stroke. "Come back, Beatrice," he shouted. "You've forgotten
something."

The girl turned, waving, but Ben's voice drowned out hers. "We'll see
you later," he called in a gay voice. "We can't come back now."

"Come back!" Neilson called again. "I order you--"

He stared intently, hoping that the man would turn. Already they were
practically out of hearing; and not even Beatrice was dipping her paddle
in obedience to his command. Looking more closely, he saw that the man
only was paddling.

Then his eye fell to the landing on which he stood, instinctively trying
to locate the second paddle. It lay at his feet. A foolhardy thing to
do, he thought, a broken paddle, out there above the rapids, would mean
death and no other thing. Helpless in the current, the canoe could not
be guided through those fearful gates of peril below. If by a
thousandth chance it escaped the rocks, it would be carried for
unnumbered miles into a land unknown, a territory that could be entered
only by the greatest difficulty--packing day after day over range and
through thicket with a great train of pack horses--and from which the
egress, except by the same perilous water route, would be almost
impossible. But the thought passed as he discerned the white paper that
had been fastened in the paddle blade.

He bent for it with eager hand. He knew instinctively that it contained
an all-important and sinister message for him. His eyes leaped over the
bold writing on the exterior.

"To Ezra Melville's murderers," Ben had written. And with that reading
Jeffery Neilson knew a terror beyond any experienced in the darkest
nightmare of his iniquitous life.

It did not occur to him to bring the note, unopened, to Ray Brent. As
yet he did not fully understand; yet he knew that the issue was one of
seconds. _Seconds_ must decide everything; his whole world hung in the
balance. His hand ripped apart the sealed fold, and he held the sheet
before his eyes.

Possessing only an elementary education Jeffery Neilson was not,
ordinarily, a fast reader. Usually he sounded out his words only with
the greatest difficulty. But to-day, one glance at the page conveyed to
him the truth: from half a dozen words he got a general idea of the
letter's full, dread meaning. Ben had written:

    TO NEILSON AND HIS GANG:--

    When you get this, Beatrice will be on her way to Back There--either
    there or on her way to hell.

    Ezra Melville was my pard. A letter leaving his claim to me is in my
    pocket, and I alone know where Hiram's will is, leaving it to Ezram.
    Your title will never stand as long as those papers aren't
    destroyed. If you don't care enough about saving your daughter from
    me, at least you'll want those letters. Come and get them. I'll be
    waiting for you.

    BEN DARBY.

As the truth flashed home, Neilson's first thought was of his rifle. He
was a wilderness man, trained to put his trust in the weapon of steel;
and if it were only in his hands, there might yet be time to prevent the
abduction. One well-aimed bullet over the water, shooting with all his
old-time skill, might yet hurl the avenger to his death in the moment of
his triumph. Just one keen, long gaze over the sights,--heaven or earth
could not yield him a vision half so glorious as this! For all his
terror he knew that he could shoot as he had never shot before, true as
a light-ray. His remorseless eyes for once could see clear and sure. One
shot--and then Beatrice could seize the paddle and save herself. And he
cursed himself, more bitterly than he had ever cursed an enemy, when his
empty hands showed him that he had left his rifle in his cabin.

His pistol, however, was at his belt, and his hand reached for it. But
the range was already too far for any hope of accurate pistol fire. His
hard eyes gazed along the short, black barrel. His steady finger pressed
back against the trigger.

The first shot fell far short. The pistol was of large caliber but small
velocity; and a hundred yards was its absolute limit of point-blank
range. He lifted the gun higher and shot again. Again he shot low. But
the third bullet fell just a few feet on the near side of the canoe.

He had the range now, and he shot again. It was like a dream, outside
his consciousness, that Beatrice was screaming with fear and amazement.
She was already too far to give or receive a message: all hope lay in
the pistol alone. The fifth shot splashed water beyond the craft.

Once more he fired, but the boat was farther distant now, and the bullet
went wild. The pistol was empty. Like a moose leaping through a marsh he
turned back to his cabin for his rifle.

But already he knew that he was lost. Before ever he could climb up the
hundred yards to the cabin, and back again, the craft would be around
the bend in the river. Heavy brush would hide it from then on. He
hastened frantically up the narrow, winding trail.



XX

Ben was fully aware, as he pushed the canoe from landing, that the
success of his scheme was not yet guaranteed. Long ago, in the hard
school of the woods, he had found out life; and one of the things he had
learned was that nothing on earth is infallible and no man's plans are
sure. There are always coincidents of which the scheming brain has not
conceived: the sudden interjection of unexpected circumstances. The
unforeseen appearance of Beatrice's father on the landing had been a
case in point.

Most of all he had been afraid that Beatrice herself would leap from the
canoe and attempt to swim to safety. He had learned in his past
conversations with her that she had at least an elementary knowledge of
swimming. Had she not confessed at the same time fear of the water, his
plan could have never been adopted. The northern girls have few
opportunities to obtain real proficiency in swimming. Their rivers are
icy cold, their villages do not afford heated natatoriums. Yet he
realized that he must quiet her suspicions as long as possible.

"I've got the landing picked out," he told her as they started off.
"I've been all over the river this morning. It is quite a way
down--around the bend--but it's perfectly safe. So don't be afraid."

"I'm not afraid--with you. And how fast you paddle!"

It was true: in all her days by rivers she had never seen such perfect
control of a canoe. He paddled as if without effort, but the streaming
shore line showed that the boat moved at an astonishing rate. He was a
master canoeist, and whatever fears she might have had vanished at once.

She talked gayly to him, scarcely aware that they were heading across
and down the stream.

When her father had appeared on the bank, calling, she had not been in
the least alarmed. Ben's gay shouts kept her from understanding exactly
what he was saying. And when the old man had drawn his pistol and fired,
and the bullet had splashed in the water some twenty yards toward shore,
her mind had refused to accept the evidence of her senses.

The second shot followed the first, and the third the second, resulting
in, for her part, only the impotence of bewilderment. Her first thought
was that her father's fierce temper, long known to her, had engulfed him
in murderous rage. Trusting Ben wholly, the real truth did not occur to
her.

She screamed shrilly at the fourth shot; and Ben looked up to find her
pale as the foam from his flashing paddle. "Turn around and go back,"
she cried to Ben. "He'll kill you if you don't! Oh, please--turn
around--"

"And get in range of him so he _can_ kill me?" Ben replied savagely.
"Can't you see he's shooting at me?"

"Then throw up your hands--it's all some dreadful mistake. Can't you
hear me--turn and go back."

The fifth and sixth shots were fired by now; and Neilson had gone to his
cabin for his rifle. Ben smiled grimly into her white face.

"We'd better keep on going to our landing place," he advised. "There's
no place to land above it--I went all over the shore this morning. That
will give him time to cool down. I only want to get around this curve
before he comes with his rifle."

She stared at him aghast, too confused and terrified to make rational
answer. He was pale, too; but she had a swift feeling that the cold,
rugged face was in some way exultant, too. The first chill of fear of
him brushed her like a cold wind.

But they were around the bend by now, and Ben's breath caught as if in a
triumphant gasp. Already all opportunity for the girl to swim to shore
was irremediably past. While he could still control the canoe with
comparative ease, the river was a swift-moving sheet of water that would
carry any one but the strongest swimmer remorselessly into the rapids
below. Ben smiled, like a man who has come into a great happiness, and
rested on his paddle.

"Push into shore," the girl urged. "The home shore--if you can. Then
I'll go and find him and try to quiet him. He'll kill you if you don't."

A short pause followed the girl's words. The man smiled coldly into her
eyes.

"He'll kill me, will he?" he repeated.

The response to the simple question was simply unmitigated terror, swift
and deadly, surging through the girl's frame. It caught and twisted her
throat muscles like a cruel hand; and her childish eyes widened and
darkened under his contemptuous gaze.

"What do you mean?" she asked breathlessly. "What--are you going to do?"

"He won't kill me," Ben went on. "I may kill him--and I will if I
can--but he won't kill me. See--we're going faster all the time."

It was true. Strokes of the paddle were no longer necessary to propel
the craft at the breakneck pace. It sped like an arrow--straight toward
the perilous cataracts below.

The girl watched him with transcending horror, and slowly the truth went
home. The supplies in the boat, her father's desperate attempt to rescue
her, even at the risk of her own life and the cost of Ben's, this white,
exultant face before her, more terrible than that of the wolf between,
the cold reptile eyes so full of some unhallowed emotion,--at last she
saw their meaning and relation. Was it _death_--was _that_ what this mad
man in the stern had for her? She remembered what she had told him the
day before, her description of the cataracts that lay below. She
struggled to shake off the trance that her terror had cast about her.

"Turn into the shore," she told him, half-whispering. There was no
pleading in her tone: the hard eyes before her told her only too plainly
how futile her pleas would be. "You still have time to steer into shore.
I'll jump overboard if you don't."

He shook his head. "Don't jump overboard, Beatrice," he answered, some
of the harshness gone from his tones. "It isn't my purpose to kill
you--and to jump over into this stream only means to die--'for any one
except the most powerful swimmer. You'd be carried down in an instant."

The girl knew he spoke the truth. Only death dwelt in those cold and
rushing waters. "What do you mean to do?" she asked.

Her tone was more quiet now, and he waited an instant before he
answered. The canoe glided faster--ever faster down the stream. Somewhat
afraid, but still trusting in the imperial mind of his master, the wolf
raised his head to watch the racing shore line.

"It's just a little debt I owe your father--and his gang," Ben
explained. "I'll tell you some time, in the days to come. It was a debt
of blood--"

The girl's dark eyes charged with red fire. "And you, a coward, take
your payment on a woman. Turn the canoe into the bank."

"The payment won't be taken from you," he explained soberly. "You'll be
safe enough--even the fate that Neilson fears for you won't happen. I
hate him too much to take _that_ payment from you. I'd die before I'd
touch the flesh of his flesh to mine! Do you understand that?"

His fury had blazed up, for the instant, and she saw the deadly zeal of
a fanatic in his gray eyes. A hatred beyond all naming, a bitterness and
a rage such as she had never dreamed could blast a human heart was
written in his brown, rugged face. Her woman's intuition gave her added
vision, and she glimpsed something of the fire that smoldered and seared
behind his eyes. They were of one blood, this man in the stern and the
wolf on the duffle.

"Then why--"

"You're safe with me--the daughter of Jeff Neilson can't ever be
anything but safe with me--as far as the thing you fear is concerned.
Don't be afraid for that. I'm simply paying an honest debt, and you're
the unfortunate agent. Don't you know the things he's fearing now are
more torment to him than anything I could do to his flesh? If we should
be killed in these rapids that are coming, it will be fair enough too;
he'll know what it is to lose the dearest thing on earth he has. For you
and me it will only be a minute that won't greatly matter. For him it
will be weeks--months! But that's only a part of it. I hope to bring you
through. The main thing is--that sooner or later they'll come for
you--into a country where I'll have every advantage. Where there won't
be any escape or chance for them. Where I can watch the trails, and
shatter them--every one--as slow or as fast as I like. Where they'll
have to hunt for me, week on week and month on month, their fears eating
into them. That's my game, Beatrice. There will be discomfort for
you--and some danger--but I'll make it as light as I can. And in another
moment--"

"You've still got time to turn back," the girl answered him, seemingly
without feeling. "Glide into shore, and we'll try to catch an
overhanging limb. It's my last warning."

It was true that a few seconds remained in which they might, with heroic
effort, save themselves. But these were passing: already they could see
the gleaming whitecaps of the cataract below.

The roar of the wild waters was in their ears. Ahead they could see
great rocks, emerging like fangs above the water, sharp-edged and wet
with spray. The boat was shuddering; the water seemed to covet them, and
a great force, like the hand of a river god, reached at them from
beneath as if to crush them in a merciless grasp. A hundred yards
farther the smooth, swift water fell into a seething, roaring
cataract--such a manifestation of the mighty powers of nature as checks
the breath and awes the heart--a death stream in which seemingly the
canoe would be shattered to pieces in an instant.

Ben shook his head. The girl's white hand flashed to her side, then rose
sure and steady, holding her pistol. "Turn quick, or I'll fire," she
said.

He felt that, if such action were in her power, she told the truth. No
mercy dwelt in her clear gaze. His eye fell to the box of cartridges,
now fallen safely among the duffle. Presently he smiled into her eyes.

"Your gun is empty, Beatrice," he told her quietly. He heard her sob,
and he smiled a little, reassuringly. "Never mind--and pray for a good
voyage," he advised. "We're going through."




XXI

The craft and its occupants were out of sight by the time Jeffery
Neilson reached the river bank with his rifle. The flush had swept from
his bronze skin, leaving it a ghastly yellow, and for once in his life
no oaths came to his lips. He could only mutter, strangely, from a
convulsed throat.

Like an insane man he hastened down the river bank, fighting his way
through the brush. The thickets were dense, ordinarily impenetrable to
any mortal strength except to that mighty, incalculable power of the
moose and grizzly; yet they could not restrain him now. The tough
clothes he wore were nearly torn from his body; his face and hands were
scratched as if by the claws of a lynx; but he did not pause till he
reached the bank of the gray river.

Only one more glimpse of the canoe was vouchsafed him, and that glimpse
came too late. He saw the light barge just as it hovered at the crest of
the rapids. Even if he could have shot straight at so great a range and
had killed the man in the stern, no miracle could have saved his
daughter. She would have been instantly swept to her death against the
crags.

Some measure of self-control returned to him then, and he made his way
fast as he could toward the claim. Sensing the older man's distress, Ray
straightened from his work at the sight of him.

The face before him was drawn and white; but there was no time for
questions. Hard hands seized his arm.

"Ray, do you know of a canoe anywhere--up or down this river?"

"There's one at the landing. None other I know of."

"Think, man! You don't know where we can get one?"

"No. Old Hiram's canoe was the only one. What's the matter?"

"Do you think there's one chance in a million of getting down through
those rapids on a raft?"

Ray's eyes opened wide. "A raft!" he echoed. "Man, are you crazy? Even
at this high water a canoe wouldn't have a chance in ten of making it.
The river's falling every hour--"

"I know it. Do you suppose there's a canoe in town?"

"No! Of course there isn't--one that you could even dream about shooting
those rapids in. Besides, by the time we got there and packed it up--it
would take two days to pack it the best we could do--the river would be
too far down to tackle the trip at all. And it won't come up again till
fall--you know that. Tell me what's the matter. Has Beatrice--"

"Beatrice has gone down, that's all."

"Then she's dead--no hope of anything else. Only an expert could hope to
take her through, and there's nothing to live on Back There. What's the
use of trying to follow--?"

Neilson straightened, his eyes searching Ray's. "She's got food, I
suppose. And she's got an expert paddler to take her there."

Ray's face seemed to darken before his eyes. His hands half closed,
shook in his face, then caught at Neilson's shoulders. "You don't
mean--she's run away?"

"Don't be a fool. Not run away--abducted. The prospector I told you
about--Darby--was the old man's partner. He's paying us back. Heaven
only knows what the girl's fate will be--I don't dare to think of it.
Ray, I wish to God I had died before I ever saw this day!"

Ray stared blankly. "Then he found out--about the murder?" he gasped.

"Yes. Here's his letter. Take time--and read it. There's no use to try
to act before we think--how to act. If I could only see a way--"

Ray read the letter carefully, crumpling it at last in savage wrath.
"It's your fault!" he cried. "Why didn't you save her for me as I've
always asked you to do; why did you let her go out with him at all? I'll
bet she wanted to go--"

"I'd rather she had, instead of being taken by force!" The older
man--aged incredibly in a few little minutes--slowly straightened. "But
don't storm at me, Ray!" he warned, carefully and quietly. "I've stood a
lot from you, but to-day I'd kill you for one word!"

They faced each other in black disdain, but Ray knew he spoke the truth.
There was no toying with this man's wrath to-day.

"And if you'd let me croak this devil like I wanted to, it wouldn't have
happened either. But there's no use crying about either one. The girl's
a goner, sure; she's deep in the rapids by now."

"Yes, and it's part of this man's hellish plan to take her clear through
to Back There. You see, he dares us to come for her--and he'll be
waiting and ready for us, mark my words. My God, she's probably
dead--smashed to pieces--already!"

"He says he's got the old man's letter, leaving the claim to him. That
messes up things even worse."

"I wish I'd never heard of the claim. There's only one thing to do, and
that's to rush into Snowy Gulch and get a big outfit--all the horses and
supplies we can find--and go after her by land."

"Yes, and walk right into his trap. Think again, Neilson. It would take
weeks and months to get in that way. Besides, what would happen to the
claim while we're gone?"

"You needn't fear for the claim! Of course, I'd expect you to think of
that first--you who loved Beatrice so dearly!" Neilson's face was white
with disdain. "It'll be recorded in our names, by then--likely Chan is
already in Bradleyburg--and Darby himself is the only man on earth we
have to fear." He paused, putting his faith in desperate craft. "If you
want to cinch the claim, the first thing to do is go and stamp the life
out of Darby; otherwise he'll turn up and make us trouble, just as he
says."

"He can't do much if the claim's recorded in our names!"

"He can make us plenty of trouble. If you want the girl, Ray--don't lose
a minute. Put your things together as fast as you can. We'll try to get
some men in Snowy Gulch to come with us--to join in the hunt--and we'll
hire every pack horse in the country. Get busy, and get busy quick."

Reluctant to leave his gold, yet seeing the truth in Neilson's words,
Ray hastened to his cabin to get such few supplies as would be needed
for the day's march into Snowy Gulch. In less than five minutes they
were on their way--tramping in file down the narrow moose trail.

They crossed the divide, thus reaching the headwaters of Poor Man's
Creek; then took the trail down toward the settlements. But the two
claim-jumpers had not yet learned all the day's ill news. Half-way to
the mouth of the stream they met Chan Heminway on his way back to the
claim.

At the first sight of him, riding in the rear of a long train of laden
pack horses, they could hardly believe their eyes. It was not to be
credited that he had made the trip to Bradleyburg and back in the few
days he had been absent. Only an aeroplane could have made so fast a
trip. Could it be that in spite of his definite orders he was returning
with the duty of recording the claim still unperformed? To Neilson,
however, the sight of the long pack train brought some measure of
satisfaction. Here were horses laden with the summer supplies that Chan
had been told to procure, and they could be utilized in the pursuit of
Beatrice. Two days at least could be saved.

"What in the devil you coming back for?" Ray shouted, when Chan's
identity became certain.

Chan rode nearer as if he had not heard. He checked his horse
deliberately, undoubtedly inwardly excited by the news he had to tell
and perhaps somewhat triumphant because he was its bearer. "I'm coming
back because there ain't no use in staying at Snowy Gulch any longer,"
he answered at last. "I've got the supplies, and I'm packin' up to the
claim, just as I was told."

"But why didn't you go to Bradleyburg and record the claim?" Ray
stormed. "Don't you know until that's done we're likely to be chased off
any minute?"

Chan looked into his partner's angry eyes, and his own lips drew in a
scowl. "Because there wasn't any use in goin' to Bradleyburg."

Ray was stricken with terror, and his words faltered. "You mean you
could tend to it in Snowy Gulch--"

"I don't mean nothing of the kind. Shut up a minute, and I'll tell you
about it. A few days ago Steve Morris got a letter addressed to old
Hiram Melville--in care of Steve. He opened it and read it, and I heard
about it soon as I got into town. There ain't no use of our trying to
record that claim."

"For God's sake, why?"

"Because it's already recorded, that's why. We all felt so sure, and we
wasn't sure at all. Before old Hiram died he wrote a letter--one of them
two letters you heard about, Neilson--and which you wished you'd got
hold of. Who that letter was to was an official in Bradleyburg--an old
friend of Hiram's--and in it was a description of the claim. This letter
Morris got was a notice that his claim was all properly filed in
his--Hiram's--name. Whatever formalities was necessary was cut out
because the old man had been too sick to make the trip--the recorder got
special permission from Victoria. To be plain, I didn't file the claim
because it's already filed, and I didn't want to show myself up as a
claim-jumper quite as bad as that."

"It's all over town--about the claim?"

"Sure, but there won't be a rush. There's quite a movement over
Bradleyburg way for one thing; for another, this is a pocket country,
once and for always."

For some seconds thereafter his partners could make no intelligent
response. This bitter blow had been anticipated by neither. But Ray was
a strong man, and his self-control quickly returned to him.

"You see what that means, don't you?" he asked Neilson.

"It means we've lost!"

The eyes before him narrowed and gleamed. "So that's what it means to
you! Well, I don't look at it just that way. It means to me that we've
got to take these supplies and these pack horses and start out and find
Ben Darby--and never stop hunting till we've found him."

"Of course we've got to rescue Beatrice--"

"Rescuing Beatrice isn't all of it now, by a long shot. For the Lord's
sake, Neilson--use your head a minute. Didn't old Hiram leave a will,
giving this claim to his brother Ezra? If the claim wasn't recorded that
will wouldn't mean much--but it is. And hasn't this Ben got a letter
from Ezra leaving the claim to him? Now do you want to know who owns
that claim? Ben Darby owns it, and as long as he can kick, that quarter
of a million in gold can never be ours."

"You mean we've got to find him--and destroy that letter--"

"We've got to; that's all. He wrote us he had it, just to taunt us, and
we've got to burn that up whether we find the girl or not. But that
ain't all we've got to destroy--that piece of paper. You see that, don't
you?"

Neilson breathed heavily. "It's all plain enough."

"I want it to be plain, so next time I want to let daylight through a
man you won't stand in the way. It ain't just enough to burn up that
letter. We've got to get the man who owns it, too. If we don't he'd
still have a good enough case against us--with a good lawyer. Likely
enough lots of people knew of their partnership, maybe have seen the
letter--and they'd all be good witnesses in a suit. Our reputation ain't
so good, after that Jenkins deal, that we'd shine very bright in a suit.
Even if he couldn't prove his own claim, he could lug out the will old
Hiram left--he alone knows where it's hid--and then his next nearest
relatives would come in and get the claim. On the other hand, if we
smash him, the thing will all quiet down; there'll be no claimants to
work the mine; and after a few months we can step in and put up our own
notices. But we've got to do that first--smash him wide-open as soon as
we can catch up with him. He'll be way out in Back There, and no man
would ever know what became of him, and there'd be nobody left to oppose
us any more. But we can't be safe any other way."

Neilson nodded slowly. His subordinate had put the matter clearly; and
there was truth in his words. In Ben's murder alone lay their safety.

He had always been adverse to bloodshed; but further reluctance meant
ruin. Ben was one whom he could strike down without mercy or regret. And
the blow would not be for expediency alone. There would be a personal
debt to pay after the long months of searching. He could not forget that
Beatrice was helpless in his hands.

"The thing to do is to turn back with Chan, at once," he said.

"Of course," Ray agreed. "That plan of yours to get help in chasing 'em
down don't go any more. We don't want any spectators for what's ahead of
us. Here's grub and horses a-plenty, and we needn't lose any time."

So they turned back toward the Yuga, on their quest of hate.




XXII

Beatrice Neilson was a mountain girl, with the strong thews of Jael, yet
she hid her face as the canoe shot into the crest of the rapids. It
seemed incredible to her that the light craft should buffet that wild
cataract and yet live. She was young and she loved life; and death
seemed very near.

The scene that her eyes beheld in that last little instant in which the
boat seemed to hang, shuddering, at the crest of the descent was branded
indelibly on her memory. She saw Ben's face, set like iron, the muscles
bunching beneath his flannel sleeves as he set his paddle. He was
leaning forward, aware of nothing in the world but the forthcoming
crisis. And in that swift flash of vision she saw not only the steel
determination and the brutal savagery of the avenger. A little glimpse
of the truth went home to her, and she beheld something of the
misdirected idealism of the man, the intensity and steadfastness that
were the dominant traits of his nature. She could not doubt his belief
in the reality of his cause. Whether fancied or real the injury, deep
wells of emotion in his heart had broken their seals and flowed forth.

The wolf crouched on the heap of supplies, fearful to the depths of his
wild heart of this mighty stream, yet still putting his faith in his
master in the stern. Beatrice saw his wild, frightened eyes as he gazed
down into the frightful whirlpools. The banks seemed to whip past.

Then the rushing waters caught the craft and seemed to fling it into
the air. There was the swift sense of lightning and incredible movement,
of such incalculable speed as that with which a meteor blazes through
the sky, and then a mighty surging, struggle; an interminable instant of
ineffable and stupendous conflict. The bow dipped, split the foam; then
the raging waters seized the craft again, and with one great impulse
hurled it through the clouds of spray, down between the narrow portals
of rocks.

Beatrice came to herself with the realization that she had uttered a
shrill cry. Part of the impulse behind it was simply terror; but it was
also the expression of an intensity of sensation never before
experienced. She could have understood, now, the lure of the rapids to
experienced canoeists. She forced herself to look into the wild
cataract.

The boat sped at an unbelievable pace. Ben held his paddle like iron,
yet with a touch as delicate as that of a great musician upon piano
keys, and he steered his craft to the last inch. His face was still like
metal, but the eyes, steely, vivid, and magnetic, had a look of triumph.
The first of the great tests had been passed.

Sudden confidence in Ben's ability to guide her through to safety began
to warm the girl's frozen heart. There were no places more dangerous
than that just past; and he had handled his craft like a master. He was
a voyageur: as long as his iron control was sustained, as long as his
nerve was strong and his eye true she had every chance of coming out
alive. But they had irremediably cast their fortunes upon the river,
now. They could not turn back. She was in his whole charge, an agent of
vengeance against her own father and his confederates.

Hot, blinding tears suddenly filled her eyes. Her frantic fear of the
river had held them back for a time; but they flowed freely enough now
the first crisis was past. In utter misery and despair her head bowed in
her hands; and her brown hair, disheveled, dropped down.

Ben gazed at her with a curious mingling of emotions. It had not been
part of his plan to bring sorrow to this girl. After all, she was not in
the least responsible for her father's crimes. He had sworn to have no
regrets, no matter what innocent flesh was despoiled in order that he
might strike the guilty; yet the sight of that bowed, lovely head went
home to him very deeply indeed. She was the instrument of his vengeance,
necessary to his cause, but there was nothing to be gained by afflicting
her needlessly. At least, he could give her his pity. It would not
weaken him, dampen his fiery resolution, to give her that.

As he guided his craft he felt growing compassion for her; yet it was a
personal pity only and brought no regrets that he had acted as he did.

"I wish you wouldn't cry," he said, rather quietly.

Amazed beyond expression at the words, Beatrice looked up. For the
instant her woe was forgotten in the astounding fact that she had won
compassion from this cast-iron man in the stern.

"I'll try not to," she told him, her dark eyes ineffably beautiful with
their luster of tears. "I don't see why I should try--why I should try
to do anything you ask me to--but yet I will--"

Further words came to him, and he could not restrain them. "You're sort
of--the goat, Beatrice," he told her soberly. "It was said, long ago,
that the sins of the father must be visited upon the children; and maybe
that's the way it is with you. I can't help but feel sorry--that you had
to undergo this--so that I could reach your father and his men. If you
had seen old Ezram lying there--the life gone from, his kind, gray old
face--the man who brought me home and gave me my one chance--maybe you'd
understand."

They were speechless a long time, Beatrice watching the swift leap of
the shore line, Ben guiding, with steady hand, the canoe. Neither of
them could guess at what speed they traveled this first wild half-hour;
but he knew that the long miles--so heart-breaking with their ridges and
brush thickets to men and horses--were whipping past them each in a few,
little breaths. Ever they plunged deeper into the secret, hushed heart
of the wild--a land unknown to the tread of white men, a region so still
and changeless that it seemed excluded from the reign and law of, time.
The spruce grew here, straight and dark and tall, a stalwart army whose
measureless march no human eyes beheld. Already they had come farther
than a pack train could travel, through the same region, in weary days.

Already they were at the border of Back There. They had cut the last
ties with the world of men. There were no trails here, leading slowly
but immutably to the busy centers of civilization; not a blaze on a tree
for the eyes of a woodsman riding on some forest venture, not the ashes
of a dead camp fire or a charred cooking rack, where an Indian had
broiled his caribou flesh. Except by the slow process of exploration
with pack horses, traveling a few miles each day, fording unknown rivers
and encircling impassable ranges, or by waiting patiently until the fall
rains swelled the river, they might never leave this land they had so
boldly entered. They could not go out the way they had come--over those
seething waters--and the river, falling swiftly, would soon be too low
to permit them to push down to its lower waters where they might find
Indian encampments.

Nothing was left but the wilderness, ancient and unchanged. The spruce
forest had a depth and a darkness that even Ben had never seen; the wild
creatures that they sometimes glimpsed on the bank stared at them wholly
without knowledge as to what they were, and likely amazed at the
strength whereby they had braved this seething torrent that swept
through their sylvan home. Here was a land where the grizzly had not yet
learned of a might greater than his, where he had not yet surrendered
his sovereignty to man. Here the moose--mightiest of the antlered
herd--reached full maturity and old age without ever mistaking the call
of a birch-bark horn for that of his rutting cow. Young bulls with only
a fifty-inch spread of horns and ten points on each did not lead the
herds, as in the more accessible provinces of the North. All things were
in their proper balance, since the forest had gone unchanged for time
immemorial; and as the head-hunters had not yet come the bull moose did
not rank as a full-grown warrior until he wore thirty points and had
five feet of spread, and he wasn't a patriarch until he could no longer
walk free between two tree trunks seventy inches apart. Certain of the
lesser forest people were not in unwonted numbers because that fierce
little hunter, the marten, had been exterminated by trappers; the otter,
yet to know the feel of cold iron, fished to his heart's content in
rivers where an artificial fly had never fallen and the trout swarmed in
uncounted numbers in the pools.

Darting down the rapids Ben felt the beginnings of an exquisite
exhilaration. Part of it arose from the very thrill and excitement of
their headlong pace; but partly it had a deeper, more portentous origin.
Here was his own country--this Back There. While all the spruce forest
in which he had lived had been his natural range and district--his own
kind of land with which he felt close and intimate relations--this was
even more his home than his own birthplace. By light of a secret
quality, hard to recognize, he was of it, and it was of him. He felt the
joy of one who sees the gleam of his own hearth through a distant
window.

He _knew_ this land; it was as if he had simply been away, through the
centuries, and had come home. The shadows and the stillness had the
exact depth and tone that was true and right; the forest fragance was
undefiled; the dark sky line was like something he had dreamed come
true. He felt a strange and growing excitement, as if magnificent
adventure were opening out before him. His gaze fell, with a queer sense
of understanding, to Fenris.

The wolf had recovered from his fear of the river, by now, and he was
crouched, alert and still, in his place. His gaze was fast upon the
shore line; and the green and yellow fires that mark the beast were
ablaze again in his eyes. Fenris too made instinctive response to those
breathless forests; and Ben knew that the bond between them was never so
close as now.

Fenris also knew that here was his own realm, the land in which the
great Fear had not yet laid its curse. The forest still thronged with
game, the wood trails would be his own. Here was the motherland, not
only to him but to his master, too. They were its fierce children: one
by breed, the other because he answered, to the full, the call of the
wild from which no man is wholly immune.

Ben could have understood the wolf's growing exultation. The war he was
about to wage with Neilson. would be on his own ground, in a land that
enhanced and developed his innate, natural powers, and where he had
every advantage. The wolf does not run into the heart of busy cities in
pursuit of his prey. He tries to decoy it into his own fastnesses.

A sudden movement on the part of Beatrice, in the bow of the canoe,
caught his eye. She had leaned forward and was reaching among the
supplies. His mind at once leaped to the box of shells for her pistol
that he had thrown among the duffle, but evidently this was not the
object of her search. She lifted into her hands a paper parcel, the same
she had brought from her cabin early that morning.

He tried to analyze the curious mingling of emotions in her face. It was
neither white with disdain nor dark with wrath; and the tears were gone
from her eyes. Rather her expression was speculative, pensive. Presently
her eyes met his.

His heart leaped; why he did not know. "What is, it?" he asked.

"Ben--I called you that yesterday and there's no use going back to last
names now--I've made an important decision."

"I hope it's a happy one," he ventured.

"It's as happy as it can be, under the circumstances. Ben, I came of a
line of frontiersmen--the forest people--and if the woods teach one
thing it is to make the best of any bad situation."

Ben nodded. For all his long training he had not entirely mastered this
lesson himself, but he knew she spoke true.

"We've found out how hard Fate can hit--if I can make it plain," she
went on. "We've found out there are certain powers--or devils--or
something else, and what I don't know--that are always lying in wait for
people, ready to strike them down. Maybe you would call it Destiny. But
the Destiny city men know isn't the Destiny we know out here--I don't
have to tell you that. We see Nature just as she is, without any gay
clothes, and we know the cruelty behind her smile, and the evil plans
behind her gentle words."

The man was amazed. Evidently the stress and excitement of the morning
had brought out the fanciful and poetic side of the girl's nature.

"We don't look for good luck," she told him. "We don't expect to live
forever. We know what death is, and that it is sure to come, and that
misfortune comes always--in the snow and the cold and the falling
tree--and when we have good luck we're glad--we don't take it for
granted. Living up here, where life is real, we've learned that we have
to make the best of things in order to be happy at all."

"And you mean--you're going to try to make the best of _this_?" His
voice throbbed ever so slightly, because he could not hold it even.

"There's nothing else I can do," she replied. "You've taken me here and
as yet I don't see how I can get away. This doesn't mean I've gone over
to your side."

He nodded. He understood _that_ very well.

"I'm just admitting that at present I'm in your hands--helpless--and
many long weeks in before us," she went on. "I'm on my father's side,
last and always, and I'll strike back at you if the chance comes. Expect
no mercy from me, in case I ever see my way to strike."

The man's eyes suddenly gleamed. "Don't you know--that you'd have a
better chance of fighting me--if you didn't put me on guard?"

"I don't think so. I don't believe you'd be fooled that easy.
Besides--I can't pretend to be a friend--when I'm really an enemy."

For one significant instant the man looked down. This was what he had
done--pretended friendship when he was a foe. But his was a high cause!

"I'm warning you that I'm against you to the last--and will beat you if
I see my way," the girl went on. "But at the same time I'm going to make
the best of a bad situation, and try to get all the comfort I can. I'm
in your hands at present, and we're foes, but just the same we can talk,
and try to make each other comfortable so that we can be comfortable
ourselves, and try not to be any more miserable than we can help. I'm
not going to cry any more."

As she talked she was slowly unwrapping the little parcel she had
brought. Presently she held it out to him.

It was just a box of homemade candy--fudge made with sugar and canned
milk--that she had brought for their day's picnic. But it was a peace
offering not to be despised. A heavy load lifted from Ben's heart.

He waited his chance, guiding the boat with care, and then reached a
brown hand. He crushed a piece of the soft, delicious confection between
his lips. "Thanks, Beatrice," he said. "I'll remember all you've told
me."




XXIII

It is a peculiar fact that no one is more deeply moved by the great
works and phenomena of nature than those who live among them. It is the
visitor from distant cities, or the callow youth with tawdry clothes and
tawdry thoughts who disturbs the great silences and austerity of
majestic scenes with half-felt effusive words or cheap impertinences.
Oddly enough, the awe that the wilderness dweller knows at the sight of
some great, mysterious canyon or towering peak seems to increase, rather
than decrease, with familiarity. His native scenes never grow old to
him. Their beauty and majesty is eternal.

Perhaps the reason lies in the fact that the native woodsman knows
nature as she really is: living ever close to her he knows her power
over his life. Perhaps there is a religious side to the matter, too. In
the solitudes the religious instincts receive an impulse that is
impossible to those who know only the works of man. The religion that
this gives is true and deep, and the eye instinctively lifts in
reverence to the manifestations of divine might.

When the swirling waters carried the canoe down into the gorge of the
Yuga both Ben and Beatrice were instinctively awed and stilled. Ever the
walls of the gorge grew more steep, until the sunlight was cut off and
they rode as if in twilight. The stone of the precipices presented a
marvellous array of color; and the spruce, almost black in the subdued
light, stood in startling contrast. Ben saw at once that even were they
able to land they could not--until they had emerged from the
gorge--climb to the highlands. A mountain goat, most hardy of all
mountaineers, could scarcely scale the abrupt wall.

During this time of half-light they saw none of the larger forest
creatures that at first had gazed at them with such wonder from the
banks. The reason was simply that they could not descend and ascend the
steep walls.

Mostly Ben had time only for an occasional glimpse at the colossus above
him. His work was to guide the craft between the perilous boulders.
Occasionally the river slackened its wild pace, and at such times he
stretched his arms and rested his straining eyes.

Both had largely forgotten the danger of the ride. Because she was
trying bravely to make the best of a tragic situation Beatrice had
resolved to keep danger from her thoughts. Ben had known from the first
that danger was an inevitable element in his venture, and he accepted it
just as he had considered it,--with entire coldness. Yet both of them
knew, in their secret thoughts, that the balance of life and death was
so fine that the least minor incident might cast them into darkness. It
would not have to be a great disaster, a wide departure from the
commonplace. They were traveling at a terrific rate of speed, and a
sharp rock too close to the surface would rip the bottom from their
craft. Any instant might bring the shock and shudder of the end.

There would scarcely be time to be afraid. Both would be hurled into the
stream; and the wild waters, pounding against the rocks, would close the
matter swiftly. It awed them and humbled them to realize with what
dispatch and ease this wilderness power could snuff out their mortal
lives. There would be no chance to fight back, no element of
uncertainty in the outcome. Here was a destiny against which the
strength of man was as thistledown in the wind! The thought was good
spiritual medicine for Ben, just as it would have been for most other
men, and his egoism died a swift and natural death.

One crash, one shock, and then the darkness and silence of the end! The
river would rage on, unsatiated by their few pounds of flesh, storming
by in noble fury; but no man would know whither they had gone and how
they had died. The walls of the gorge would not tremble one whit, or
notice; and the spruce against the sky would not bow their heads to show
that they had seen.

But the canyon broke at last, and the craft emerged into the sunlight.
It was good to see the easy slope of the hills again, the spruce
forests, and the forms of the wild creatures on the river bank, startled
by their passing. Noon came and passed, and for lunch they ate the last
of the fudge. And now a significant change was manifest in both of them.

Psychologists are ever astounded at the ability of mortals, men and
animals, to become adjusted to any set of circumstances. The wax of
habit sets almost in a day. The truth was, that in a certain measure
with very definite and restricted limits, both Ben and Beatrice were
becoming adjusted even to this amazing situation in which they found
themselves. This did not mean that Beatrice was in the least degree
reconciled to it. She had simply accepted it with the intention of
making the best of it. She had been abducted by an enemy of her father
and was being carried down an unknown and dangerous river; but the
element of surprise, the life of which is never but a moment, was
already passing away. Sometimes she caught herself with a distinct
start, remembering everything with a rage and a bitter load on her
heart; but the mood would pass quickly.

It is impossible, through any ordinary change of fortune, for a normal
person to lose his sense of self-identity. As long as that remains
exterior conditions can make no vital change, or make him feel greatly
different than he felt before. The change from a peasant to a
millionaire brings only a moment's surprise, and then readjustment.
Beatrice was still herself; the man in the stern remained Ben Darby and
no one else. Very naturally she began to talk to him, and he to answer
her.

The fact that they were bitter foes, one the victim of the other, did
not decree they could not have friendly conversation, isolated as they
were. From time to time Ben pointed out objects of interest on the
shore; and she found herself remarking, in a casual voice, about them.
And before the afternoon he had made her laugh, in spite of herself,--a
gay sound in which fear and distress had little echo.

"We're bound to see a great deal of each other in the next few weeks,"
he had said; and this fact could not be denied. The sooner both became
adjusted to it the better. Actual fear of him she had none; she
remembered only too well the steel in his eyes and the white flame on
his cheeks as he had assured her of her safety.

In mid-afternoon Ben began to think of making his night's camp. From
time to time the bank became an upright precipice where not even a tree
could find foothold; and it had occurred to him, with sudden vividness,
that he did not wish the darkness to overtake him in such a place. The
river rocks would make short work of him, in that case. It was better to
pick out a camp site in plenty of time lest they could not find one at
the day's end.

In one of the more quiet stretches of water he saw the place--a small
cove and a green, tree-clad bank, with the gorge rising behind. Handling
his canoe with greatest care he slanted toward it. A moment later he had
caught the brush at the water's edge, stepped off into shallow water,
and was drawing the canoe up onto the bank.

"We're through for the day," he said happily, as he helped Beatrice out
of the boat. "I'll confess I'm ready to rest."

Beatrice made no answer because her eyes were busy. Coolly and quietly
she took stock of the situation, trying to get an idea of the
geographical features of the camp site. She saw in a glance, however,
that there was no path to freedom up the gorge behind her. The rocks
were precipitate: besides, she remembered that over a hundred miles of
impassable wilderness lay between her and her father's cabin. Without
food and supplies she could not hope to make the journey.

The racing river, however, wakened a curious, inviting train of thought.
The torrent continued largely unabated for at least one hundred miles
more, she knew, and the hours that it would be passable in a canoe were
numbered. The river had fallen steadily all day; driftwood was left on
the shore; rocks dried swiftly in the sun, cropping out like fangs above
the foam of the stream. Was there still time to drift on down the Yuga a
hundred or more miles to the distant Indian encampment? She shut the
thought from her mind, at present, and turned her attention to the work
of making camp.

With entire good humor she began to gather such pieces of dead wood as
she could find for their fire.

"Your prisoner might as well make herself useful," she said.

Ben's face lighted as she had not seen it since their outward journey
from Snowy Gulch. "Thank God you're taking it that way, Beatrice," he
told her fervently. "It was a proposition I couldn't help--"

But the girl's eyes flashed, and her lips set in a hard line. "I'm doing
it to make my own time go faster," she told him softly, rather slowly.
"I want you to remember that."

But instantly both forgot their words to listen to a familiar clucking
sound from a near-by shrub. Peering closely they made out the plump,
genial form of Franklin's grouse,--a bird known far and wide in the
north for her ample breast and her tender flesh.

"Good Lord, there's supper!" Ben whispered. "Beatrice, get your
pistol--"

Her eyes smiled as she looked him in the face. "You remember--my pistol
isn't loaded!"

"Excuse me. I forgot. Give it to me."

She handed him the little gun, and he slipped in the shells he had taken
from it. Then--for the simple and sensible reason that he didn't want to
take any chance on the loss of their dinner--he stole within twenty feet
of the bird. Very carefully he drew down on the plump neck.

"Dinner all safe," he remarked rather gayly, as the grouse came tumbling
through the branches.




XXIV

Quietly Beatrice retrieved the bird and began to remove its feathers.
Ben built the fire, chopped sturdily at a half-grown spruce until it
shattered to the earth, and then chopped it into lengths for fuel. When
the fire was blazing bright, he cut away the green branches and laid
them, stems overlapping, into a fragrant bed.

"Here's where you sleep to-night, Beatrice," he informed her.

She stopped in her work long enough to try the springy boughs with her
arms; then she gave him an answering smile. Even a tenderfoot can make
some sort of a comfortable pallet out of evergreen boughs--ends
overlapping and plumes bent--but a master woodsman can fashion a
veritable cradle, soft as silk with never a hard limb to irritate the
flesh, and yielding as a hair mattress. Such softness, with the
fragrance of the balsam like a sleeping potion, can not help but bring
sweet dreams.

Ben had been wholly deliberate in the care with which he had built the
pallet. He had simply come to the conclusion that she was paying a high
price for her father's sins; and from now on he intended to make all
things as easy as he could for her. Moreover, she had been a sportswoman
of the rarest breed and merited every kindness he could do for her.

He was not half so careful with his own bed, built sixty feet on the
opposite side of the fire. He threw it together rather hastily. And when
he walked back to the fire he found an amazing change.

Already Beatrice had established sovereignty over the little patch of
ground they had chosen for the camp,--and the wilderness had drawn back.
This spot was no longer mere part of the far-spreading, trackless wilds.
It had been set off and marked so that the wilderness creatures could no
longer mistake it for part of their domain. Over the fire she had
erected a cooking rack; and water was already boiling in a small bucket
suspended from it. In another container a fragrant mixture was in the
process of cooking. She had spread one of the blankets on the grass for
a tablecloth.

As twilight lowered they sat down to their simple meal,--tea, sweetened
with sugar, and vegetables and meat happily mingled in a stew. It was
true that the vegetable end was held up by white grains of rice alone,
but the meat was the white, tender flesh of grouse, permeating the
entire dish with its tempting flavor. As a whole, the stew was greatly
satisfying to the inner man.

"I wish I'd brought more tea," Ben complained, as he sipped that most
delightful of all drinks, the black tea beloved of the northern men.

"You a woodsman, and don't know how to remedy that!" the girl responded.
"I know of a native substitute that's almost as good as the real
article."

About the embers of the fire they sat and watched the tremulous wings of
night close round them. The copse grew breathless. The distant trees
blended into shadow, the nearer trunks dimmed and finally faded; the
large, white northern stars emerged in infinite troops and companies,
peering down through the rifts in the trees. Here about their fire they
had established the domain of man. For a few short hours they had routed
the forces of the wilderness; but the foe pressed close upon them. Just
at the fluctuating ring of firelight he waited, clothed in darkness and
mystery,--the infinite, brooding spirit of the ancient forest.

They had never known such silence, broken only by the prolonged chord of
the river, as descended upon them now. It was new and strange to the
conscious life of Ben, himself, the veritable offspring of the woods;
although infinitely old and familiar to a still, watching, secret self
within him. It was as if he had searched forever for this place and had
just found it, and it answered, to the full, a queer mood of silence in
his own heart. The wind had died down now. The last wail of a
coyote--disconsolate on a far-away ridge--had trembled away into
nothingness; the voices of the Little People who had chirped and rustled
in the tree aisles during the daylight hours were stilled with a
breathless, dramatic stillness. Such sound as remained over the
interminable breadth of that dark forest was only the faint stirrings
and rustlings of the beasts of prey going to their hunting; and this was
only a moving tone in the great chord of silence.

To Ben the falling night brought a return of his most terrible moods.
Beatrice sensed them in his pale, set face and his cold, wolfish eyes.
The wolf sat beside him, swept by his master's mood, gazing with deadly
speculations into the darkness. Beatrice saw them as one breed to-night.
The wild had wholly claimed this repatriated son. The paw of the Beast
was heavy upon him; the softening influences of civilization seemed
wholly dispelled. There was little here to remind her that this was the
twentieth century. The primitive that lies just under the skin in all
men was in the ascendancy; and there was little indeed to distinguish
him from the hunter of long ago, a grizzled savage at the edge of the
ice who chased the mammoth and wild pony, knowing no home but the
forest and no gentleness unknown to the wolf that ran at his heels....
The tenderness and sympathy he had had for her earlier that day seemed
quite gone now. She searched for it in vain in the dark and savage lines
of his pale face.

Because it has always been that the happiness of women must depend upon
the mood of men, her own spirits fell. The despair that descended upon
her brought also resentment and rage; and soon she slipped away quietly
to her bed. She drew the blankets over her face; but no tears wet her
cheeks to-night. She was dry-eyed, thoughtful--full of vague plans.

She lay awake a long time, until at last a little, faint ray of hope
beamed bright and clear. More than a hundred miles farther down the
Yuga, past the mouth of Grizzly River, not far from the great,
north-flowing stream of which the Yuga was a tributary, lay an Indian
village--and if only she could reach it she might enlist the aid of the
natives and make a safe return, by a long, roundabout route, to her
father's arms. The plan meant deliverance from Ben and the defeat of all
his schemes of vengeance,--perhaps the salvation of her father and his
subordinates.

She realized perfectly the reality of her father's danger. She had read
the iron resolve in Ben's face. She knew that if she failed to make an
immediate escape from him, all his dreadful plans were likely to
succeed: his enemies would follow him into the unexplored mazes of Back
There to effect her rescue and fall helpless in his trap. What quality
of mercy he would extend to them then she could readily guess.

Just to get down to the Indian village: this was her whole problem. But
it was Ben's plan to land and enter the interior somewhere in the vast
wilderness between, from which escape could not be made until the flood
waters of fall. The way would remain open but a few hours more, due to
the simple fact that the waters were steadily falling and the
river-bottom crags, forming impassable barriers at some points, would be
exposed. _If she made her escape at all it must be soon._

Yet she could not attempt it at night. She could not see to guide the
canoe while the darkness lay over the river. Just one further chance
remained--to depart in the first gray of dawn.

She fell into troubled sleep, but true to her resolution, wakened when
the first ribbon of light stretched along the eastern horizon. She sat
up, laying the blankets back with infinite care. This was her chance:
Ben still lay asleep.

Just to steal down to the water's edge, push off the canoe, and trust
her life to the doubtful mercy of the river. The morning soon would
break; if she could avoid the first few crags, she had every chance to
guide her craft through to deliverance and safety. By no conceivable
chance could Ben follow her. He would be left in the shadow of the
gorge, a prisoner without hope or prayer of deliverance. There was no
crossing the cliffs that lifted so stern and gray just behind. Before he
could build any kind of a craft with axe and fire, the waters would fall
to a death level, beyond any hope of carrying him to safety. The tables
would be turned; he would be left as helpless to follow her as Neilson
had been to follow him.

The plan meant deliverance for her; but surely it meant _death_ to him.
Starvation would drive him to the river and destruction, before men
could ever come the long way to rescue him. But this was not her
concern. She was a forest girl and he her enemy: he must pay the price
for his own deeds.

She got to her feet, stalking with absolute silence. She must not waken
him now. Softly she pressed her unshod foot into the grass. He stirred
in his sleep; and she paused, scarcely breathing.

She looked toward him. Dimly she could see his face, tranquil in sleep
and gray in the soft light; and an instantaneous surge of remorse sped
through her. There was a sweetness, a hint of kindly boyishness in his
face now, so changed since she had left him beside the glowing coals.
Yet he was her deadly enemy; and she must not let her woman's heart cost
her her victory in its moment of fulfillment. She crept on down to the
water.

She could discern the black shadow of the canoe. One swift surge of her
shoulders, one leap, the splash of the stern in the water and the swift
stroke of the paddle, and she would be safe. She stepped nearer.

But at that instant a subdued note of warning froze her in her tracks.
It was only a small sound, hushed and hardly sharp enough to arouse Ben
from his sleep; but it was deadly, savage, unutterably sinister. She had
forgotten that Ben did not wage war alone. For the moment she had given
no thought to his terrible ally,--a pack brother faithful to the death.

A great, gaunt form raised up from the pile of duffle in the canoe; and
his fangs showed ivory white in the wan light. It was Fenris, and he
guarded the canoe. He crouched, ready to spring if she drew near.

The girl sobbed once, then stole back to her blankets.




XXV

Ben wakened refreshed, at peace with the world as far as he could ever
be until his ends were attained; and immediately built a roaring fire.
Beatrice still slept, exhausted from the stress and suspense of her
attempt to escape. When the leaping flames had dispelled the frost from
the grass about the fire Ben stepped to her side and touched her
shoulder.

"It's time to get up and go on," he said. "We have only a few hours more
of travel."

It was true. The river had fallen appreciably during the night. Not many
hours remained in which to make their permanent landing. Although the
river was somewhat less violent from this point on, the lower water line
would make traveling practically as perilous as on the preceding day.

The girl opened her eyes. "I'd rather hoped--I had dreamed it all," she
told him miserably.

The words touched him. He looked into her face, moved by the girlishness
and appeal about the red, wistful mouth and the dark, brimming eyes.
"It's pretty tough, but I'm afraid it's true," he said, more kindly than
he had spoken since they had left the landing. "Do you want me to cook
breakfast and bring it to you here?"

"No, I want to do that part myself. It makes the time pass faster to
have something to do."

He went to look for fresh meat, and she slipped into her outer garments.
She found water already hot in a bucket suspended from the cooking rack,
permitting a simple but refreshing toilet. With Ben's comb she
straightened out the snarls in her dark tresses, parted them, and
braided them into two dusky ropes to be worn Indian fashion in front of
her shoulders. Then she prepared the meal.

It was a problem to tax the ingenuity of any housekeeper,--to prepare an
appetizing breakfast out of such limited supplies. But in this art,
particularly, the forest girls are trained. A quantity of rice had been
left from the stew of the preceding night, and mixing it with flour and
water and salt, she made a batter. Sooner or later fresh fat could be
obtained from game to use in frying: to-day she saw no course other than
to melt a piece of candle. The reverberating roar of the rifle a hundred
yards down the river bank, however, suggested another alternative.

A moment later Ben appeared--and the breakfast problem was solved. It
was another of the woods people that his rifle had brought down,--one
that wore fur rather than feathers and which had just come in from night
explorations along the river bank. It was a yearling black bear--really
no larger than a cub--and he had an inch of fat under his furry hide.

The fat he yielded was not greatly different from lard; and the
pancakes--or fritters, as Ben termed them--were soon frying merrily.
Served with hot tea they constituted a filling and satisfactory
breakfast for both travelers.

After breakfast they took to the river, yielding themselves once more to
the whims of the current. Once more the steep banks whipped past them in
ever-changing vista; and Ben had to strain at his paddle to guide the
craft between the perilous crags. The previous day the high waters had
carried them safely above the boulders of the river bed: to-day some of
the larger crags all but scraped the bottom of the canoe. It did not
tend toward peace of mind to know that any instant they might encounter
a submerged crag that would rip their craft in twain. Ben felt a growing
eagerness to land.

But within an hour they came out once more upon the open forest. The
river broadened, sped less swiftly, the bank sloped gradually to the
distant hills. This was the heart of Back There,--a virgin and primeval
forest unchanged since the piling-up of the untrodden ranges. The wild
pace of the craft was checked, and they kept watch for a suitable place
to land.

There was no need to push on through the seething cataracts that lay
still farther below. Shortly before the noon hour Ben's quick eye saw a
break in the heavy brushwood that lined the bank and quickly paddled
toward it. In a moment it was revealed as the mouth, of a small, clear
stream, flowing out of a beaver meadow where the grass was rank and
high. In a moment more he pushed the canoe into the mud of the creek
bank.

They both got out, rather sober of mien, and she helped him haul the
canoe out upon the bank. They unloaded it quickly, carrying the supplies
in easy loads fifty yards up into the edge of the forest, on
well-drained dry ground.

The entire forest world was hushed and breathless, as if startled by
this intrusion. Neither of the two travelers felt inclined to speak. And
the silence was finally broken by the splashing feet of a moose, running
through a little arm of the marsh that the forest hid from view.

"Is this our permanent camp?" the girl asked at last.

"Surely not," was the reply. "It's too near the river for one
thing--too easily found. It's too low, too--there'll be mosquitoes in
plenty in that marsh two months from now. The first thing is--to look
around and find a better site."

"You want me to come?"

"I'd rather, if you don't mind."

She understood perfectly. He did not intend to give her complete freedom
until the river fell so low that the rapids farther down would be wholly
impassable.

"I'll come." Beatrice smiled grimly. "We can have that picnic we
planned, after all."

They found a moose trail leading into the forest, and leaving the wolf
on guard over the supplies, they filed swiftly along it in that
peculiar, shuffling, mile-speeding gait that all foresters learn. At
once both were aware of a subdued excitement. In the first place, this
was unknown country and they experienced the incomparable thrill of
exploration. Besides they were seeking a permanent camp where their
fortunes would be cast, the drama of their lives be enacted, for weeks
to come.

Almost at once they began to catch glimpses of wild life,--a squirrel
romping on a limb; or a long line of grouse, like children in school,
perched on a fallen log. The trapper had not yet laid his lines in this
land, and the tracks of the little fur-bearers weaved a marvelous and
intricate pattern on the moose trail. Once a marten with orange throat
peered at them from a covert, and once a caribou raced away, too fast
for a shot.

Mostly the wild things showed little fear or understanding of the two
humans. The grouse relied on their protective coloration, just as when
menaced by the beasts of prey. An otter, rarely indeed seen in daylight,
hovered a moment beside a little stream to consider them; and a coyote,
greatest of all cowards, lingered in their trail until they were within
fifty feet of his grey form, then trotted shyly away.

"We won't starve for meat, that's certain," Ben informed her. His voice
was subdued; he had fallen naturally into the mood of quietness that
dwells ever in the primeval forest.

Because the trail seemed to be leading them too far from the waterways,
they took a side trail circling about a wooded hill. Ever Ben studied
the landmarks, looked carefully down the draws and tried to learn as
much as possible of the geography of the country; and Beatrice
understood his purpose with entire clearness. He wished to locate his
camp so that it would have every natural advantage and insurance against
surprise attack. He desired that every advantage of warfare be in his
favor when finally he came to grips with Neilson and his men.

They crossed a low ridge, following down another of the thousand creeks
that water the northern lands. In a moment it led them to a long, narrow
lake, blue as a sapphire in its frame of dusky spruce.

For a moment both of them halted on its bank, held by its virgin beauty.
Lost in the solitudes as it was, perhaps never before gazed upon by the
eyes of men, still it gave no impression of bleakness and stagnation.
Rather it was a scene of scintillating life, vivid past all expression.
Far out of range on the opposite shore a huge bull moose stood like a
statue in black marble, gazing out over the shimmering expanse. Trout
leaped, flashing silver, anywhere they might look; and a flock of loon
shrieked demented cries from its center. The burnished wings of a flock
of mallard flashed in the air, startled by some creeping hunter.

Slowly, delighted in spite of themselves by the lovely spot, they
followed along its shore. They climbed the bank; and now Ben began to
examine his surroundings with great care.

He had suddenly realized that he was in a region wonderfully fitted for
his permanent camp. The low ridge between the lake and the creek gave a
clear view of a large part of the surrounding country, affording him
every chance of seeing his enemies before they saw him. If they came
along the river--the course they would naturally follow--they would be
obliged to cross the beaver marsh--a half-mile of open grassland with no
protecting coverts. Beatrice saw, dismayed, that his gray eyes were
kindling with unholy fire under his heavy, dark brows.

What if he should see them, deep in the wet grass, filing across the
open marsh! How many shots would be needed to bring his war to a
triumphant end? There were no thickets in which they might find shelter:
hidden himself, they could not return his fire. Before they could break
and run to cover he could destroy them all!

Should they cross the narrow neck of the marsh, higher up, he would have
every chance to see them on the lake shore. The site was good from the
point of health and comfort--high enough to escape the worst of the
insect pests, close to fresh water, plenty of fuel, and within a few
hundred yards of a lake that simply swarmed with fish and waterfowl.

Still following a narrow, racing trout stream that flowed into the lake
they advanced a short distance farther, clear to the base of a rock
wall. And all at once Beatrice, walking in front, drew up with a gasp.

She stood at the edge of a little glade, perhaps thirty yards across,
laying at the base of the cliff. The creek flowed through it, the grass
was green and rich, beloved by the antlered herds that came to graze,
the tall spruce shaded it on three sides. But it was not these things
that caught the girl's eye. Just at the edge of a glade a dark hole
yawned in the face of the cliff.

In an instant more they were beside it, gazing into its depths. It was a
natural cavern with rock walls and a clean floor of sand--a roomy place,
and yet a perfect stronghold against either mortal enemies or the powers
of wind and rain.

"It's home," the man said simply.




XXVI

Ben and Beatrice went together back to the canoe, and in two trips they
carried the supplies to the cave. By instinct a housekeeper, Beatrice
showed him where to stow the various supplies, what part of the cave was
to be used for provisions, where their cots would be laid, and where to
erect the cooking rack. Shadows had fallen over the land before they
finished the work.

Tired from the hard tramp, yet sustained by a vague excitement neither
of them could name or trace, they began to prepare for the night. Ben
cut boughs as before, placing Beatrice's bed within the portals of the
cave and his own on the grass outside. He cut fuel and made his fire:
Beatrice prepared the evening meal.

The flesh of the cub-bear they had procured that morning would have to
serve them to-night; but more delicious meat could be procured
to-morrow. Ben knew that the white-maned caribou fed in the high park
lands. Beatrice made biscuits and brewed tea; and they ate the simple
food in the firelight. Already the darkness was pressing close upon
them, tremulous, vaguely sinister, inscrutably mysterious.

They had talked gayly at first; but they grew silent as the fire burned
down to coals. A great preoccupation seemed to hold them both. When one
spoke the other started, and word did not immediately come in answer.
Beatrice's despair was not nearly so dominating to-night; and Ben
harbored a secret excitement that was almost happiness.

Its source and origin Ben could not trace. Perhaps it was just relief
that the perilous journey was over. The strain of his hours at the
paddle had been severe; but now they were safe upon the sustaining
earth. Yet this fact alone could hardly have given him such a sense of
security,--an inner comfort new to his adventurous life.

The forest was oppressive to-night, tremulous with the passions of the
Young World; yet he did not respond to it as before. The excitement that
sparkled in the red wine of his veins was not of the chase and death,
and he had difficulty in linking it up with the thoughts of his
forthcoming vengeance. Rather it was a mood that sprang from their
surroundings here, their shelter at the mouth of the cave. He felt
deeply at peace.

The fire blazed warmly at the cavern maw; the wolf stood tense and
still, by means of the secret wireless of the wild fully aware of the
tragic drama, the curtain of which was the dark just fallen; yet Ben's
wild, bitter thoughts of the preceding night did not come readily back
to him. There was a quality here--in the firelight and the haven of the
cave--that soothed him and comforted him. The powers of the wild were
helpless against him now. The wind might hurl down the dead trees, but
the rock of the cavern Wall would stand against them. Even the dreaded
avalanche could roar and thunder on the steep above in vain.

There was no peril in the hushed, breathless forest for him to-night.
This was his stronghold, and none could assail it. And it was a
significant fact that his sense of intimate relationship with the wolf,
Fenris, Was someway lessened. Fenris was a creature of the open forest,
sleeping where he chose on the trail; but his master had found a cavern
home. There was a strange and bridgeless chasm between such breeds as
roamed abroad and those that slept, night after night, in the shelter of
the same walls.

He watched the girl's face, ruddy in the firelight, and it was
increasingly hard to remember that she was of the enemy camp,--the
daughter of his arch foe. To-night she was just a comrade, a habitat of
his own cave.

For the first time since he had found Ezram's body--so huddled and
impotent in the dead leaves--he remembered the solace of tobacco. He
hunted through his pockets, found his pipe and a single tin of the weed,
and began to inhale the fragrant, peace-giving smoke. When he raised his
eyes again he found the girl studying him with intent gaze.

She looked away, embarrassed, and he spoke to put her at ease. "You are
perfectly comfortable, Beatrice?" he asked gently.

"As good as I could expect--considering everything. I'm awfully relieved
that we're off the water."

"Of course." He paused, looking away into the tremulous shadows. "Is
that all? Don't you feel something else, too--a kind of satisfaction?"

The coals threw their lurid glow on her lovely, deeply tanned face.
"It's for you to feel satisfaction, not me. You couldn't expect me to
feel very satisfied--taken from my home--as a hostage--in a feud with my
father. But I think I know what you mean. You mean--the comfort of the
fire, and a place to stay."

"That's it. Of course."

"I feel it--but every human being does who has a fire when this big,
northern night comes down and takes charge of things. It's just an
instinct, I suppose, a comfort and a feeling of safety--and likely only
the wild beasts are exempt from it." Her voice changed and softened, as
her girlish fancy reached ever farther. "I suppose the first men that
you were telling me about on the way out, the hairy men of long ago,
felt the same way when the cold drove them to their caves for the first
time. A great comfort in the protecting walls and the fire."

"It's an interesting thought--that perhaps the love of home sprang from
that hour."

"Quite possibly. Perhaps it came only when they had to fight for their
homes--against beasts, and such other hairy men as tried to take their
homes away from them. Perhaps, after all, that's one of the great
differences between men and beasts. Men have a place to live in and a
place to fight for--and the fire is the symbol of it all. And the beasts
run in the forest and make a new lair every day."

Thoughts of the stone age were wholly fitting in this stone-age forest,
and Ben's fancy caught on fire quickly. "And perhaps, when the hairy men
came to the caves to live, they forgot their wild passions they knew on
the open trails--their blood-lust and their wars among themselves--and
began to be men instead of beasts." Ben's voice had dropped to an even,
low murmur. "Perhaps they got gentle, and the Brute died in their
bodies."

"Yes. Perhaps then they began to be tamed."

The silence dropped about them, settling slowly; and all except the
largest heap of red coals burned down to gray ashes. The darkness
pressed ever nearer. The girl stretched her slender, brown arms.

"I'm sleepy," she said. "I'm going in."

He got up, with good manners; and he smiled, quietly and gently, into
her sober, wistful face. "Sleep good," he prayed. "You've got solid
walls around you to-night--and some one on guard, too. Good night."

A like good wish was on her lips, but she pressed it back. She had
almost forgotten, for the moment, that this man was her abductor and her
father's enemy. She ventured into the darkness of the cave.

Scratching a match Ben followed her, so that she could see her way. For
the instant the fireside was deserted. And then both of them grew
breathless and alert as the brush cracked and rustled just beyond the
glowing coals.

Some huge wilderness creature was venturing toward them, at the edge of
the little glade.




XXVII

The match flared out in Ben's fingers, and the only light that was left
was the pale moonlight, like a cobweb on the floor of the glade, and the
faint glow from the dying fire. About the glade ranged the tall spruce,
Watching breathlessly; and for a termless second or two a profound and
portentous silence descended on the camp. No leaf rustled, not a tree
limb cracked. The creature that had pushed through the thickets to the
edge of the glade was evidently standing motionless, deciding on his
course.

Only the wild things seem to know what complete absence of motion means.
To stand like a form in rock, not a muscle quivering or a hair stirring,
is never a feat for ragged, over stretched human nerves; and it requires
a perfect muscle control that is generally only known to the beasts of
the forest. Only a few times in a lifetime in human beings are the
little, outward motions actually suspended; perhaps under the paralysis
of great terror or, with painstaking effort, before a photographer's
camera. But with the beasts it is an everyday accomplishment necessary
to their survival. The fawn that can not stand absolutely motionless,
his dappled skin blending perfectly with the background of shrubbery
shot with sunlight, comes to an end quickly in the fangs of some great
beast of prey. The panther that can not lurk, not a muscle quivering, in
his ambush beside the deer trail, never knows full feeding. The creature
on the opposite side of the glade seemed as bereft of motion as the
spruce trees in the moonlight, or the cliff above the cave.

"What is it?" Beatrice whispered. The man's eyes strained into the
gloom.

"I don't know. It may be just a moose, or maybe a caribou. But it may
be--"

He tiptoed to the door of the cave, and his eye fell to the crouching
form of Fenris. The creature outside was neither moose nor caribou. The
great wolf of the North does not stand at bay to the antlered people. He
was poised to spring, his fangs bared and his fierce eyes hot with fire,
but he was not hunting. Whatever moved in the darkness without, the wolf
had no desire to go forth and attack. Perhaps he would fight to the
death to protect the occupants of the cave; but surely an ancient and
devastating fear had hold of him. Evidently he recognized the intruder
as an ancestral enemy that held sovereignty over the forest.

At that instant Ben leaped through the cavern maw to reach his gun.
There was nothing to be gained by waiting further. This was a savage and
an uninhabited land; and the great beasts of prey that ranged the forest
had not yet learned the restraint born of the fear of man. And he knew
one breathless instant of panic when his eye failed to locate the weapon
in the faint light of the fire.

Holding hard, he tried to remember where he had left it. The form across
the glade was no longer motionless. Straining, Ben saw the soft roll of
a great shadow, almost imperceptible in the gloom--advancing slowly
toward him. Then the faint glow of the fire caught and reflected in the
creature's eyes.

They suddenly glowed out in the half-darkness, two rather small circles
of dark red, close together and just alike. This night visitor was not
moose or caribou, or was it one of the lesser hunters, lynx or
wolverine, or a panther wandered far from his accustomed haunts. The
twin circles were too far above the ground. And whatever it was, no
doubt remained but that the creature was steadily stalking him across
the soft grass.

At that instant Ben's muscles snapped into action. Only a second
remained in which to make his defense--the creature had paused, setting
his muscles for a death-dealing charge. "Go back into the cave--as far
as you can," he said swiftly to Beatrice. His own eyes, squinted and
straining for the last iota of vision in that darkened scene, made a
last, frantic search for his rifle. Suddenly he saw the gleam of its
barrel as it rested against the wall of the cliff, fifteen feet distant.

At once he knew that his only course was to spring for it in the instant
that remained, and trust to its mighty shocking power to stop the charge
that would in a moment ensue. Yet it seemed to tear the life fiber of
the man to do it. His inmost instincts, urgent and loud in his ear, told
him to remain on guard, not to leave that cavern maw for an instant but
to protect with his own body the precious life that it sheltered. His
mind worked with that incredible speed that is usually manifest in a
crisis; and he knew that the creature might charge into the cavern
entrance in the second that he left it. Yet only in the rifle lay the
least chance or hope for either of them.

"At him, Fenris!" he shouted. The wolf leaped forward like a thrown
spear,--almost too fast for the eye to follow. He was deathly afraid,
with full knowledge of the power of the enemy he went to combat, but his
fears were impotent to restrain him at the first sound of that masterful
voice. These were the words he had waited for. He could never disobey
such words as these--from the lips of his god. And Ben's mind had worked
true; he knew that the wolf could likely hold the creature at bay until
he could seize his rifle.

In an instant it was in his hands, and he had sprung back to his post in
front of the cavern maw. And presently he remembered, heartsick, that
the weapon was not loaded.

For his own safety he had kept it empty on the outward journey, partly
to prevent accident, partly to be sure that his prisoner could not turn
it against him. But he had shells in the pocket of his jacket. His hand
groped, but his reaching fingers found but one shell, dropping it
swiftly into the gun. And now he knew that no time remained to seek
another. The beast in the darkness had launched into the charge.

Thereafter there was only a great confusion, event piled upon event with
incredible rapidity, and a whole lifetime of stress and fear lived in a
single instant. The creature's first lunge carried him into the brighter
moonlight; and at once Ben recognized its breed. No woodsman could
mistake the high, rocking shoulders, the burly form, the wicked ears
laid back against the flat, massive head, the fangs gleaming white, the
long, hooked claws slashing through the turf as he ran. It was a
terrible thing to see and stand against, in the half-darkness. The
shadows accentuated the towering outline; and forgotten terrors,
lurking, since the world was young, in the labyrinth of the germ plasm
wakened and spread like icy streams through the mortal body and seemed
to threaten to extinguish the warm flame of the very soul.

The grizzly bawled as he came, an explosive, incredible storm of sound.
Few indeed are the wilderness creatures that can charge in silence:
muscular exertion can not alone relieve their gathered flood of madness
and fury. And at once Ben sensed the impulse behind the attack. He and
the girl had made their home in the grizzly's cave--perhaps the lair
wherein he had hibernated through the winter and which he still slept in
from time to time--and he had come to drive them out. Only death could
pay for such insolence as this,--to make a night's lair in the den of
his sovereignty, the grizzly.

It is not the accustomed thing for a grizzly to make an unprovoked
attack. He has done it many times, in the history of the west, but
usually he is glad enough to turn aside, only launching into his
terrible death-charge when a mortal wound obliterates his fear of man,
leaving only his fear of death. But this grizzly, native to these
uninhabited wilds, had no fear of man to forget. He did not know what
man was, and he had not learned the death that dwells in the shining
weapon he carries in his arms. No trappers mushed through his snows of
spring; no woodsman rode his winding trails. True, from the first
instant that the human smell had reached him on the wind he had been
disturbed and discomfited; yet it was not grizzly nature to yield his
den without a fight. The sight of the wolf--known to him of old--only
wakened an added rage in his fierce heart.

The wolf met him at his first leap, springing with noble courage at his
grizzled throat; and the bear paused in his charge to strike him away.
He lashed out with his great forepaw; and if that blow had gone straight
home the ribs of the wolf would have been smashed flat on his heart and
lungs. The tough trunk of a young spruce would have been broken as
quickly under that terrible, blasting full-stroke of a grizzly. The
largest grizzly weighs but a thousand pounds, but that weight is simple
fiber and iron muscle, of a might incredible to any one but the woodsmen
who know this mountain king in his native haunts. But Fenris whipped
aside, and the paw missed him.

Immediately the wolf sprang in again, with a courage scarcely compatible
with lupine characteristics, ready to wage this unequal battle to the
death. But his brave fight was tragically hopeless. For all that his
hundred and fifty pounds were, every ounce, lightning muscle and vibrant
sinew, it was as if a gopher had waged war with a lynx. Yet by the law
of his wild heart he could not turn and flee. His master--his stalwart
god whose words thrilled him to the uttermost depths--had given his
orders, and he must obey them to the end.

The second blow missed him also, but the third caught a small shrub that
grew twenty feet beyond the dying fire. The shrub snapped off under the
blow, and its branchy end smote the wolf across the head and neck. As if
struck by a tornado he was hurled into the air, and curtailed and
indirect though the blow was, he sprawled down stunned and insensible in
the grass. The bear paused one instant; then lunged forth again.

But the breath in which the wolf had stayed the charge had given Ben his
chance. With a swift motion of his arm he had projected the single rifle
shell into the chamber of the weapon. The stock snapped to his shoulder;
and his keen, glittering eyes sought the sights.




XXVIII

Few wilderness adventures offer a more stern test to human nerves than
the frightful rush of a maddened grizzly. It typifies all that is primal
and savage in the wild: the insane rage that can find relief only in the
cruel rending of flesh; the thundering power that no mere mortal
strength can withstand. But Ben was a woodsman. He had been tried in the
fire. He knew that not only his life, but that of the girl in the cavern
depended upon this one shot; and it was wholly characteristic of Wolf
Darby that his eye held true and his arm was steady as a vice of iron.

He was aware that he must wait until the bear was almost upon him, in
order to be sure to send the bullet home to a vital place. This alone
was a test requiring no small measure of self-control. The instinct was
to fire at once. In the moonlight it was difficult to see his sights:
his only chance was to enlarge his target to the last, outer limit of
safety. He aimed for the great throat, below the slavering jaw.

His finger pressed back steadily against the trigger. The slightest
flinching, the smallest motion might yet throw off his aim. The rifle
spoke with a roar.

But this wilderness battle was not yet done. The ball went straight
home, down through the throat, mushrooming and plowing on into the neck,
inflicting a wound that was bound to be mortal within a few seconds. The
bear recoiled; but the mighty engine of its life was not yet destroyed.
Its incalculable fonts of vitality had not yet run down.

The grizzly bounded forward again. The ball had evidently missed the
vertebrae and spinal column. His crashing, thunderous roar of pain
smothered instantly the reechoing report of the rifle and stifled the
instinctive cry that had come to Ben's lips. He was a forester; and he
had known of old what havoc a mortally wounded bear can wreak in a few
seconds of life. In that strange, vivid instant Ben knew that his own
and the girl's life still hung in the balance, with the beam inclining
toward death.

The grizzly was in his death-agony, nothing more; yet in that final
convulsion he could rip into shreds the powerful form that opposed him.
Ben knew, with a cold, sure knowledge, that if he failed to slay the
beast, it would naturally crawl into its lair for its last breath. As
this dreadful thought flashed home he dropped the empty rifle and seized
the axe that leaned against a log of spruce beside the fire.

There was no time at all to search out another shell and load his rifle.
If the shock of the heavy bullet had not slackened the bear's pace he
would not even have had time to seize the axe. Finally, if the bear had
not been all but dead, in his last, threshing agony, Ben's mortal
strength could not have sent home one blow. As it was they found
themselves facing each other over the embers of the fire, well-matched
contestants whose stake was life and whose penalty was death. The
grizzly turned his head, caught sight of Ben, identified him as the
agent of his agony, and lurched forward.

Just in time Ben sprang aside, out of the reach of those terrible
forearms; and his axe swung mightly in the air. Its blade gleamed and
descended--a blow that might have easily broken the bear's back if it
had gone true but which now seemed only to infuriate him the more. The
bear reared up, reeled, and lashed down; and dying though he was, he
struck with incredible power. One slashing stroke of that vast forepaw,
one slow closing of those cruel fangs upon skull or breast, and life
would have gone out like a light. But Ben leaped aside again, and again
swung down his axe.

These were but the first blows of a terrific battle that carried like a
storm through the still reaches of the forest. Far in the distant tree
aisles the woods people paused in their night's occupation to listen,
stirred and terrified by the throb and thrill in the air; the grazing
caribou lifted his growing horns and snorted in terror; the beasts of
prey paused in the chase, growling uneasily, gazing with fierce,
luminous eyes in the direction of the battle.

It is beyond the ken of man whether or not, in their wild hearts, these
forest folk sensed what was taking place,--that their gray monarch, the
sovereign grizzly, was at the death-fight with some dreadful invader
from the South. They heard the bear's fierce bawls, unimitatable by any
other voice as he lashed down blow after blow; and they heard the thud
and crunch of the axe against his body. Had this monarch of the trails
found his master at last?

Gazing out through the aperture of the cave Beatrice beheld the whole
picture: the ring of spruce trees, the glade so strange and ensilvered
in the moonlight, and these two fighting beasts, magnificent in fury
over the embers of the dying fire. And Ben's powers increased, rather
than lessened. Ever he swung his terrible axe with greater power.

He fought like the wolf that was his blood brother,--lunging, striking
down, recoiling out of harm's way, and springing forward to strike
again. This man was Wolf Darby, a forester known in many provinces for
his woods prowess, but even those who had seen his most spectacular
feats, in past days, had not appreciated the real extent of his powers.
There was a fury and a might in his blows that was hard to associate
with the world of human beings,--such ferociousness and wolf-like
savagery, welling strength and prowess of battle that mostly men have
forgotten in their centuries of civilization, but which still mark the
death-fight between beasts.

Ben had always recalled the earlier types of man--his great-thewed
ancestors, wild hunters in the forests of ancient Germany--but never so
much as to-night. He was in his natural surroundings--at the mouth of
his cave in which the Woman watched and exulted in his blows, enclosed
by the primeval forest and beside the ashes of his fire. There could be
nothing strange or unreal about this scene to Beatrice. It was more true
than any soft vista of a far-away city could possibly be. It was life
itself,--man battling for his home and his woman against the raw forces
of the wild.

All superficialities and superfluities were gone, and only the basic
stuff of life remained,--the cave, the fire, the man who fought the
beast in the light of the ancient moon. At that moment Ben was no more
of the twentieth century than he was of the first, or of the first more
than of some dark, unnumbered century of the world's young days. He was
simply the male of his species, the man-child of all time, forgetting
for the moment all the little lessons civilization had taught, and
fighting his fight in the basic way for the basic things.

This was no new war which Ben and the grizzly fought in the pale light
of the moon. It had begun when the race began, and it would continue,
in varied fields, until men perished from the earth. Ben fought for
_life_--not only his own but the girl's--that old, beloved privilege to
breathe the air and see and know and be. He represented, by a strange
symbolism, the whole race that has always fought in merciless and
never-ending battle with the cruel and oppressive powers of nature. In
the grizzly were typified all those ancient enemies that have always
opposed, with claw and fang, this stalwart, self-knowing breed that has
risen among the primates: he symbolized not only the Beast of the
forest, but the merciless elements, storm and flood and cold and all the
legions of death. And had they but known their ultimate fate if this
intruder survived the battle and brought his fellows into this, their
last stronghold, the watching forest creatures would have prayed to see
the grizzly strike him to the earth.

Ben knew, too, that he was fighting for his home; and this also lent him
strength. _Home_! His shelter from the storm and the cold, the thing
that marked him a man instead of a beast. The grizzly had come to drive
him forth; and they had met beside the ashes of his fire.

The old exhilaration and rapture of battle flashed through him as he
swung his axe, sending home blow after blow. Sometimes he cried out,
involuntarily, in his fury and hatred; and as the bear weakened he waged
the fight at closer quarters. His muscles made marvelous response,
flinging him out of danger in the instant of necessity and giving
terrific power to his blows.

He danced about the shaggy, bleeding form of the bear, swinging his axe,
howling in his rage, and escaping the smashing blows of the bear with
miraculous agility,--a weird and savage picture in the moonlight. But
at last the grizzly lunged too far. Ben sprang aside, just in time, and
he saw his chance as the great, reeling form sprawled past. He aimed a
terrific blow just at the base of the skull.

The silence descended quickly thereafter. The blow had gone straight
home, and the last flicker of waning life fled from the titanic form. He
went down sprawling; Ben stood waiting to see if another blow was
needed. Then the axe fell from his hands.

For a moment he stood as if dazed. It was hard to remember all that
occurred in the countless life times he had lived since the grizzly had
stolen out of the spruce forest. But soon he remembered Fenris and
walked unsteadily to his side.

The wolf, however, was already recovering from the blow. He had been
merely stunned; seemingly no bones were broken. Once more Ben turned to
the mouth of the cavern.

Sobbing and white as the moonlight itself Beatrice met him in the
doorway. She too had been uninjured; his arm had saved her from the
rending fangs. She was closer to him now, filling a bigger part of his
life. He didn't know just why. He had fought for her; and some way--they
were more to each other.

And this was his cavern,--his stronghold of rock where he might lay his
head, his haven and his hearth, and the symbol of his dominance over the
beasts of the field. He had fought for this, too. And he suddenly knew a
great and inner peace and a love for the sheltering walls that would
dwell forever in the warp and woof of his being.






PART THREE

THE TAMING




XXIX

Ben rose at daybreak, wonderfully refreshed by the night's sleep, and
built the fire at the cavern mouth. Beatrice was still asleep, and he
was careful not to waken her. The days would be long and monotonous for
her, he knew, and the more time she could spend in sleep the better.

He did, however, steal to the opening of the cavern and peer into her
face. The soft, morning light fell gently upon it, bringing out its
springtime freshness and the elusive shades of gold in her hair. She
looked more a child than a woman, some one to shelter and comfort rather
than to harry as a foe. "Poor little girl," he murmured under his
breath. "I'm going to make it as easy for you as I can."

He meant what he said. He could do that much, at least--extend to her
every courtesy and comfort that was in his power, and place his own
great strength at her service.

His first work was to remove the skin of last night's invader,--the huge
grizzly that lay dead just outside the cavern opening. They would have
use for this warm, furry hide before their adventure was done. It would
supplement their supply of blankets; and if necessary it could be cut
and sewed with threads of sinew into clothes. Because the animal had
but recently emerged from hibernation his fur, except for a few rubbed
places, was long and rich,--a beautiful, tawny-gray that shimmered like
cloth-of-gold in the light.

It taxed his strength to the utmost to roll over the huge body and skin
it. When the heavy skin was removed he laid it out, intending to stretch
it as soon as he could build a rack. He cut off some of the fat; then
quartering the huge body, he dragged it away into the thickets.

The hour was already past ten; but Beatrice--worn out by the stress of
the night before--did not waken until she heard the crack of her pistol.
She lay a while, resting, watching through the cavern opening Ben's
efforts to prepare breakfast. A young grouse had fallen before the
pistol, and her companion was busy preparing it for the skillet.

The girl watched with some pleasure his rather awkward efforts to go
about his work in silence,--evidently still believing her asleep. She
laughed secretly at his distress as he tripped clumsily over a piece of
firewood; then watched him with real interest as he mixed batter for
griddle cakes and fried the white breast of the grouse in bear fat.
Filling one of the two tin plates he stole into the cavern.

Falling into his mood the girl pretended to be asleep. She couldn't have
understood why her pulse quickened as he knelt beside her, looking so
earnestly and soberly into her face. Then she felt the touch of his
fingers on her shoulder.

"Wake up, Beatrice," he commanded, with pretended gruffness. "It's after
ten, and you've got to cook my breakfast."

She stirred, pretending difficulty in opening her eyes.

"Get right up," he commanded again. "D'ye think I'm going to wait all
morning?"

She opened her eyes to find him regarding her with boyish glee. Then--as
a surprise--he proffered the filled plate, meanwhile raising his arm in
feigned fear of a blow.

She laughed; then began upon her breakfast with genuine relish. Then he
brought her hot water and the meager toilet articles; and left the cave
to prepare his own breakfast.

"I'm going on a little hunt," he said, when this rite was over. "We
can't depend on grouse and bear forever. I hate to ask you to go--"

His tone was hopeful; and she could not doubt but that the lonely spirit
of these solitudes had hold of him. They were two human beings in a vast
and uninhabited wilderness, and although they were foes, they felt the
primitive need of each other's companionship. "I don't mind going," she
told him. "I'd rather, than stay in the cave."

"It's a fine morning. And what's your favorite meat--moose or caribou?"

"Caribou--although I like both."

He might have expected this answer. There are few meats in this
imperfect earth to compare in flavor with that of the great, woodland
caribou, monarch of the high park-lands.

"That means we do some climbing, instead of watching in the beaver
meadows. I'm ready--any time."

They took the game trail up the ridge, venturing at once into the heavy
spruce; but curiously enough, the mysterious hush, the dusky shadows did
not appall Beatrice greatly to-day. The miles sped swiftly under her
feet. Always there were creatures to notice or laugh at,--a squirrel
performing on a branch, a squawking Canada Jay surprised and utterly
baffled by their tall forms, a porcupine hunched into a spiny ball and
pretending a ferociousness that deceived not even such hairbrained folk
as the chipmunks in the tree roots, or those queens of stupidity, the
fool hens on the branch. In the way of more serious things sometimes
they paused to gaze down on some particularly beautiful glen--watered,
perhaps, by a gleaming stream--or a long, dark valley steeped deeply in
the ancient mysticism of the trackless wilds.

He helped her over the steeps, waited for her at bad crossings; and
meanwhile his thoughts found easy expression in words. He had to stop
and remind himself that she was his foe. Beatrice herself attempted no
such remembrance; she was simply carrying out her resolve to make the
best of a deplorable situation.

She could see, however, that he kept close watch of her. He intended to
give her no opportunity to strike back at him. He carried his rifle
unloaded, so that if she were able, in an unguarded moment, to wrest it
from him she could not turn it against him. But there was no joy for her
in noticing these small precautions. They only reminded her of her
imprisonment; and she wisely resolved to ignore them.

They climbed to the ridge top, following it on to the plateau where
patches of snow still gleamed white and the spruce grew in dark clumps,
leaving open, lovely parks between. Here they encountered their first
caribou.

This animal, however, was not to their liking in the way of meat for the
table. A turn in the trail suddenly revealed him at the edge of the
glade, his white mane gleaming and his graceful form aquiver with that
unquenchable vitality that seems to be the particular property of
northern wild animals; but Ben let him go his way. He was an old bull,
the monarch of his herd; he had ranged and mated and fought his rivals
for nearly a score of years in the wild heart of Back There,--and his
flesh would be mostly sinew.

Ten minutes later, however, the girl touched his arm. She pointed to a
far glade, fully three hundred yards across the canyon. Her quick eyes
made out a tawny form against the thicket.

It was a young caribou--a yearling buck--and his flesh would be tender
as a spring fowl.

"It's just what we want, but there's not much chance of getting him at
that range," he said.

"Try, anyway. You've got a long-range rifle. If you can hold true, he's
yours."

This was one thing that Ben was skilled at,--holding true. He raised the
weapon to his shoulder, drawing down finely on that little speck of
brown across the gulch. Few times in his life had he been more anxious
to make a successful shot. Yet he would never have admitted the true
explanation: that he simply desired to make good in the girl's eyes.

He held his breath and pressed the trigger back.

Beatrice could not restrain a low, happy cry of triumph. She had
forgotten all things, for the moment, but her joy at his success. And
truly, Ben had made a remarkable shot. Most hunters who boast of
long-range hits do not step off the distance shot; fifty yards is called
a hundred, a hundred and fifty yards three hundred; and to kill true at
this range is not the accustomed thing on the trails of sport. The
bullet had gone true as a light-shaft, striking the animal through the
shoulders, and he had never stirred out of his tracks. With that joy of
conquest known to all owners of rod and gun--related darkly to the
blood-lust of the beasts--they raced across the gully toward the
fallen.

Ben quartered the animal, and again he saw fit to save the hide. It is
the best material of all for the parka, the long, full winter garment of
the North.

Ben carried the meat in four trips back to the camp. By the time this
work was done, and one of the quarters was drying over a fire of
quivering aspen chips, the day was done. Again they saw the twilight
shadows grow, and the first sable cloak of night was drawn over the
shoulders of the forest. Beatrice prepared a wonderful roast of caribou
for their evening meal; and thereafter they sat a short time at the
mouth of the cavern, looking quietly into the red coals of the dying
fire. Again Ben knew the beneficence and peace of the sheltering walls
of home. Again he felt a sweet security,--a taming, gentling influence
through the innermost fiber of his being.

But Fenris the wolf gazed only into the darkened woods, and the hair
stood stiff at his shoulders, and his eyes glowed and shone with the
ancient hunting madness induced by the rising moon.




XXX

June passed away in the wilds of Back There, leaving warmer, longer
days, a more potent sun, and a greener, fresher loveliness to the land.
The spring calves no longer tottered on wabbly legs, but could follow
their swift mothers over the most steep and difficult trails. Fledglings
learned to fly, the wolf cubs had their first lessons in hunting on the
ridges. The wild Yuga had fallen to such an extent that navigation--down
to the Indian villages on the lower waters--was wholly impossible.

The days passed quickly for Ben and Beatrice. They found plenty of work
and even of play to pass the time. Partly to fill her lonely moments,
but more because it was an instinct with her, Beatrice took an
ever-increasing interest in her cave home. She kept it clean and cooked
the meals, performing her tasks with goodwill, even at times a gaiety
that was as incomprehensible to herself as to Ben.

Their diet was not so simple now. Of course their flour and sugar and
rice, and the meat that they took in the chase furnished the body of
their meals, and without these things they could not live; but Beatrice
was a woods child, and she knew how to find manna in the wilderness.
Almost every morning she ventured out into the still, dew-wet forest,
and nearly always she came in with some dainty for their table. She
gathered watercress in the still pools and she knew a dozen ways to
serve it. Sometimes she made a dressing out of animal oil, beaten to a
cream; and it was better than lettuce salad. Other tender plant tops
were used as a garnish and as greens, and many and varied were the
edible roots that supplied their increasing desire for fresh vegetables.

Sometimes she found wocus in the marsh--the plant formerly in such
demand by the Indians--and by patient experiment she learned how to
prepare it for the table. Washing the plant carefully she would pound it
into paste that could be used as the base for a nutty and delicious
bread. Other roots were baked in ashes or served fried in animal fat,
and once or twice she found patches of wild strawberries, ripening on
the slopes.

This was living! They plucked the sweet, juicy berries from the vines;
they served as dessert and were also used in the fashioning of delicious
puddings with rice and sugar. Several times she found certain treasures
laid by for winter use by the squirrels or the digging people--and
perfectly preserved nuts and acorns, The latter, parched over coals,
became one of the staples of their diet.

She gathered leaves of the red weed and dried them for tea. She searched
out the nests of the grouse and robbed them of their eggs; and always
high celebration in the cave followed such a find as this. Fried eggs,
boiled eggs, poached eggs tickled their palates for mornings to come.
And she traced down, one memorable day when their sugar was all but
gone, a tree that the wild bees had stored with honey.

In the way of meat they had not only caribou, but the tender veal of
moose and all manner of northern small game. Ben did not, however, spend
rifle cartridges in reckless shooting. When at last his enemies came
filing down through the beaver meadow he had no desire to be left with a
half-empty gun. He had never fired this more powerful weapon since he
had felled their first caribou. The moose calves and all the small game
were taken with Beatrice's pistol.

Sometimes he took ptarmigan--those whistling, sprightly grouse of the
high steeps--and Beatrice served uncounted numbers of them, like the
famous blackbirds, baked in a pie. Fried ptarmigan was a dish never to
forget; roast ptarmigan had a distinctive flavor all its own, and the
memory of ptarmigan fricassee often called Ben home to the cavern an
hour before the established mealtime. Indeed, they partook of all the
northern species of that full-bosomed clan, the upland game birds;
little, brown quail, willow grouse, fool hens, and the incomparable blue
grouse, half of the breast of which was a meal. It was true that their
little store of pistol cartridges was all but gone, but worlds of big
game remained to fall back upon.

Ben never ceased regretting that he had not brought a single fishhook
and a piece of line. He had long since carried the canoe from the river
bank and hid it in the tall reeds of the lake shore, not only for
pleasure's sake, but to preserve it for the autumn floods when they
might want to float on down to the Indian villages; and surely it would
have afforded the finest sport in the way of trolling for lake trout.
But with utter callousness he made his pistol serve as a hook and line.
Often he would crawl down, cautiously as a stalking wolf, to the edge of
a trout pool, then fire mercilessly at a great, spotted beauty below.
The bullet itself did not penetrate the water, but the shock carried
through and the fish usually turned a white belly to the surface. A fat
brook or lake trout, dipped in flour and fried to a chestnut brown, was
a delight that never grew old.

At every fresh find Beatrice would come triumphant into Ben's presence;
and at such times they scarcely conducted themselves like enemies. An
unguessed boyishness and charm had come to Ben in these ripe, full
summer days: the hard lines softened in his face and mostly the hard
shine left his eyes. Beatrice found herself curiously eager to please
him, taking the utmost care and pains with every dish she prepared for
the table; and it was true that he made the most joyful, exultant
response to her efforts. The searing heat back of his eyes was quite
gone, now. Even the scarlet fluid of his veins seemed to flow more
quietly, with less fire, with less madness. A gentling influence had
come to bear upon him; a great kindness, a new forbearance had
brightened his outlook toward all the world. A great redemption was even
now hovering close to him,--some unspeakable and ultimate blessing that
he could not name.

Their days were not without pleasure. Often they ventured far into the
heavy forest, and always fresh delight and thrilling adventure awaited
them. Ever they learned more of the wild things that were their only
neighbors,--creatures all the way down the scale from the lordly moose,
proud of his growing antlers and monarch of the marshes, to the small
pika, squeaking on the slide-rock of the high peaks. They knew and loved
them all; they found ever-increasing enjoyment in the study of their shy
ways and furtive occupations; they observed with delight the droll
awkwardness of the moose calves, the impertinence and saucy speech of
the jays, the humor of the black bear and the surly arrogance of the
grizzly. They knew that superlative cunning of his wickedness, the
wolverine; the stealth of the red fox; the ferociousness of the ermine
whose brown skin, soon to be white, suggested only something silken and
soft and tender instead of a fiendish cutthroat, terror of the Little
People; the skulking cowardice of the coyote; and the incredible
savagery and agility of the fisher,--that middle-sized hunter that
catches and kills everything he can master except fish. They climbed
high hills and descended into still, mysterious valleys; they paddled
long, dreamy twilight hours on the lake; they traversed marshes where
the moose wallowed; and they walked through ancient forests where the
decayed vegetation was a mossy pulp under their feet. Sometimes they
forgot the poignancy of their strange lives, romping sometimes,
gossiping like jays in the tree-limbs, and sometimes, forgetting enmity,
they told each other their secret beliefs and philosophies. They had
picnics in the woods; and long, comfortable evenings before their
dancing fire. But there was one enduring joy that always surpassed all
the rest, a happiness that seemed to have its origin in the silent
places of their hearts. It was just the return, after a fatiguing day in
forest and marsh, to the sheltering walls of the cave.

With his axe and hunting knife Ben prepared a complete set of furniture
for their little abode. His first Work was a surpassing-marvelous
dining-room suite of a table and two chairs. Then he put up shelves for
their rapidly dwindling supplies of provisions and cut chunks of spruce
log, with a bit of bark remaining, for fireside seats. And for more than
a week, Beatrice was forbidden to enter a certain covert just beyond the
glade lest she should prematurely discover an even greater wonder that
Ben, in off hours, was preparing for a surprise.

From time to time she heard him busily at work, the ring of his axe and
his gay whistling as he whittled bolts of wood; but other than that it
concerned the grizzly skin she had not the least idea of his task. But
the work was completed at last, and then came two days of rather
significant silence,--quite incomprehensible to the girl. She was at a
loss why Ben did not reveal his treasure.

But one morning she missed the familiar sounds of his fire-building,
usually his first work on wakening. The very fact of their absence
startled her wide-awake, while otherwise she would have perhaps slept
late into the morning. Ben had seemingly vanished into the heavy timber
across the glade.

Presently she heard him muttering and grunting as he moved some heavy
object to the door of the cave. Boyishly, he could not wait for the
usual late hour when she wakened. He made a wholly unnecessary amount of
noise as he built the fire. Then he thrust his lean head into the cavern
opening.

"I hope I haven't waked you up?" he said.

The girl smiled secretly. "I wanted to wake up, anyway--to-day."

"I wish you'd get up and come and look at something ugly I've got just
outside the door."

She hurried into her outer garments, and in a moment appeared. It was
ugly, certainly, the object that he had fashioned with such tireless
toil: not fitted at all for a stylish city home; yet the girl, for one
short instant, stopped breathing. It was a hammock, suspended on a stout
frame, to take the place of her tree-bough bed on the cave floor. He had
used the grizzly skin, hanging it with unbreakable sinew, and fashioning
it in such a manner that folds of the hide could be turned over her on
cold nights. For a moment she gazed, very earnestly, into the rugged,
homely, raw-boned face of her companion.

Beatrice was deeply and inexplicably sobered, yet a curious happiness
took swift possession of her heart. Reading the gratitude in her eyes,
Ben's lips broke into a radiant smile.

"I guess you've forgotten what day it is," he said.

"Of course. I hardly know the month."

"I've notched each day, you know. And maybe you've forgotten--on the
ride out from Snowy Gulch--we talked of birthdays. To-day is yours."

She stared at him in genuine astonishment. She had not dreamed that this
little confidence, given in a careless moment of long weeks before, had
lingered in the man's memory. She had supposed that the fury and
savagery of his war with her father and the latter's followers had
effaced all such things as this.

And it was true that had this birthday come a few weeks before, on the
river journey and previous to their occupation of the cave, Ben would
have let it pass unnoticed. The smoldering fire in his brain would have
seared to ashes any such kindly thought as this. But when the wild
hunter leaves his leafy lair and goes to dwell, a man rather than a
beast, in a permanent abode, he has thought for other subjects than his
tribal wars and the blood-lust of his hates. The hearth, and the care
and friendship of the girl had tamed Ben to this degree, at least.

But wonders were not done. The look in the girl's eyes suddenly melted,
as the warm sun melts ice, some of the frozen bitterness of his spirit.
"It's your birthday--and I hope you have many of 'em," he went on. "No
more like this--but all of 'em happy,--as you deserve."

He walked toward her, and her eyes could not leave his. He bent soberly,
and brushed her lips with his own.

There were always worlds to talk about in the warm gleam of their fire.
When the day's work was done, and the hush of early night gathered the
land to its arms, they would sit on their fireside seats and settle all
problems, now and hereafter, to the perfect satisfaction of them both.

From Ben, Beatrice gained a certain strength of outlook as well as depth
of insight, but she gave him in return more than she received. He felt
that her influence, in his early years, would have worked wonders for
him. She straightened out his moral problems for him, taught him lessons
in simple faith; and her own childish sweetness and absolute purity
showed his whole world in a new light.

Sometimes they talked of religion and ethics, sometimes of science and
economics, and particularly they talked of what was nearest to
them,--the mysteries and works of nature. She had been a close observer
of the forest. She had received some glimpse of its secret laws that
were, when all was said and done, the basic laws of life. But for all
her love of science she was not a mere biologist. She had a full and
devout faith in Law and Judgment beyond any earthly sphere.

"No one can live in this boundless wilderness and not believe," she told
him earnestly, her dark eyes brimming with her fervor. "Perhaps I can't
tell you why--maybe it's just a feeling of need, of insufficiency of
self. Besides, God is close, like He was to the Israelites when they
were in the wilderness; but you will remember that He never came close
again.--This forest is so big and so awful, He knows he must stay close
to keep you from dying of fear.--God may not be a reality to the people
of the cities, where they see only buildings and streets, but Ben, He is
to me. You can't forget Him up here. He stands on every mountain, just
as the sons of Aaron saw Him."

He found, to his surprise, that she was not ill-read, particularly in
the old-time classics. But her environment had also influenced her
choice of reading. She loved the old legends in the minor,--far-off and
plaintive things that reflected the mood of the dusky forest in which
she lived.

One night, when the moon was in the sky, he told her of his war record,
of the shell-shock and the strange, criminal mania that followed it; and
then of his swift recovery. With an over-powering need of
self-justification he told her of his further adventures with Ezram, of
the old man's murder and the theft of the claim. She heard him out,
listening attentively; but in loyalty to her father she did not let
herself believe him entirely. The answer she gave him was the same as
she had always given at his every reference to his side of the case.

"If you were in the right, you'd take me back and let the law take its
course," she told him. "You'd not be out here laying an ambush for them,
to kill them when they try to rescue me."

He could never make her understand how, by the intricacies of law, it
would be a rare chance that he would be able to fasten the crime on the
murderers: that he had taken the only sure way open to make them pay for
Ezram's death. He told her of the old man's, final request; how that his
war with her father and his men was a debt that, by secret, inscrutable
laws of his being, could never be written off or disavowed. But he could
never fully find words to uphold his position. The thing went back to
his instincts, traced at last to the remorseless spirit of the wolf that
was his heritage.

Yet these hours of talk were immensely good for him. While they never
met on common grounds, the girl's true outlook and nobility of character
were ever more manifest to him; and were not without a gentling, healing
influence upon him. He could not blind himself to them. And sometimes
when he sat alone by his dying fire, as the dark menaced him, and the
girl that was his charge slept within the portals of stone, he had the
unescapable feeling that the very structure of his life was falling and
shattering down; but even now he could see, an enchanted vista in the
distance, a mightier, more glorious tower, builded and shaped by this
woman's hand.




XXXI

While Beatrice was at her household tasks--cooking the meals, cleaning
the cave, washing and repairing their clothes--Ben never forgot his more
serious work. Certain hours every day he spent in exploration, seeking
out the passes over the hills, examining every possible means of
entrance and egress into his valley, getting the lay of the land and
picking out the points from which he would make his attack. Already he
knew every winding game trail and every detail of the landscape for five
miles or more around. His ultimate vengeance seemed just as sure as the
night following the day.

Ever he listened for the first sound of the pack train in the forest;
and even in his hours of pleasure his eyes ever roamed over the sweep of
valley and marsh below. He was prepared for his enemies now. One or
five, they couldn't escape him. He had provided for every contingency
and had seemingly perfected his plan to the last detail.

He had not the slightest fear that his eagerness would cost him his aim
when finally his eye looked along the sights at the forms of his
enemies, helpless in the marsh. He was wholly cold about the matter now.
The lust and turmoil in his veins, remembered like a ghastly dream from
that first night, returned but feebly now, if at all. This change, this
restraint had been increasingly manifest since his occupation of the
cave, and it had marked, at the same time, a growing barrier between
himself and Fenris. But he could not deny but that such a development
was wholly to have been expected. Fenris was a child of the open forest
aisles, never of the fireside and the hearth. It was not that the wolf
had ceased to give him his dint of faithful service, or that he loved
him any the less. But each of them had other interests,--one his home
and hearth; the other the ever-haunting, enticing call of the wildwood.
Lately Fenris had taken to wandering into the forest at night, going and
coming like a ghost; and once his throat and jowls had been stained with
dark blood.

"It's getting too tame for you here, old boy, isn't it?" Ben said to him
one hushed, breathless night. "But wait just a little while more. It
won't be tame then."

It was true: the hunting party, if they had started at once, must be
nearing their death valley by now. Except for the absolute worst of
traveling conditions they would have already come. Ben felt a growing
impatience: a desire to do his work and get it over. His pulse no longer
quickened and leaped at the thought of vengeance; and the wolflike
pleasure in simple killing could no longer be his. It would merely be
the soldier's work--a dreadful obligation to perform speedily and to
forget. Even the memory of the huddled form of his savior and friend, so
silent and impotent in the dead leaves, did not stir him into madness
now.

Yet he never thought of disavowing his vengeance. It was still the main
purpose of his life. He had no theme but that: when that work was done
he could conceive of nothing further of interest on earth, nothing else
worth living for. Not for an instant had he relented: except for that
one kiss, on the occasion of her birthday, he had never broken his
promise in regard to his relations with Beatrice. His first trait was
steadfastness, a trait that, curiously enough, is inherent in all living
creatures who are by blood close to the wild wolf, from the German
police dog to the savage husky of the North. But he was certainly and
deeply changed in these weeks in the cave. He no longer hated these
three murderous enemies of his. The power to hate had simply died in his
body. He regarded their destruction rather as a duty he owed old Ezram,
an obligation that he would die sooner than forego.

The hushed, dark, primal forest had a different appeal for him now. He
loved it still, with the reverence and adoration of the forester he was,
but no longer with that love a servant bears his master. He had
distinctly escaped from its dominance. The passion and mounting fire
that it wakened at the fall of darkness could no longer take possession
of him, as strong drink possesses the brain, bending his will, making of
him simply a tool and a pawn to gratify its cruel desires and to achieve
its mysterious ends. He had been, in spirit, a brother of the wolf,
before: a runner in the packs. Such had been the outgrowth of innate
traits; part of his strange destiny. Now, after these weeks in the cave,
he was a man. It was hard for him to explain even to himself. It was as
if in the escape from his own black passions, he had also escaped the
curious tyranny of the wild; not further subject to its cruel moods and
whims, but rather one of a Dominant Breed, a being who could lift his
head in defiance to the storm, obey his own will, go his own way. This
was no little change. Perhaps, when all is said and done, it marks the
difference between man and the lesser mammals, the thing that has
evolved a certain species of the primates--simply woods creatures that
trembled at the storm and cowered in the night--into the rulers and
monarchs of the earth.

Ben had come out from the darkened forest trails where he made his lairs
and had gone into a cave to live! He had found a permanent abode--a
lasting, shelter from the cold and the storm. It suggested a curious
allegory to him. Some time in the long-forgotten past, probably when the
later glaciers brought their promise of cold, all his race left their
leafy bowers and found cave homes in the cliffs. Before that time they
were merely woods children, blind puppets of nature, sleeping where
exhaustion found them; wandering without aim in the tree aisles; mating
when they met the female of their species on the trails and venturing on
again; knowing the ghastly, haunting fear of the night and the blind
terror of the storm and elements: merely higher beasts in a world of
beasts. But they came to the caves. They established permanent abodes.
They began to be men.

All that now stands as civilization, all the conquest of the earth and
sea and air began from that moment. It was the Great Epoch,--and Ben had
illustrated it in his own life. The change had been infinitely slow, but
certain as the movement of the planets in their spheres. Behind the
sheltering walls they got away from fear,--that cruel bondage in which
Nature holds all her wild creatures, the burden that makes them her
slaves. Never to shudder with horror when the darkness fell in silence
and mystery; never to have the heart freeze with terror when the thunder
roared in the sky and the wind raged in the trees. The cave dwellers
began to come into their own. Sheltered behind stone walls they could
defy the elements that had enslaved them so long. This freedom gained
they learned to strike the fire; they took one woman to keep the cave,
instead of mating indiscriminately in the forest, thus marking the
beginning of family life. Love instead of deathless hatred, gentleness
rather than cruelty, peace in the place of passion, mercy and tolerance
and self-control: all these mighty bulwarks of man's dominance grew into
strength behind the sheltering walls of home.

Thus in these few little weeks Ben Darby--a beast of the forest in his
unbridled passions--had in some measure imaged the life history of the
race. He had lived again the momentous regeneration. The protecting
walls, the hearth, particularly Beatrice's wholesome and healing
influence, had tamed him. He was still a forester, bred in the
bone--loving these forest depths with an ardor too deep for words--but
the mark of the beast was gone from his flesh.

He could still deal justice to Ezram's murderers and thus keep faith
with his dead partner; but the primal passions could no longer dominate
him. His pet, however, remained the wolf. The sheltering cavern walls
were never for him. He loved Ben with an undying devotion, yet a barrier
was rising between them. They could not go the same paths forever.

Matters reached a crisis between Fenris and himself one still, warm
night in late July. The two were sitting side by side at the cavern maw,
watching the slow enchantment of the forest under the spell of the
rising moon; Beatrice had already gone to her hammock. As the last
little blaze died in the fire, and it crackled at ever longer intervals,
Ben suddenly made a moving discovery. The fringe of forest about him,
usually so dreamlike and still, was simply breathing and throbbing with
life.

Ben dropped his hand to the wolf's shoulders. "The little folks are
calling on us to-night," he said quietly.

In all probability he spoke the truth. It was not an uncommon thing for
the creatures of the wood--usually the lesser people such as rodents and
the small hunters--to crowd close to the edge of the glade and try to
puzzle out this ruddy mystery in its center. Unused to men they could
never understand. Sometimes the lynx halted in his hunt to investigate,
sometimes an old black bear--kindly, benevolent good-humored old
bachelor that every naturalist loves--grunted and pondered at the edge
of shadow, and sometimes even such lordly creatures as moose and caribou
paused in their night journeys to see what was taking place.

Curiously, the wolf started violently at Ben's touch. The man suddenly
regarded him with a gaze of deepest interest. The hair was erect on the
powerful neck, the eyes swam in pale, blue fire, and he was staring away
into the mysterious shadows.

"What do you see, old-timer?" Ben asked. "I wish I could see too."

He brought his senses to the finest focus, trying hard to understand. He
was aware only of the strained silence at first. Then here and there,
about the dimmining circle of firelight, he heard the soft rustle of
little feet, the subdued crack of a twig or the scratch of a dead leaf.
The forest smells--of which there is no category in heaven or
earth--reached him with incredible clarity. These were faint, vaguely
exciting smells, some of them the exquisite fragrances of summer
flowers, others beyond his ken. And presently two small, bright circles
appeared in a distant covert, glowed once, and then went out.

By peering closely, with unwinking eyes, he began to see other
twin-circles of green and yellow light. Yet they were furtive little
radiances--vanishing swiftly--and they were nothing of which to be
afraid.

"They _are_ out to-night," he murmured. "No wonder you're excited,
Fenris. What is it--some celebration in the forest?"

There was no possible explanation. Foresters know that on certain nights
the wilderness seems simply to teem with life--scratchings and rustlings
in every covert--and on other nights it is still and lifeless as a
desert. The wild folk were abroad to-night and were simply paying
casual, curious visits to Ben's fire.

Once more Ben glanced at the wolf. The animal no longer crouched. Rather
he was standing rigid, his head half-turned and lifted, gazing away
toward a distant ridge behind the lake. A wilderness message had reached
him, clear as a voice.

But presently Ben understood. Throbbing through the night he heard a
weird, far-carrying call--a long-drawn note, broken by half-sobs--the
mysterious, plaintive utterance of the wild itself. Yet it was not an
inanimate voice. He recognized it at once as the howl of a wolf, one of
Fenris' wild brethren.

The creature at his feet started as if from a blow. Then he stood
motionless, listening, and the cry came the second time. He took two
leaps into the darkness.

Deeply moved, Ben watched him. The wolf halted, then stole back to his
master's side. He licked the man's hand with his warm tongue, whining
softly.

"What is it, boy?" Ben asked. "What do you want me to do?"

The wolf whined louder, his eyes luminous with ineffable appeal. Once
more he leaped into the shadows, pausing as if to see if Ben would
follow him.

The man shook his head, rather soberly. A curious, excited light was in
his eyes. "I can't go, old boy," he said. "This is my place--here.
Fenris, I can't leave the cave."

For a moment they looked eyes into eyes--in the glory of that moon as
strange a picture as the wood gods ever beheld. Once more the wolf call
sounded. Fenris whimpered softly.

"Go ahead if you like," Ben told him. "God knows it's your destiny."

The wolf seemed to understand. With a glad bark he sped away and almost
instantly vanished into the gloom.

But Fenris had not broken all ties with the cave. The chain was too
strong for that, the hold on his wild heart too firm. If there is one
trait, far and near in the wilds, that distinguishes the woods children,
it is their inability to forget. Fenris had joined his fellows, to be
sure; but he still kept watch over the cave.

The strongest wolf in the little band, the nucleus about which the
winter pack would form, he largely confined their hunting range to the
district immediately about the cave. It held him like a chain of iron.
Although the woods trails beguiled him with every strong appeal, the
sight of his master was a beloved thing to him still, and scarcely a
night went by but that he paused to sniff at the cavern maw, seeing that
all was well. At such times his followers would linger, trembling and
silent, in the farther shadows. Because they had never known the love of
man they utterly failed to understand. But in an instant Fenris would
come back to them, the wild urge in his heart seemingly appeased by the
mere assurance of Ben's presence and safety.

Ben himself was never aware of these midnight visits. The feet of the
wolves were like falling feathers on the grass; and if sometimes,
through the cavern maw, he half-wakened to catch the gleam of their
wild eyes, he attributed it merely to the presence of skulking coyotes,
curious concerning the dying coals of the fire.




XXXII

Beatrice had kept only an approximate track of the days; yet she knew
that an attempt to rescue her must be almost at hand. Even traveling but
half a dozen miles a day, and counting out a reasonable time for
exploration and delays, her father's party must be close upon them. And
the thought of the forthcoming battle between her abductor and her
rescuers filled every waking moment with dread.

She could not escape the thought of it. It lingered, hovering like a
shadow, over all her gayest moments; it haunted her more sober hours,
and it brought evil dreams at night. Her one hope was that her father
had given her up for lost and had not attempted her rescue.

She realized perfectly the perfection of Ben's plans. She knew that he
had provided for every contingency; and besides, he had every natural
advantage in his favor. The end was inevitable: his victory and the
destruction of his foes. There would be little mercy for these three in
the hands of this iron man from the eastern provinces. If they were to
be saved it must be soon, not a week from now, nor when another moon had
waned. If Ben was to be checkmated there were not many hours to waste.

She had had no opportunity to escape, at first. Ben knew that she could
not make her way over the hundreds of miles of howling wilderness
without food supplies, and always the wolf had been on guard. He was
like a were-wolf, a demon, anticipating her every move, knowing her
secret thoughts. But the wolf had gone now to join his fellows. She was
not aware of his almost nightly return. Perhaps the fact of his absence
gave her an opportunity, her one chance to save her father from Ben's
ambush.

Conditions for escape were more favorable than at any time since their
departure from the canoe landing, that late spring day of long ago. The
wolf was gone; Ben's guard of her was ever more lax. The season was
verdant: she could supplement what supplies she took from the cave with
roots and berries, and the warm nights would enable her to carry a
minimum of blankets. She knew that she could never hope to succeed in
the venture except by traveling light and fast. On the other hand she
would need all of Ben's remaining supplies to bring her through: in a
few more days the stores would be so low that she could not attempt the
trip. Human beings cannot survive, in the forests of the north, on roots
and berries alone. Tissue-building flour and sustaining meat are
necessary to climb the ridges and battle the thicket.

How could she obtain these things? For all his seeming carelessness Ben
kept a fairly close watch on her actions, and he would discover her
flight within a few hours. Stronger than she, and knowing every trail
and pass for miles around he could overtake her with ease. He gave her
no opportunity to seize his rifle, load it and turn it against him, thus
making her escape by force.

The fact that she would leave him without food mattered not one way or
another. He would still have his rifle, and his small stock of rifle
cartridges would procure sufficient big game to sustain him for weeks
and months to come. After all, the whole issue depended on the
rifle,--the symbol of force. It would be his instrument of vengeance
when his chance came. If she could only take this weapon from him she
need not fear the coming of her rescuers. In that case Ben would be
helpless against them.

Unfortunately, the gun rarely left his hands. If indeed she should
attempt to seize it he would wrest it away from her before she could
destroy or injure it. But it was a hopeful fact that the rifle was
useless without its shells!

To procure these, however, presented an unsolvable problem. Any way she
turned she found a barrier Ben kept them in his shell belt, and he wore
the belt about his waist, waking or sleeping. Only to procure it, run
like a deer and hurl it into the rapids of the Yuga,--and her problem
would be absolutely solved. Ben would be obliged to leave the cave home
at once and return with her to the Yuga cabins, utilizing the few stores
they had left for the journey--simply because to stay, unarmed, would
mean to die of starvation. Indeed the few remaining supplies would not
more than last them through now, traveling early and late, so if the
venture were to be attempted at all it must be at once. On the other
hand his rifle and shells would enable the two of them to remain in the
cavern indefinitely on a diet of meat alone.

As she worked about the cavern she brooded over the plan; but at first
she could conceive of no possible way to procure the shells. If the
chance came, however, she wanted to be ready. She planned all other
details of the venture; the shortest route to the nearest rapids of the
river where she might dispose of the deadly cylinders of brass. It
became necessary, also, to consider the lesser weapon for the plain
reason that it might defeat her in the moment of her success.

Ben kept the weapon in his cartridge belt, but the extra pistol shells
were among the supplies. They could easily be procured. It would also be
necessary to induce him to fire away the few shells that he carried in
the pistol magazine; but this would likely be easy enough to do. He put
little reliance on the weapon, trusting rather to his rifle both for the
impending war and the procurance of big game; and he would not harbor
the pistol shells as long as he had his rifle.

But the days were passing! Any attempt at deliverance must be made
before the food stores were further depleted. They could not make the
march without food. Days and nights overtook her with her triumph as far
distant as ever. The moment of opportunity she had watched for, in which
she might seize the cartridge belt and destroy it, had never come to
pass. The plans she had made while the night lay soft and mysterious in
the solitudes had all come to nothing. He had never, as she had hoped,
removed his belt and forgotten to replace it, nor had his slumber ever
been so deep that she could steal it from him.

His own triumph surely was almost at hand. Surely his pursuers had
almost overtaken him. The stores had already fallen far below the margin
of safety for the long journey home. The thought was with her, and she
was desperate one long, warm afternoon as she searched for roots and
berries in the forest. Edible plants were ever more hard to find, these
past days; but what there were she gathered almost automatically,
herself lost in a deep preoccupation. And all at once her hand reached
toward a little vine of black berries, each with a green tuft at the
end, not unlike gooseberries in southern gardens.

As if by instinct, hardly aware of the motion, she withdrew her hand.
She knew this vine. She was enough of a forester never to mistake it.
It was the deadly nightshade, and a handful of the berries spelt death.
She started to look elsewhere.

But presently she paused, arrested by an idea so engrossing and yet so
terrible that her heart seemed to pause in her breast. Had any rules
been laid down for her to follow in her war with Ben? Was she to
consider methods at such a time as this? Was she not a woods girl,--a
woman, not a child, trained and tutored in the savage code of the wild
that knows no ethics other than might, whether might of arm or craft, of
brain or fell singleness of purpose? Should she consider ethics now?

Her father's life was in imminent danger. Another day might find him
stretched lifeless before her. Ben had not hesitated to use every weapon
in his power; she should not hesitate now. Ben had made his war; she
would wage it by his own code.

For a moment she stood almost without outward motion, intrigued by the
possibilities of this little handful of berries. She shuddered once,
nervously, but there was no further impulse of remorse. Perhaps she
trembled slightly; and her eyes were simply depthless shadows under her
brows.

They were so little, seemingly so inoffensive: these dark berries in the
shadows of the covert. They were scarcely to be noticed twice. But not
even the savage grizzly was of such might; storms or seas were not so
deadly. There they were, inconspicuous among their sister plants,
waiting for her hand.

It was right that they should be black in color. Their blackness was as
of a black night without a star shining through,--a black cloud with
never a rainbow to promise hope. She could not turn her eyes away! How
black they were among the green leaves--lightless as death itself.

A handful of them meant death: her father had warned her about them long
ago. But half a handful--perhaps a dozen of the sable berries in the
palm of her hand--what did _they_ mean? Just a sickness wherein one
could no longer guard a prisoner. They were a powerful alkaloid, she
knew; and a dozen of them would likely mean hours and hours of deep,
dreamless sleep,--a sleep in which one could take no reckoning of hands
fumbling at a cartridge belt! Half a handful would, in all probability,
fail to strike the life from such a powerful frame as Ben's, but would
certainly act upon him like a powerful opiate and leave him helpless in
her hands.

Eagerly her fingers plucked the black berries.




XXXIII

In one of the tin cups Beatrice pressed the juice from the nightshade,
obtaining perhaps a tablespoonful of black liquor. To this she added
considerable sugar, barely tasting the mixture on the end of her finger.
The balance was inclining toward the success of her plan. The sugar
mostly killed the pungent taste of the berries.

Then she concealed the cup in a cluster of vines, ready for the moment
of need. Her next act was to procure from among the supplies the little
cardboard box containing half a dozen or so of her pistol shells. The
way of safety was to destroy these first. The effect of the poison might
be of only a few minutes' duration, and every motion might count. Under
any conditions, they would be out of the way. She was careful, with a
superlative cunning, to take the box as well as its contents. She
foresaw that in all likelihood Ben would seek the shells as soon as he
fired the few that remained in his pistol magazine; and an empty
container might put him upon his guard. On the other hand, if he could
not find the box at all, he could easily be led to believe that it had
been simply misplaced among the other supplies.

She scattered the shells in the heavy brush where not even the bright,
searching eyes of the Canada jay might ever find them. Then she hastened
up the ridge to meet Ben on his way to the cave.

She waited a few minutes, then spying his stalwart form at the edge of
the beaver meadow, she tripped down to meet him. He was not in the least
suspicious of this little act of friendship. It was quite the customary
thing, lately, for her thus to watch for his coming; and his brown face
always lighted with pleasure at the first glimpse of her graceful form
framed by the spruce. She too had always taken pleasure in these little
meetings and in the gay talk they had as they sped down toward the
cavern; but her delight was singularly absent to-day. She tried to
restrain the wild racing of her heart.

She knew she must act her part. Her plan was to put him off his guard,
to hide her treachery with pretended friendship. To meet him here--far
distant from the poison cup hidden in the vines--would give her time to
master her leaping heart and to strengthen her self-control.

Yet she had hardly expected him to greet her in just this way,--with
such a light in his eyes and such obvious delight in his smile. He had a
rather boyish, friendly smile, this foe of hers whom she was about to
despatch into the very shadow of death. She dispelled quickly a small,
faltering voice of remorse. This was no time for remorse, for gentleness
and mercy. She hurried to his side.

"You're flushed from hurrying down that hill," he told her gayly.
"Beatrice, you're getting prettier every day."

"It's the simple life that's doing it, Ben! No late hours, no
indigestible food--"

"Speaking of food--I'm famished. I hope you've got something nice for
lunch--and I know you have."

She _had_ been careful with to-day's lunch; but it had merely been part
of her plot to put him off his guard. "Caribou tenderloin--almost the
last of him--wocus bread and strawberries," she assured him. "Does that
suit your highness?"

He made a great feint of being overwhelmed by the news. "Then let's
hurry. Take my arm and we'll fly."

She seized the strong forearm, thrilled in spite of herself by the
muscles of steel she felt through the sleeves. He fell into his fastest
walking stride,--long steps that sped the yards under them. They emerged
from the marsh and started to climb the ridge.

At a small hollow beside the creek bed her fingers suddenly tightened on
his arm. A thrill that was more of wonder than of joy coursed through
her; and her dark eyes began to glitter with excitement. The wilderness
was her ally to-day. She suddenly saw her chance--in a manner that could
not possibly waken his suspicions of her intentions--of disposing of the
remainder of his pistol cartridges.

On a log thirty feet distant sat an old grouse with half a dozen of her
brood, all of them perched in a row and relying on their protective
coloring to save them from sight. They were Franklin's grouse--and they
had appeared as if in answer to Beatrice's secret wish.

These birds were common enough in their valley, and not a day passed
without seeing from five to fifty of them, yet the sight went straight
home to Beatrice's superstitions. "Get them with your pistol," she
whispered. "I want them all--for a big grouse pie to-night."

"But our pistol shells are getting low," Ben objected. "I've hardly got
enough shells in the gun to get 'em all--"

"No matter. You have to use them some time. There's a few more in the
cave, I think. We'll have to rely on big game from now on, anyway. Don't
miss one."

Ben drew his pistol, then walked up within twenty feet. He drew slowly
down, knocking the old bird from her perch with a bullet through the
neck.

"Good work," Beatrice exulted. "Now for the chicks."

Ben took the bird on the extreme right, and again the bullet sped true.
The remainder of the flock had become uneasy now; and at the next shot
all except one flew into the branches of the surrounding trees. This
shot was equally successful, and with the fourth he knocked the
remaining bird from the log.

Each of the four birds he had downed with a shot either through the head
or the neck; and such shooting would have been marvelous indeed in the
eyes of the tenderfoot. But both these two foresters knew that there was
nothing exceptional about it. Pistol shooting is simply a matter of a
sure eye and steady nerves, combined with a greater or less period of
practice. Few were the trappers or woodsmen north of fifty-three that
could not have done as much.

Ben turned his attention to the fowl on the lower tree limbs, hitting
once but missing the second time. To correct this unpardonable
proceeding, he knocked with his seventh a fat cock, his spurs just
starting, from almost the top of a young spruce.

"Here's one more," Beatrice urged him. "I'll need every one for the
pie."

But the gun was empty. The firing pin snapped harmlessly against the
breach. They gathered the grouse and sped on down to the cavern.

Her heart seemingly leaped into her throat at every beat; but with
steady hands and smiling face she went about the preparation of the
meal. She fried the venison and baked the wocus bread, and with more
than usual spirit and gaiety set the dishes at Ben's place at the
table. "Draw up your chair," she told him. "I'll have the tea in a
minute."

Ben peered with sudden interest into her face. "What's troubling you,
Bee?" he asked gently. "You're pale as a ghost."

"I'm not feeling overly well." Her eyes dropped before his gaze. "I'm
not hungry--at all. But it's nothing to worry about--"

She saw by his eyes that he _was_ worrying; yet it was evident that he
had not the slightest suspicion of the real cause of the sudden pallor
in her cheeks. She saw his face cloud and his eyes darken; and again she
heard that faint, small voice of remorse--whispering deep in her heart's
heart. He was always so considerate of her, this jailer of hers. His
concern was always so real and deep. Yet in a moment more the kindly
sympathy would be gone from his face. He would be lying very still--and
his face would be even more pale than hers.

Listlessly she walked to the door of the cave, procuring a handful of
dried red-root leaves that she used for tea. Through the cavern opening
he saw her drop them into the bucket that served as their teapot.

Then she came back for the oiled, cloth bag that contained the last of
their sugar. This was always one of her little kindnesses,--to sweeten
his tea for him before she brought it to him. He began to eat his steak.

In one glance the girl saw that he was wholly unsuspecting. He trusted
her; in their weeks together he had lost all fear of treachery from her.
There he was, exulting over the frugal lunch she had prepared, with no
inkling of the deadly peril that even now was upon him. She wished he
did not trust her so completely; it would be easier for her if he was
just a little wary, a little more on guard.

She felt cold all over. She could hardly keep from shivering. But this
was the moment of trial; the thing would be done in a moment more. She
mustn't give way yet to the growing weakness in her muscles. She walked
to the vine where she had left the potion.

How much of it there was--it seemed to have doubled in quantity since
she had left it. A handful of the black berries meant death--certain as
the sunrise--but what did half a handful mean? The question came to her
again. How did she know that half a handful did not mean death too,--not
just hours of slumber, but relentless and irremediable death! Would that
be the end of her day's work--to see this tall, friendly warden of hers
lying dead before her gaze, the laughter gone from his lips and the
light faded from his eyes? She would be free then to strip the shell
belt from his waist. He would never waken to prevent her. She could
escape too--back to her father's home--and leave him in the cave.

All that he had told her concerning his war with her father recurred to
her in one vivid flash. Could it have been that he had told the
truth--that her father and his followers had been the attackers in the
beginning? She had never believed him fully; but could it be that he was
in the right? His claim had been invaded, he said, and his one friend
murdered in cold blood. Was this not cause enough, by the code of the
North, for a war of reprisal?

But even as these thoughts came to her, she had walked boldly to the
fire and emptied the contents of the cup into the boiling water in the
teapot. Ben would have only had to look up to see her do it. Yet still
he did not suspect.

She waited an instant, steadying herself for the ordeal to come. Then
she took the pot off the fire and poured the hot contents into the cup
that had just held the potion. She had been careful not to put enough
water into the pot to weaken the drink. The cup brimmed; but none was
left. She brought it steaming to Ben's side.

No kindly root tripped her feet as she entered, no merciful unsteadiness
caused her to drop this cup of death and spill its contents.

"Thanks, Beatrice." Ben looked up, smiling. "I'm a brute to let you fix
my tea when you are feeling so bad. But I sure am grateful, if that
helps any--"

His voice sounded far away, like a voice in a nightmare. "It's pretty
strong, I'm afraid," she told him. "The leaves weren't very good, and I
boiled them too long. I'm afraid you'll find it bitter."

"I'll drink it, if it's bitter as gall," he assured her, "after your
kindness to fix it."

His hand reached and seized the handle of the cup. Even now--_now_--he
was raising it to his lips. In an instant more he would be pouring it
down his throat, too considerate of her to admit its unwholesome taste,
drinking it down though it tasted the potion of death that it was! The
hair seemed to start on her head.

Then she seemed to writhe as in a convulsion. Her voice rose in a
piercing scream. "Ben--_Ben_--_don't drink it_!" she cried. "God have
mercy on my soul!"

But with that utterance a strength surpassing that of sinew and muscle
returned to her. She reached and knocked the cup from his hand; and its
black contents, like dark blood, stained the sandy floor of the cavern.

Ben's first thought was curiously not of his own narrow escape, but was
rather in concern for Beatrice. Whether or not he had actually
swallowed any of the liquor in the cup he did not know; nor did he give
the matter a thought. He was aware of only the terror-stricken girl
before him, her face deathly white and her eyes starting and wide. He
leaped to his feet.

Fearing that she was about to faint he steadied her with his hand. The
echo of her scream died in the cavern, the cup rolled on the floor and
came to a standstill against the wall; but still she made no sound, only
gazing as if entranced. But slowly, as he steadied her, the blessed
tears stole into her eyes and rolled down her white cheeks; and once
more breath surged into her lungs.

"Never mind, Beatrice," the man was saying, his deep, rough voice gentle
as a woman's. "Don't cry--please don't cry--just forget all about it.
Let's go over to your hammock and rest awhile."

With a strong arm he guided her to her cot, and smiling kindly, pushed
her down into it. "Just take it easy," he advised. "And forget all about
it. You'll be all right in a minute."

"But you don't understand--you don't know--what I tried to do--"

"No matter. Tell me after a while, if you want to. Don't tell me at all
if you'd rather not. I'm going back to my lunch." He laughed, trying to
bring her to herself. "I wouldn't miss that caribou steak for
anything--even though I can't have my tea. Just lay down a while, and
rest."

His rugged face lighted as he smiled, kindly and tolerantly, and then he
turned to go. But her solemn voice arrested him.

"Wait, Ben. I want you to know--now--so you won't trust me again--or
give me another chance. The cup--was poisoned."

But the friendly light did not yet wane in his eyes. "I didn't think it
was anything very good--the way you knocked it out of my hand. We'll
just pretend it was very bad tea--and let it go at that."

"No. It was nightshade--it might have killed you." She spoke in a flat,
lifeless voice. "I didn't want it to kill you--I just wanted to give you
enough to put you to sleep--so I could take your rifle shells and throw
them away--but I was willing to let you drink it, even if it _did_ kill
you."

The man looked at her, in infinite compassion, then came and sat beside
her in the hammock. Rather quietly he took one of her hands and gazed at
it, without seeing it, a long time. Then he pressed it to his lips.

For a breath he held it close to his cheek, his eyes lightless and far
away, and she gazed at him in amazement.

"You'd kiss my hand--after what I did--?"

"After what you _didn't_ do," he corrected. "Please, Beatrice--don't
blame yourself. Some way--I understand things better--than I used to.
Even if you had killed me--I don't see why it wouldn't have been your
right. I've held you here by force. Yet you didn't let me drink the
stuff. You knocked it out of my hand."

And now, for the first time, an inordinate amazement came into his face.
He looked at her intently, yet with no unfriendliness, no passion.
Rather it was with overwhelming wonder.

"_You knocked it out of my hands_!" he repeated, more loudly. "Oh,
Beatrice--it's my turn to beg forgiveness now! When I was at your mercy,
and the cup at my lips--you spared me. Why did you do it, Beatrice?"

He gazed at her with growing ardor. She shook her head. She simply did
not know the reason.

"It's not your place to feel penitent," he told her, with infinite
sincerity. "If you had let me take it, you'd have just served me
right--you'd have just paid me back in my own coin. It was fair
enough--to use every advantage you had. Good Lord, have you forgotten
that I am holding you here by force? But instead--you saved me, when you
might have killed me--and won the fight. All you've done is to show
yourself the finer clay--that's what you've done. God knows I suppose
the woman is always finer clay than the man--yet it comes with a jolt,
just the same. It's not for you to be down-hearted--Heaven knows the
strength you've shown is above any I ever had, or ever will have. You've
shown how to feel mercy--I could never show anything but hate, and
revenge. You've shown me a bigger and stronger code than mine. And
there's nothing--nothing I can say."

The tone changed once more to the personal and solicitous. "But it's
been a big strain on you--I can see that. I believe I'd lie here and
rest awhile if I were you. I'll eat my dinner--and the fire's about out
too. That's the girl--Beatrice."

Gently he picked her up, seemingly with no physical effort and laid her
in her hammock. "Then--you'll forgive me?" she asked brokenly.

"Good Heavens, I wish there was something to forgive--so we'd be a
little more even. But you've accomplished something, Beatrice--and I
don't know what it is yet--I only know you've changed me--and softened
me--as I never dreamed any one in the world could. Now go to sleep."

He turned from her, but the food on the table no longer tempted him. For
a full hour he stood before the ashes of the fire, deeply and
inextricably bewildered with himself, with life, and with all these
thoughts and hopes and regrets that thronged him. He was like ashes now
himself; the fires of his life seemed burned out. The thought recalled
him to the need of cutting fuel for the night's fire.

He might be able to quiet the growing turmoil in his brain when the
still shadows of the spruce closed around him. He seized his axe, then
peered into the cave. Beatrice, worn out by the stress of the hour
before and immensely comforted by Ben's words, was already deeply
asleep. His rifle leaned against the wall of the cavern, and he put it
in the hollow of his arm. It was not that he feared Beatrice would
attempt to procure it. The act was mostly habit, combined with the fact
that their supply of meat was all but exhausted and he did not wish to
miss any opportunity for big game.

The forest was particularly gloomy to-day. Its shadows lay deep. And
this was not merely the result of his own darkened outlook: glancing up,
he saw that clouds were gathering in the sky. They would need fuel in
plenty to keep the fire bright to-night. Evidently rain was
impending,--one of those cold, steady downpours that are disliked so
cordially by the folk of the upper Selkirks.

He went a full two hundred yards before he found a tree to his liking.
It was a tough spruce of medium height and just at the edge of the
stream. He laid his rifle down, leaning it against a fallen log; then
began his work.

It was an awkward place to stand; but he gave no thought to it. His mind
dwelt steadily on the events in the cavern of the hour before; the
girl's remorse in the instant that she had him at her mercy and the
example it set for him. The blade bit into the wood with slow
encroachments. Perhaps the expenditure of brute energy in swinging the
axe would relieve his pent-up feelings.

He was not watching his work. His blows struck true from habit. Now the
tree was half-severed: it was time to cut on the opposite side. Suddenly
his axe crashed into yielding, rotten wood.

Instantly the powers of the wilderness took their long-awaited toll. Ben
had been unwary, too absorbed by his swirling thoughts to mark the
ambush of death that had been prepared for him. Ever to keep watch, ever
to be on guard: such is the first law of the wild; and Ben had
disregarded it. Half of the tree had been rotten, changing the direction
of its fall and crashing it down before its time.

Ben leaped for his life, instinctively aiming for the shelter of the log
against which he had inclined his rifle; but the blow came too soon. He
was aware only of the rush of air as he leaped, an instant's hovering at
the crest of a depthless chasm, then the sense of a mighty, resistless
blow hurling him into infinity.

Ben's rifle, catching the full might of the blow, was broken like a
match. Ben himself was crushed to earth as beneath a meteor, the branchy
trunk shattering down upon his stalwart form like the jaws of a great
trap. He uttered one short, half-strangled cry.

Then the darkness, shot with varied and multiple lights, dropped over
him. The noise of the falling tree died away; the forest-dwellers
returned to their varied activities. The rain clouds deepened and spread
above his motionless form.



XXXIV

Beatrice's dreams were troubled after Ben's departure into the forest.
She tossed and murmured, secretly aware that all was not well with her.
Yet in the moments that she half-wakened she ascribed the vague warning
to nervousness only, falling immediately to sleep again. Wakefulness
came vividly to her only with the beginnings of twilight.

She opened her eyes; the cavern was deep with shadow. She lay resting a
short time, adjusting her eyes to the soft light. In an instant all the
dramatic events of the day were recalled to her: the tin cup that had
held the poison still lay against the wall, and the liquor still stained
the sandy floor, or was it only a patch of deeper shadow?

She wondered why Ben did not come into the cave. Was he embittered
against her, after all; had he spoken as he did just from kindness, to
save her remorse? She listened for the familiar sounds of his fuel
cutting, or his other work about the camp. Wherever he was, he made no
sound at all.

She sat up then, staring out through the cavern maw. For an instant she
experienced a deep sense of bewilderment at the pressing gloom, so
mysterious and unbroken over the face of the land. But soon she
understood what was missing. The fire was out.

The fact went home to her with an inexplicable shock. She had become so
accustomed to seeing the bright, cheerful blaze at the cavern mouth that
its absence was like a little tragedy in itself. Always it had been the
last vista of her closing eyes as she dropped off to sleep--the soft,
warm glow of the coals--and the sight always comforted her. She could
scarcely remember the morning that it wasn't crackling cheerily when she
wakened. Ben had always been so considerate of her in this
regard--removing the chill of the cave with its radiating heat to make
it comfortable for her to dress. Not even coals were left now--only
ashes, gray as death.

She got up, then walked to the cavern maw. For a moment she stood
peering into the gloom, one hand resting against the portals of stone.
The twilight was already deep. It was the supper hour and past; dark
night was almost at hand. There could be no further doubt of Ben's
absence. He was not at the little creek getting water, nor did she hear
the ring of his axe in the forest. She wondered if he had gone out on
one of his scouting expeditions and had not yet returned. Of course this
was the true explanation; she had no real cause to worry.

Likely enough he had little desire to return to the cavern now. She
could picture him following at his tireless pace one of the winding
woods trails, lost in contemplation, his vivid eyes clouded with
thought.

She looked up for the sight of the familiar stars that might guide him
home. They were all hidden to-night. Not a gleam of light softened the
stark gloom of the spruce. As she watched the first drops of rain fell
softly on the grass.

The drops came in ever-increasing frequency, cold as ice on her hand.
She heard them rustling in the spruce boughs; and far in the forest she
discerned the first whine of the wakening wind. The sound of the rain
was no longer soft. It swelled and grew, and all at once the wind caught
it and swept it into her face. And now the whole forest moaned and
soughed under the sweep of the wind.

There is no sound quite like the beat of a hard rain on dense forest. It
has no startling discords, but rather a regular cadence as if the wood
gods were playing melodies in the minor on giant instruments,--melodies
remembered from the first, unhappy days of the earth and on instruments
such as men have never seen. But this was never a melody to fill the
heart with joy. It touches deep chords of sorrow in the most secret
realms of the spirit. The rain song grew and fell as the gusts of the
wind swept it, and the rock walls of the cliff swam in clouds of spray.

The storm could not help but bring Ben to camp, she thought. At least
she did not fear that he would lose his way: he knew every trail and
ridge for miles around the cave. Even such pressing, baleful darkness as
this could not bewilder him. She went back to her cot to wait his
coming.

The minutes seemed interminable. Time had never moved so slowly before.
She tried to lie still, to relax; then to direct her thought in other
channels; but all of these meandering streams flowed back into the main
current which was Ben. Yet it was folly to worry about him; any moment
she would hear his step at the edge of the forest. But the night was so
dark, and the storm so wild. A half-hour dragged its interminable length
away.

Her uneasiness was swiftly developing into panic. Just to-day she was
willing to risk his life for her freedom: it was certainly folly now to
goad herself to despair by dwelling on his mysterious absence. It might
speed the passing minutes if she got up and found some work to do about
the cave; but she simply had no heart for it. Once she sat up, only to
lie down again.

The moments dragged by. Surely he would have had time to reach camp by
now. The storm neither increased nor decreased; only played its mournful
melodies in the forest. The song of the rain was despairing,--low
mournful notes rising to a sharp crescendo as the fiercer gusts swept it
into the tree tops. The limbs murmured unhappily as they smote together;
and a tall tree, swaying in the wind, creaked with a maddening
regularity. She was never so lonely before, so darkly miserable.

"I want him to come," her voice suddenly spoke aloud. It rang strangely
in the gloomy cave. "I want him to come back to me."

She felt no impulse for the words. They seemed to speak themselves.
Presently she sat erect, her heart leaping with inexpressible relief, at
the sound of a heavy tread at the edge of the glade.

The steps came nearer, and then paused. She sprang to her feet and went
to the mouth of the cave. A silence that lived between the beating rain
and the complaining wind settled down about her. Her eyes could not
pierce the darkness.

"Is that you, Ben?" she called.

She strained into the silence for his reply. The cold drops splashed
into her face.

"Ben?" she called again. "Is that you?"

Then something leaped with an explosive sound, and running feet splashed
in the wet grass in flight. The little spruce trees at the edge of the
glade whipped and rustled as a heavy body crashed through. The steps had
been only those of some forest beast--a caribou, perhaps, or a
moose--come to mock her despair.

She remembered that Ben had been wishing for just such a visitation
these past few days; of course in the daylight hours when he could see
to shoot. Their meat supply was almost gone.

She did not go to her cot again. She stood peering into the gloom. All
further effort to repel her fears came to nothing. The storm was already
of two hours' duration, and Ben would have certainly returned to the
cave unless disaster had befallen him. Was he lost somewhere in the
intertwining trails, seeking shelter in a heavy thicket until the dawn
should show him his way? There were so many pitfalls for the
unsuspecting in these trackless wilds.

Yet she could be of no aid to him. The dark woods stretched
interminably; she would not even know which way to start. It would just
mean to be lost herself, should she attempt to seek him. The trails that
wound through the glades and over the ridges had no end.

"Ben!" she called again. Then with increasing volume. "Ben!"

But no echo returned. The darkness swallowed the sound at once.

The night was chill: she longed for the comfort of the fire. The actual
labor of building it might take her mind from her fears for a while at
least; and its warm glow might dispel the growing cold of fear and
loneliness in her breast. Besides, it might be a beacon light for Ben.
She turned at once to the pile of kindling Ben had prepared.

But before she could build a really satisfactory fire, one that would
endure the rain, she must cut fuel from some of the logs Ben had hewn
down and dragged to the cave. She lighted a short piece of pitchy wood,
intending to locate the heavy camp axe. Then, putting on her heavy
coat--the same garment of lustrous fur which Ben had sent her back for
the day of her abduction--she ventured into the storm.

The rain splashed in vain at her torch. The pitch burned with a fierce
flame. But her eyes sought in vain for the axe.

This was a strange thing: Ben always left it leaning against one of the
chunks of spruce. Presently she halted, startled, gazing into the black
depths of the forest.

Ben had taken it; he had plainly gone forth after fuel. Trees stood all
about the little glade: he couldn't have gone far. The inference was
obvious: whatever disaster had befallen him must have occurred within a
few hundred yards of the cave.

Holding her torch high she went to the edge of the glade and again
called into the gloom. There was no repression in her voice now. She
called as loudly as she could. She started to push on into the fringe of
timber.

But at once she paused, holding hard on her self-control. It was folly
to make a blind search. To penetrate the dark mystery of the forest with
only this little light--already flickering out--would probably result in
becoming lost herself. Such a course would not help Ben's cause.
Evidently he was lying within a few hundred feet of her,
unconscious--perhaps dead--or he would have replied to her call.

Dead! The thought sped an icy current throughout the hydraulic system of
her veins.

She was a mountain girl, and she made no further false motions. She
turned at once to the cave, and piling up her kindling, built a fire
just at the mouth of the cave. It was protected here in some degree from
the rain, and the wind was right to carry the smoke away. This fire
would serve to keep her direction and lead her back to the cavern.

Once more she ventured into the storm, and gathering all the cut fuel
she could find, piled it on her fire. The two spruce chunks that Ben had
cut for their fireside seats were placed as back logs. Then she hunted
for pine knots taken from the scrub pines that grew in scattering clumps
among the spruce, and which were laden with pitch.

One of these knots she put in the iron pan they used for frying, then
lighted it. Then she pushed into the timber.

Holding her light high she began to encircle the glade clear to the
barrier of the cliffs. To the eyes of the wild creatures this might have
been a never-to-be-forgotten picture: the slight form of the girl, her
face blanched and her eyes wide and dark in the flaring light, her
grotesque torch and its weird shadows, and then rain sweeping down
between. She reached the cliff, then started back, making a wider
circle.

Adding fresh fuel to the torch, she peered into every covert and
examined with minute care any human-shaped shadow in that eerie world of
shadows; but the long half-circle brought her back to the cliff wall
without results. She was already wet to the skin, and her pine knots
were nearly spent. Ever the load of dread was heavier at her heart. In
the hour or more she had searched--she had no way of estimating
time--she had already gone farther than Ben usually went for his fuel.

As yet no tears came; only the raindrops lay on her face and curled her
dark hair in ringlets. But she must not give up yet. It was hard to hold
her shoulders straight; but she must make the long circle once more.

With courage and strength such as she had not dreamed she possessed,
she launched forward again. But fatigue was breaking her now. The tree
roots tripped her faltering feet, the branches clutched at her as she
passed. It was hard to tell what territory she had searched, or how far
she had gone. But when she was halfway around, she suddenly halted,
motionless as an image, at the edge of the stream.

The flickering light revealed a tree, freshly cut, its, naked stump
gleaming and its tall form lying prone. Yet beneath it the shadows were
of strange, unearthly shape, and something showed stark white through
the green foliage. Great branches stretched over it, like bars over a
prison window.

Just one curious deep sob wracked her whole body. The life-heat, the
mystery that is being, seemed to steal away from her. Her strength
wilted; and for an instant she could only stand and gaze with fixed,
unbelieving eyes. But almost at once the unquenchable fires of her
spirit blazed up anew. She saw her task, and with a faith and
steadfastness conformable more to the sun and the earth than to human
frailty, her muscles made instant and incredible response.

Instantly she was beside the form of her comrade and enemy, struggling
with the cruel limbs that pinned him to the earth.




XXXV

Beatrice knew one thing and one alone: that she must not give way to the
devastating terror in her heart. There was mighty work to do, and she
must keep strong. Her only wish was to kneel beside him, to lift the
bleeding head into her arms and let the storm and the darkness smother
her existence; but her stern woods training came to her aid. She began
the stupendous task of freeing him from the imprisoning tree limbs.

The pine knots flickered feebly; and by their light she looked about for
Ben's axe. Her eyes rested on the broken gun first: then she saw the
blade, shining in the rain, protruding from beneath a broken bough. She
drew it out and swung it down.

Some of the lesser limbs she broke off, with a strength in her hands she
did not dream she possessed. The larger ones were cut away with blows
incredibly strong and accurate. How and by what might she did not know,
but almost at once the man's body was free except for the tree trunk
that wedged him against a dead log toward which he had leaped for
shelter.

She seemed powerless to move it. Her shoulders surged against it in
vain. A desperate frenzy seized her, but she fought it remorselessly
down. Her self-discipline must not break yet. Seeing that she could not
move the tree itself, she thrust with all her power against the dead log
beside which Ben lay. In a moment she had rolled it aside.

Then for the first time she went to her knees beside the prone form.
Ben was free of the imprisoning limbs, but was his soul already free of
the stalwart body broken among the broken boughs? She had to know this
first; further effort was unavailing until she knew this. Her hand stole
over his face.

She found no reassuring warmth. It was wet with the rain, cold to the
touch. His hair was wet too, and matted from some dreadful wound in the
scalp. Very softly she felt along the skull for some dreadful fracture
that might have caused instant death; but the descending trunk had
missed his head, at least. Very gently she shook him by the shoulders.

Her stern self-control gave way a little now. The strain had been too
much for human nerves to bear. She gathered him into her arms, still
without sobbing, but the hot tears dropped on to his face.

"Speak to me, Ben," she said quietly. The wind caught her words and
whisked them away; and the rain played its unhappy music in the tree
foliage; but Ben made no answer. "Speak to me," she repeated, her tone
lifting. "My man, my baby--tell me you're not dead!"

Dead! Was that it--struck to the earth like the caribou that fell before
his rifle? And in that weird, dark instant a light far more bright than
that the flickering pine knots cast so dim and strange over the scene
beamed forth from the altar flame of her own soul. It was only the light
of knowledge, not of hope, but it transfigured her none the less.

All at once she knew why she had hurled the poisoned cup from his hand,
even though her father's life might be the price of her weakness. She
understood, now, why these long weeks had been a delight rather than a
torment; why her fears for him had gone so straight to her heart. She
pressed his battered head tight against her breast.

"My love, my love," she crooned in his ear, pressing her warm cheek
close to his. "I do love you, I do, I do," she told him confidingly, as
if this message would call him back to life. Her lips sought his, trying
to give them warmth, and her voice was low and broken when she spoke
again. "Can't you hear me, Ben--won't you try to come back to me? If
you're dead I'll die too--"

But the man did not open his eyes. Would not even this appeal arouse him
from this deep, strange sleep in which he lay? He had always been so
watchful of her--since that first day--so zealous for her safety. She
held him closer, her lips trembling against his.

But she must get herself in hand again! Perhaps life had not yet
completely flickered out; and she could nurse it back. She dropped her
ear to his breast, listening.

Yes, she felt the faint stirring of his heart. It was so feeble, the
throbs were so far apart, yet they meant life,--life that might flush
his cheeks again, and might yet bring him back to her, into her arms. He
was breathing, too; breaths so faint that she hardly dared to believe in
their reality. And presently she realized that his one hope of life lay
in getting back to the fire.

For long hours he had been lying in the cold rain; a few more minutes
would likely extinguish the spark of life that remained in his breast.
Her hand stole over his powerful frame, in an effort to get some idea of
the nature of his wounds.

One of his arms was broken; its position indicated that. Some of his
ribs were crushed too--what internal injuries he had that might end him
before the morning she did not know. But she could not take time to
build a sledge and cut away the brush. She worked her shoulder under his
body.

Wrenching with all her fine, young strength she lifted him upon her
shoulder; then, kneeling in the vines, she struggled for breath. Then
thrusting with her arm she got on her feet.

His weight was over fifty pounds greater than her own; but her woods
training, the hard work she had always done, had fitted her for just
such a test as this. She started with her burden toward the cave.

She had long known how to carry an injured man, suspending him over her
shoulder, head pointed behind her, her arms clasping his thigh. With her
free arm she seized the tree branches to sustain her. She had no light
now; she was guided only by the faint glow of the fire at the cavern
mouth.

After a hundred feet the load seemed unbearable. Except for the fact
that she soon got on the well-worn moose trail that followed the creek,
she could scarcely have progressed a hundred feet farther. As it was,
she was taxed to the utmost: every ounce of her reserve strength would
be needed before the end.

At the end of a hundred yards she stopped to rest, leaning against a
tree and still holding the beloved weight upon her shoulder. If she laid
it down she knew she could not lift it again. But soon she plunged on,
down toward the beacon light.

Except for her love for him, and that miraculous strength that love has
always given to women, she could not have gone on that last, cruel
hundred yards. But slowly, steadily, the circle of light grew brighter,
larger, nearer; ever less dense were the thickets of evergreen between.
Now she was almost to the glade; now she felt the wet grass at her
ankles. She lunged on and laid her burden on her bed.

Then she relaxed at his feet, breathing in sobbing gasps. Except for the
crackle of the fire and the beat of the rain, there was no sound in the
cave but this,--those anguished sobs from her wracked lungs.

But far distant though Ben was and deep as he slept--just outside the
dark portals of death itself--those sounds went down to him. He heard
them dimly at first, like a far-distant voice in a dream, but as the
moments passed he began to recognize their nature and their source. Sobs
of exhaustion and distress--from the girl that was in his charge. He lay
a long time, trying to understand.

On her knees beside him Beatrice saw the first flutter of his eyelids.
In awe, rather than rapture, her arms crept around him, and she kissed
his rain-wet brow. His eyes opened, looking wonderingly into hers.

She saw the first light of recognition, then a half-smile, gentle as a
girl's, as he realized his own injuries. Of course Ben Darby would smile
in such a moment as this; his instincts, true and manly, were always to
try to cheer her. Presently he spoke in the silence.

"The tree got me, didn't it?" he asked.

"Don't try to talk," she cautioned. "Yes--the tree fell on you. But
you're not going to die. You're going to live, live--"

He shook his head, the half-smile flickering at his lips. "Let me talk,
Beatrice," he said, with just a whisper of his old determination. "It's
important--and I don't think--I have much time."

Her eyes widened in horror. "You don't mean--"

"I'm going back in a minute--I can't hardly keep awake," he said. His
voice, though feeble, was preternaturally clear. She heard every kind
accent, every gentle tone even above the crackle of the fire without and
the beat of the rain. "I think it's the limit," he went on. "I believe
the tree got me--clear inside--but you must listen to everything I say."

She nodded. In that eerie moment of suspense she knew she must hear what
he had to tell her.

"Don't wait to see what happens to me," he went on. "I'll either go out
or I'll live--you really can't help me any. Where's the rifle?"

"The rifle was broken--when the tree fell."

"I knew it would be. I saw it coming." He rested, waiting for further
breath. "Beatrice--please, please don't stay here, trying to save me."

"Do you think I would go?" she cried.

"You must. The food--is about gone. Just enough to last one person
through to the Yuga cabins--with berries, roots. Take the pistol.
There's six shots or so--in the box. Make every one tell. Take the dead
grouse too. The rifle's broken and we can't get meat. It's
just--death--if you wait. You can just make it through now."

"And leave you here to die, as long as there's a chance to save you?"
the girl answered. "You couldn't get up to get water--or build a fire--"

He listened patiently, but shook his head at the end. "No, Bee--please
don't make me talk any more. It's just death for both of us if you stay.
The food is gone--the rifle broken. Your father's gang'll be here sooner
or later--and they'd smash me, anyway. I could hardly fight 'em off with
those few pistol shells--but by God I'd like to try--"

He struggled for breath, and she thought he had slipped back into
unconsciousness. But in a moment the faltering current of his speech
began again.

"Take the pistol--and go," he told her. "You showed me to-day how to
give up--and I don't want to kill--your father--any more. I renounce it
all! Ezram--forgive me--old Ez that lay dead in the leaves." He smiled
at the girl again. "So don't mind leaving me. Life work's all
spent--given over. Please, Beatrice--you'd just kill yourself without
aiding me. Wait till the sun comes up--then follow up the river--"

Unconsciousness welled high above him, and the lids dropped over his
eyes. The gloom still pressed about the cavern, yet a sun no less
effulgent than that of which he had spoken had risen for Ben. It was his
moment of renunciation, glorious past any moment of his life. He had
renounced his last, little fighting chance that the girl might live. And
Ezram, watching high and afar, and with infinite serenity knowing at
last the true balance of all things one with another, gave him his full
forgiveness.

The girl began to strip the wet clothes from his injured body.




XXXVI

The trail was long and steep into Back There for Jeffery Neilson and his
men. Day after day they traveled with their train of pack horses,
pushing deeper into the wilds, fording mighty rivers, traversing silent
and majestic mountain ranges, climbing slopes so steep that the packs
had to be lightened to half before the gasping animals could reach the
crest. They could go only at a snail's pace,--even in the best day's
travel only ten miles, and often a single mile was a hard, exhausting
day's work.

Of course there was no kind of a trail for them to follow. As far as
possible they followed the winding pathways of big game--as long as
these led them in their general direction--but often they were obliged
to cut their way through the underbrush. Time after time they
encountered impassable cliffs or rivers from which they were obliged to
turn back and seek new routes; they found marshes that they could not
penetrate; ranges they could not climb; wastes of slide rock where they
could make headway only at a creeping pace and with hourly risk of their
lives.

They had counted on slow travel, but the weeks grew into the months
before they even neared the obscure heart of Back There where they
thought Ben and Beatrice might be hidden. The way was hard as they had
never dreamed. Every day, it seemed to them, brought its fresh tragedy:
a long back-trailing to avoid some impassable place, a fatiguing
digression, perhaps several hours of grinding work with the axe in order
to cut a trail. Sometimes the harness broke, requiring long stops on
the trail to repair it, the packs slipped continually from the hard
going; and they found it increasingly difficult to secure horse feed for
the animals.

Even Indian ponies cannot keep fat on such grass as grows in the deep
shade of the spruce. They need the rich growths of the open park lands
to stiffen them for the grinding toil; and even with good feeding,
foresters know that pack animals must not be kept on the trail for too
many days in succession. Jeffery Neilson and his men disregarded both
these facts, with the result that the animals lost flesh and strength,
cutting down the speed of their advance. Oaths and shouts were
unavailing now: only cruel blows could drive them forward at all.

They seemed to sense a great hopelessness in their undertaking. Usually
well-trained pack horses will follow their leader without question, walk
almost in his tracks, and the rider in front only has to show the way.
After the first few days of grinding toil, the morale of the entire
outfit began to break. The horses broke away into thickets on each side;
and time after time, one hour upon another, the horsemen had to round
them up again. When they came to the great rivers--wild tributaries of
the Yuga--they had to follow up the streams for days in search of a
place to ford. Then they were obliged to carry the packs across in small
loads, making trip after trip with the utmost patience and toil. The
horses, broken in spirit, took the wild waters just as they climbed the
steep slopes, with little care whether they lived or died.

The days passed, June and July. Ever they moved at a slower pace. One of
the horses, giving up on a steep pitch and frenzied by Ray's cruel,
lashing blows, fell off the edge of the trail and shot down like a
plummet two hundred feet into the canyon below--and thereupon it became
necessary not only to spend the rest of the day in retrieving and
repairing the supplies that had fallen with him, but also to heap bigger
loads on the backs of the remaining horses. And always they were faced
by the cruel possibility that this whole, mighty labor was in
vain,--that Ben and Beatrice might have gone to their deaths in the
rapids, weeks before.

The food stores brought for the journey were rapidly depleted. The
result was that they had to depend more and more upon a diet of meat.
Men can hold up fairly well on meat alone, particularly if it has a fair
amount of fat, but the effort of hunting and drying the flesh into jerky
served to cut down their speed.

The constant delays, the grinding, blasting toil of the day's march, and
particularly the ever-recurring crises of ford and steep, made serious
inroads on the morale of the three men. Just the work of urging on the
exhausted horses drained their nervous energy in a frightful stream: the
uncertainty of their quest, the danger, the scarcity of any food but
meat, and most of all the burning hatred in their hearts for the man who
had forced the expedition upon them combined to torment them; even now,
Ben Darby had received no little measure of vengeance.

No experience of their individual lives had ever presented such a daily
ordeal of physical distress; none had ever been so devastating to hope
and spirit. There was not one moment of pleasure, one instant of relief
from the day's beginning to its end. At night they went to sleep on
hastily made beds, cursing at all things in heaven and earth; they
blasphemed with growing savagery all that men hold holy and true; and
degeneracy grew upon them very swiftly. They quarreled over their
tasks, and they hated each other with a hatred only second to that they
bore Darby himself. All three had always been reckless, wicked, brutal
men; but now, particularly in the case of Ray and Chan, the ordeal
brought out and augmented the latent abnormalities that made them
criminals in the beginning, developing those odd quirks in human minds
that make toward perversion and the most fiendish crime.

Jeffery Neilson had almost forgotten the issue of the claim by now. He
had told the truth, those weary weeks before, when he had wished he had
never seen it. His only thought was of his daughter, the captive of a
relentless, merciless man in these far wilds. Never the moon rose or the
sun declined but that he was sick with haunting fear for her. Had she
gone down to her death in the rapids? This was Neilson's fondest wish:
the enfolding oblivion of wild waters would be infinitely better than
the fate Ben had hinted at in his letter. Yet he dared not turn back.
She might yet live, held prisoner in some far-off cave.

At first all three agreed on this point: that they must not turn back
until either Ben was crushed under their heels or they had made sure of
his death. Ray had not forgotten that Ben alone stood between him and
the wealth and power he had always craved. He dreamed, at first, that
the deadly hardships of the journey could be atoned for by years of
luxury and ease. His mind was also haunted with dark conjectures as to
the fate of Beatrice, but jealousy, rather than concern for her, was the
moving impulse.

Neilson knew his young partner now. He saw clearly at last that Ray was
not and had never been a faithful confederate, but indeed a malicious
and bitter enemy, only waiting his chance to overthrow his leader. They
were still partners in their effort to rescue the girl and slay her
abductor; otherwise they were at swords' points. And there would be
something more than plain, swift slaying, now. If Neilson could read
aright, the actual, physical change that had been wrought in Ray's face
foretold no ordinary end for Ben. His features were curiously drawn; and
his eyes had a fixed, magnetic, evil light. Occasionally in his darker
hours Neilson foresaw even more sinister possibilities in this change in
Ray: the abnormal intensity manifest in every look and word, the weird,
evil preoccupation that seemed ever upon him. There was not only the
fate of Ben to consider, but that of Beatrice too, out in these desolate
forests. But surely Ray's degenerate impulses could be mastered. Neilson
need not fear this, at least.

Chan Heminway, also, had developed marvelously in the journey. He also
was more assertive, less the underling he had been. He had developed a
brutality that, though it contained nothing of the exquisite fineness of
cruelty of which Ray's diseased thought might conceive, was nevertheless
the full expression of his depraved nature. He no longer cowered in fear
of Neilson. Rather he looked to Ray as his leader, took him as his
example, tried to imitate him, and at last really began to share in his
mood. In cruelty to the horses he was particularly adept; but he was
also given to strange, savage bursts of insane fury.

"We must be close on them now," Neilson said one morning when they had
left the main gorge of the Yuga far behind them. "If they're not dead
we're bound to find trace of 'em in a few days."

The hope seemed well-founded. It is impossible for even most of the wild
creatures--furtive as twilight shadows--to journey through wood spaces
without leaving trace of their goings and comings: much less clumsy
human beings. Ultimately the searchers would find their tracks in the
soft earth, the ashes of a camp fire, or a charred cooking rack.

"And when we get 'em, we can wait and live on meat until the river goes
up in fall--then float on down to the Indian villages in their canoe,"
Chan answered. "It will carry four of us, all right."

Ray, Chan, Neilson and Neilson's daughter--these made four. What
remained of Ben when Ray was through could be left, silent upon some
hushed hillside, to the mercy of the wild creatures and the elements.

Surely they were in the enemy-country now; and now a fresh fear began to
oppress them. They might expect an attack from their implacable foe at
any moment. It did not make for ease of mind to know that any brush
clump might be their enemy's ambush; that any instant a concealed rifle
might speak death to them in the silence. Ben would have every advantage
of fortress and ambush. They had not thought greatly of this matter at
first; but now the fear increased with the passing days. Even Neilson
was not wholly exempt from it. It seemed a hideous, deadly thing,
incompatible with life and hope, that they should be plunging deeper,
farther into helplessness and peril.

If mental distress and physical discomfort can constitute vengeance Ben
was already avenged. Now that they were in the hill-lands, out from the
gorge and into a region of yellow beaver meadows lying between gently
sloping hills, their apprehension turned to veritable terror. A blind
man could see how small was their fighting chance against a hidden foe
who had prepared for their coming. The skin twitched and crept when a
twig cracked about their camp at night, and a cold like death crept
over the frame when the thickets crashed under a leaping moose.

Ray found himself regretting, for the first time, that murderous crime
of his of months before. Even riches might not pay for these days of
dread and nights of terror: the recovery of the girl from Ben's arms
could not begin to recompense. Indeed, the girl's memory was
increasingly hard to call up. The mind was kept busy elsewhere.

"We're walking right into a death trap," he told Neilson one morning.
"If he is here, what chance have we got; he'd have weeks to explore the
country and lay an ambush for us. Besides, I believe he's dead. I don't
believe a human being could have got down this far, alive."

Chan too had found himself inclining toward this latter belief; without
Ray's energy and ambition he had less to keep him fronted to the chase.
Neilson, however, was not yet ready to turn back. He too feared Ben's
attack, but already in the twilight of advancing years, he did not
regard physical danger in the same light as these two younger men.
Besides, he was made of different stuff. The safety of his daughter was
the one remaining impulse in his life.

And more and more, in the chill August nights, the talk about the camp
fire took this trend: the folly of pushing on. It was better to turn
back and wait his chances to strike again, Ray argued, than to walk
bald-faced into death. Sometime Ben must return to the claim: a chance
might come to lay him low. Besides, ever it seemed more probable that
the river had claimed him.

One rainy, disagreeable morning, as they camped beside the river near
the mouth of a small creek, affairs reached their crisis. They had
caught and saddled the horses; Ray was pulling tight the last hitch.
Chan stood beside him, speaking in an undertone. When he had finished
Ray cursed explosively in the silence.

Neilson turned. He seemed to sense impending developments. "What now?"
he asked.

"I'm not going on, that's what it is," Ray replied. "Neilson, it's two
against one--if you want to go on you can--but Ray and I are going back.
That devil's dead. Beatrice is, too--sure as hell. If they ain't dead,
he'll get us. I was a fool ever to start out. And that's final."

"You're going back, eh--scared out!" Neilson commented coldly.

"I'm going back--and don't say too much about being scared out, either."

"And you too, Chan? You're against me, too?"

Chan cursed. "I'd gone a week ago if it'd been me. We knew the way
home, at least."

The old man looked a long time into the river depths. Only too well he
realized that their decision was final. But there was no answer, in the
swirling depths, to the question that wracked his heart: whether or not
in these spruce-clad hills his daughter still lived. It could only
murmur and roar, without shaping words that human ears could grasp,
never relieving the dreadful uncertainty that would be his life's curse
from henceforth. He sighed, and the lines across his brow were dark and
deep.

"Then turn the horses around, you cowards," he answered. "I can't go on
alone."

For once neither Ray nor Chan had outward resentment for the epithet.
Secretly they realized that old Neilson was to the wall at last, and
like a grizzly at bay, it was safer not to molest him. Chan went down
to the edge of the creek to water his saddle horse.

But presently they heard him curse, in inordinate and startled
amazement, as he gazed at some imprint in the mud of the shore. They saw
the color sweep from his face. In an instant his two companions were
beside him.

Clear and unmistakable in the mud they saw the stale imprint of Ben's
canoe as they had landed, and the tracks of both the man and the girl as
they had turned into the forest.




XXXVII

The dawn that crept so gray and mysterious over the frosty green of
spruce brought no hope to Beatrice, sitting beside the unconscious form
of Ben in the cave fronting the glade. Rather it only brought the tragic
truth home more clearly. Her love for him had manifested itself too late
to give happiness to either of them: even now his life seemed to be
stealing from her, into the valley of the shadow.

She had watched beside him the whole night; and now she beheld a
sinister change in his condition. He was still unconscious, but he no
longer drew his breath at long intervals, softly and quietly. He was
breathing in short, troubled gasps, and an ominous red glow was in his
cheeks. She touched his brow, only to find it burning with fever.

The fact was not hard to understand. The downpour of cold rain in which
he had lain, wounded, for so many hours had drawn the life heat out of
him, and some organic malady had combined with his bodily injuries to
strike out his life. Her predicament was one of absolute helplessness.
She was hundreds of miles--weary weeks of march--from medical attention,
and she could neither leave him nor carry him. The wilderness forces,
resenting the intrusion into their secret depths, had seemingly taken
full vengeance at last. They had seemingly closed all gates to life and
safety. They had set the trap with care; and the cruel jaws had sprung.

She sat dry-eyed, incoherent prayers at her trembling lips. Mostly she
did not touch the man, only sat at his bedside in the crude chair Ben
had fashioned for her while the minutes rolled into hours and the hours
sped the night away,--in tireless vigil, watching with lightless eyes.
Once she bent and touched her lips to his.

They were not cold now. They were warm with fever. But in the strange
twilight-world of unconsciousness he could neither know of nor respond
to her kiss. She patted down his covering and sometimes held his hard
hands warm between hers, as if she could thus keep death from seizing
them and leading him away. But her courage did not break again.

The wan light showed her his drawn face; and just for an instant her
arms pressed about it. "I won't give up, Ben," she promised. "I'll keep
on fighting--to the last minute. And maybe I can pull you through."

Beatrice meant exactly what she said: to the last minute. That did not
mean to the gray hour when, by all dictate of common sense, further
fight is useless. She meant that she would battle tirelessly as long as
one pale spark glowed in his spirit, as long as his breath could cloud a
glass. The best thing for her now, however, was rest. She was exhausted
by the strain of the night; and she must save herself for the crisis
that was sure to come. Ben was sleeping easily now; the instant when his
life hung in the balance still impended.

She built up the fire, put on water to heat, covered the man with added
blankets, then lay down on Ben's cot. Soon she drifted into uneasy
slumber, waking at intervals to serve her patient.

The hours dragged by, the night sloped down to the forest; and the dawn
followed the night. Ben's life still flickered, like a flame in the
wind, in the twilight land between life and death.

Yet little could she do for him these first few days, except, in her
simple faith, to pray. Never an hour passed but that prayers were at her
lips, childlike, direct, entreating prayers from her woman's heart. Of
all her offices these were first: she had no doubt but that they counted
most. She sat by his bedside, kept him covered with the warmest robes,
hewed wood for the fire; but as yet he had never fully emerged from his
unconsciousness. Would he slip away in the night without ever wakening?

But in the morning of the fourth day he opened his eyes vividly,
muttered, and fell immediately to sleep. He woke again at evening; and
his moving lips conveyed a message. In response she brought him steaming
grouse broth, administering it a spoonful at a time until he fell to
sleep again.

In the days that followed he was conscious to the degree that he could
drink broth, yet never recognizing Beatrice nor seeming to know where he
was. His fever still lingered, raging; yet in these days she began to
notice a slow improvement in his condition. The healing agents of his
body were hard at work; and doubt was removed that he had received
mortal internal injuries. She had set his broken arm the best she could,
holding the bones in place with splints; but in all likelihood it would
have to be broken and set again when he reached the settlements. She
began to notice the first cessation of his fever; although weeks of
sickness yet remained, she believed that the crisis was past. Yet in
spite of these hopeful signs, she was face to face with the most tragic
situation of all. Their food was almost gone.

It would be long weeks before Ben could hope for sufficient strength to
start the journey down to the settlements, even if the way were open. As
it was their only chance lay in the fall rains that would flood the
Yuga and enable them to journey down to the native villages in their
canoe. These rains would not fall till October. For all that she had
hoarded their supplies to the last morsel, eating barely enough herself
to sustain life in her body, the dread spectre of starvation waited just
without the cave. She had realized perfectly that Ben could not hope to
throw off the malady without nutritious food and she had not stinted
with him; and now, just when she had begun to hope for his recovery, she
shook the last precious cup of flour from the sack.

The rice and sugar were gone, long since. The honey she had hoarded to
give Ben--knowing its warming, nutritive value--not tasting a drop
herself. Of all their stores only a few pieces of jerked caribou
remained; she had used the rest to make rich broth for Ben, and there
was no way under heaven whereby they might procure more.

The rifle was broken. The last of the pistol shots was fired the day she
had prepared the poisoned cup for Ben.

Yet she still waged the fight, struggling with high courage and tireless
resolution against the frightful odds that opposed her. Her faith was as
of that nameless daughter of the Gileadite; and she could not yield. Not
ambition, not hatred--not even such fire of fury as had been wakened in
Wolf Darby's heart that first frenzied night on the hillside--could have
been the impulse for such fortitude and sacrifice as hers. It was not
one of these base passions--known in the full category to her rescuers
who were even now bearing down upon her valley--that kept the steel in
her thews and the steadfastness in her heart. She loved this man; her
love for him was as wholesome and as steadfast as her own self; and the
law of that love was to give him all she had.

There were few witnesses to this infinite giving of hers. Ben himself
still lingered in a strange stupor, remembering nothing, knowing neither
the girl nor himself. Perhaps the wild things saw her desperate efforts
to find food in the wilderness,--the long hours of weary searching for a
handful of berries that gave such little nourishment to his weakened
body, or for a few acorns stored for winter by bird or rodent. Sometimes
a great-antlered moose--an easy trophy if the rifle had been
unbroken--saw her searching for wocus like a lost thing in the tenacious
mud of the marshes; and almost nightly a silent wolf, pausing in his
hunting, gazed uneasily through the cavern maw. But mostly her long
hours of service in the cave, the chill nights that she sat beside Ben's
cot, the dreary mornings when she cooked her own scanty breakfast and
took her uneasy rest, the endless labor of fire-mending so that the cave
could be kept at an even heat went unobserved by mortal eyes. The
healing forces of his body called for warmth and nourishment; but for
all the might of her efforts she waged a losing fight.

What little wocus she was able to find she made into bread for Ben; yet
it was never enough to satisfy his body's craving. The only meat she had
herself was the vapid flesh that had been previously boiled for Ben's
broth; and now only a few pieces of the jerked meat remained. She
herself tried to live on such plants as the wilderness yielded, and she
soon began to notice the tragic loss of her own strength. Her eyes were
hollow, preternaturally large; she experienced a strange, floating
sensation, as if spirit and flesh were disassociated.

Still Ben lingered in his mysterious stupor, unaware of what went on
about him; but his fever was almost gone by now, and the first
beginnings of strength returned to his thews. His mind had begun to
grope vaguely for the key that would open the doors of his memory and
remind him again of some great, half-forgotten task that still
confronted him, some duty unperformed. Yet he could not quite seize it.
The girl who worked about his cot was without his bourne of knowledge;
her voice reached him as if from an infinite distance, and her words
penetrated only to the outer edges of his consciousness. It was not
strictly, however, a return of his amnesia. It was simply an outgrowth
of delirium caused by his sickness and injuries, to be wholly dispelled
as soon as he was wholly well.

But now the real hour of crisis was at hand,--not from his illness, but
from the depletion of their food supplies. Beatrice had spent a hard
afternoon in the forest in search of roots and berries, and as she crept
homeward, exhausted and almost empty-handed, the full, tragic truth was
suddenly laid bare. Her own strength had waned. Without the miracle of a
fresh food supply she could hardly keep on her feet another day. Plainly
and simply, the wolf was at the door. His cruel fangs menaced not only
her, but this stalwart man for whose life she had fought so hard.

The fear of the obliterating darkness known to all the woods people
pressed close upon her and appalled her. She loved life simply and
primitively; and it was an unspeakable thing to lose at the end of such
a battle. Out so far, surrounded by such endless, desolate wastes of
gloomy forest, the Shadow was cold, inhospitable; and she was afraid to
face it alone. If Ben would only waken and sustain her drooping spirit
with his own! She was lonely and afraid, in the shadow of the inert
spruce, under the gray sky.

She could hardly summon strength for the evening's work of cutting fuel.
The blade would not drive with its old force into the wood. The blaze
itself burned dully; and she could not make it leap and crackle with its
old cheer. And further misfortune was in store for her when she crept
into the cave to prepare Ben's supper.

A pack rat--one of those detested rodents known so well to all northern
peoples--had carried off in her absence two of the three remaining
sticks of jerked caribou. For a moment she gazed in unbelieving and
speechless horror, then made a frenzied search in the darkened corners
of the cabin.

This was no little tragedy: the two sticks of condensed and concentrated
protein might have kept Ben alive for a few days more. It was disaster,
merciless and sweeping. And the brave heart of the girl seemed to break
under the blow.

The hot, bitter tears leaped forth; but she suppressed the bitter,
hopeless sobs that clutched at her throat. She must not let Ben know of
this catastrophe. Likely in his stupor he would not understand; yet she
must not take the chance. She must nourish the spark of hope in his
breast to the last hour. She walked to the mouth of the cave; and Famine
itself stood close, waiting in the shadows. She gazed out into the
gathering gloom.

The tears blinded her eyes at first. Slowly the dark profile of the
spruce against the gray sky penetrated to her consciousness: the somber
beauty of the wilderness sky line that haunts the woodsman's dreams.
With it came full realization of the might and the malevolency of these
shadowed wilds she had battled so long. They had got her down at last;
they had crushed her and beaten her, and had held up to scorn her
sacrifice and her mortal strength. She knew the wild wood now: its
savage power, its remorselessness, and yet, woods girl that she was, she
could not forget its dark and moving beauty.

The forest was silent to-night. Not a twig cracked or a branch rustled.
It was hushed, breathless, darkly sinister. All at once her eyes peered
and strained into the dusk.

Far across the valley, beyond the beaver marsh and on the farther shore
of the lake she saw a little glimmer of light through the rift in the
trees. She dared not believe in its reality at first. Perhaps it was a
trick of her imagination only, a hallucination born of her starvation,
child of her heartfelt prayer. She looked away, then peered again. But,
yes--a tiny gleam of yellow light twinkled through the gloom! It was
real, _it was true_! A gleam of hope in the darkness of despair.

Her rescuers had come. There could be no other explanation. She hastened
into the cave, drew the blankets higher about Ben's shoulders, then
crept out into the dusk. Half running, she hastened toward their distant
camp fire.




XXXVIII

Beatrice's first impulse was to run at a breakneck pace down the ridge
and about the lake into her father's camp, beseeching instant aid to the
starving man in the cave. She wished that she had a firearm with which
to signal to them and bring them at once to the cavern. And it was not
until she had descended the ridge and stood at the edge of the beaver
meadow that her delirious joy began to give way to serious, thought.

She was brought to a halt first by the sight of the horses that had
wandered about the long loop of the lake and were feeding in the rich
grass of the meadow. The full moon rising in the east had cast a
nebulous glow over the whole countryside by now; and she could make a
hasty estimation of their numbers. It was evident at once that her
father had not made the expedition alone. The large outfit implied a
party of at least three,--indicating that Ray Brent and Chan Heminway
had accompanied him.

She had only fear and disdain for these two younger men; but surely they
would not refuse aid to Ben. Yet perhaps it was best to proceed with
some caution. These were her lover's enemies; if for no other reason
than their rage at her own abduction they might be difficult to control.
Her father, in all probability, would willingly show mercy to the
helpless man in the cavern--particularly after she told him of Ben's
consideration and kindness--but she put no faith in Ray and Chan. She
knew them of old. Besides, she remembered there was a further
consideration,--that of a gold claim.

Could Ben have told her the truth when he had maintained that they would
kill him on sight if he did not destroy them first? Was it true that he
had waged the war in defense of his own rights? Weeks and months had
passed since she had seen her father's face: perhaps her old control of
him could no longer be relied upon. If indeed their ownership of a rich
claim depended upon Ben's death, Ray and Chan could not be trusted at
all.

She resolved to proceed with the utmost caution. Abruptly she turned out
of the beaver marsh, where the moonlight might reveal her, and followed
close to the edge of the timber, a course that could not be visible from
beyond the lake. She approached the lake at its far neck, then followed
back along the margin clear to the edge of the woods in which the fire
was built.

In her years in the woods Beatrice had learned to stalk, and the
knowledge was of value to her now. With never a misstep she took down a
little game trail toward the camp fire. She was within fifty yards of it
now--she could make out three dark figures seated in the circle of
firelight. Walking softly but upright she pushed within ninety feet of
the fire.

Then she waited, in doubt as to her course. She was still too far
distant to hear more than the murmur of their voices. If she could just
get near enough to catch their words she could probably glean some idea
of their attitude toward Ben. She pushed on nearer, through the dew-wet
brush.

Impelled by the excitement under which she advanced, her old agility of
motion had for the moment returned to her; and she crept softly as a
fawn between the young trees. One misstep, one rustling branch or
crackling twig might give her away; but she took each step with
consummate care, gently thrusting the tree branches from her path.

Once a rodent stirred beneath her feet, and she froze--like a hunting
wolf--in her tracks. One of the three men looked up, and she saw his
face plainly through the low spruce boughs. And for a moment she thought
that this was a stranger. It was with a distinct foreboding of disaster
that she saw, on second glance, that the man was Ray Brent.

She had never seen such change in human countenance in the space of a
few months. She did not pause to analyze it. She only knew that his eyes
were glittering and fixed; and that she herself was deeply,
unexplainably appalled. The man cursed once, blasphemously, his face
dusky and evil in the eerie firelight, but immediately turned back to
his talk. Beatrice crept closer.

Now she was near enough to catch an occasional word, but not discern
their thoughts. It was evident, however, that their conversation was of
Ben and herself,--the same topic they had discussed nights without end.
She caught her own name; once Chan used an obscene epithet as he spoke
of their enemy.

Her instincts were true and infallible to-night; and she was ever more
convinced of their deadly intentions toward Ben. It was not wise to
announce herself yet. Perhaps she would have to rely upon a course other
than a direct appeal for aid. Now her keen eyes could see the whole
camp: the three seated figures of the men, their rifles leaning near
them, their supplies spread out about the fire.

At one side, quite to the edge of the firelight, she saw a kyack--one of
those square boxes that are hung on a pack saddle--which seemed to be
heaped with jerked caribou or moose flesh. For the time of a breath she
could not take her eyes from it. It was food--food in plenty to sustain
Ben through his illness and the remaining weeks of their exile--and her
eyes moistened and her hands trembled at the sight. She had been taught
the meaning of famine, these last, bitter days. In reality she was now
in the first stage of starvation, experiencing the first, vague
hallucinations, the sense of incorporeality, the ever-declining
strength, the constant yearning that is nothing but the vitals'
submerged demand for food. The contents of the kyack meant _life_ to
herself and to Ben,--deliverance and safety when all seemed lost.

A daughter of the cities far to the south--even a child of
poverty--rarely could have understood the unutterable craving that
overswept her at the sight of this simple food. It was unadorned,
unaccompanied by the delicacies that most human beings have come to look
upon as essentials and to expect with every meal: it was only animal
flesh dried in the smoke and the sun. It not only attracted her
physically; but in that moment it possessed real objective beauty for
her; as it would have possessed for the most cultivated esthete that
might be standing in her place. This girl was down to the most stern
realities, and life and death hung in the balance.

She went on her hands and knees, creeping nearer. Still she did not make
the slightest false motion, creeping with an uncanny silence in the
under shrubbery. And now the words came plain.

"But we must be near," Chan was saying. "They can't be more than a mile
or so from here. We'll find 'em in the morning--"

"If he doesn't find us first and shoot up our camp," Ray replied. "I
wish we'd built our fire further into the woods. Here we've looked all
day without even finding a track except those tracks in the mud."

"They might be beyond the marsh," Neilson suggested.

"But Chan went over that way and didn't find a trace," Ray objected.
"But just the same--we'll make a real search to-morrow. I believe we'll
find the devil. And then--we can leave this hellish country and go back
in peace--if we don't want to wait for the flood."

Beatrice's eyes were on his face, wondering what growth of wickedness,
what degeneracy had so filled his cruel eyes with light and stamped his
face with evil. This was the man to whom she must look for mercy. Ben's
life, if she led the three men to the cave, would be in his hands. She
sensed from his authoritative tone that her father's control over him
was largely broken. She hovered, terrified and motionless, in her
covert.

Ray reached for his rifle, glancing at the sights and drawing the lever
back far enough to see the brass of its shells. Chan's lean face was
drawn with a cruel glee.

"You can't keep your hands off that gun, Ray," he said. "You sure are
gettin' anxious."

"I won't use it on him," Ray replied, slowly and carefully. "It's too
good for him--except maybe the stock. He didn't lead me clear out here
just to see him puff out and blow up in a minute with a rifle ball
through his head. Just the same I want the gun near me, all the time."

The two men looked at him, sardonic-eyed; and both of them seemed to
understand fully what he meant. They seemed to catch more from the slow
tones, so full of lust and frenzy that they seemed to drop from his
lips in an ugly monotone, than they did from the words themselves. They
took a certain grim amusement in these quirks of abnormal depravity that
had begun to manifest themselves in Ray. The man's fingers were wide
spread as he spoke, and his lip twitched twice, sharply, when he had
finished.

The words came clear and distinct to the listening girl. She tried to
take them literally--that Ray would not shoot Ben! _"It's too good for
him--except maybe the stock!"_ Did he mean _that_ too! Was there any
possible meaning in the world other than that he was planning some
unearthly, more terrible fate for the man she loved! She would not yet
yield to the dreadful truth, yet even now terror was clutching at her
throat, strangling her; and the cold drops were beading her brow. Still
the dark drama of the fireside continued before her eyes.

Chan suddenly turned to Neilson, evidently imbued with Ray's fervor.
"What do you think of that, old man?" he asked menacingly. Thus Chan,
too, had escaped from Neilson's dominance: plainly Ray was his idol now.
It was also plain that he recognized attributes of mercy and decency in
his grizzled leader that might interfere with his own and his
companion's plans. "What's worrying me--whether you're goin' to join in
on the sport when we catch the weasel!"

Sport! The word was more terrible to Beatrice than the vilest oath he
had used to emphasize it. She crouched, shivering. Watching intently,
she saw Ray look up, too, waiting for the reply; and her father, sensing
his lost dominance, bowed his head.

"You could hardly expect me to let him off easy--seeing what he did to
my daughter--"

"What he done to your daughter ain't all--I don't care if he treated her
like a queen of the realm all the time," Ray interrupted harshly. "That
makes no difference to neither me nor Chan. The main thing is--he
brought us out here, away from the claim--and gave us months of the
worst hell I ever hope to spend. I guess you ain't forgotten what Chan
found out in Snowy Gulch--that the claim's recorded--in old Hiram's
name. This Darby's got a letter in his pocket from Hiram's brother that
would stand in any court. We've got to get that first. If Darby was an
angel I'd mash him under my heel just the same; we've gone too far to
start crawfishing. Just let me see him tied up in front of me--"

Beatrice did not linger to hear more. She had her answer: only in Ben's
continued concealment lay the least hope of his salvation. These wolves
about the fire meant what they said. But already her plans were shaping;
and now she saw the light.

In the kyack of venison lay her own and her lover's safety: it contained
enough nutritious food to sustain them until the fall rains could swell
the Yuga and enable them to escape down to the Indian encampment. Her
mind was swift and keen as never before: swiftly she perfected the last
detail of her plan. The canoe, due to Ben's foresight, was securely
hidden in a maze of tall reeds on the lake shore: they were certain to
overlook it. The cavern, however, was almost certain to be discovered in
the next day's search. They must make their escape to-night.

Ben, though terribly weakened, would be able to walk a short distance
with her help. They could slip into the deepest forest, concealing
themselves in the coverts until the three men had given up the search
and gone away. She would take their robes and blankets to keep them
warm; a camp fire would of course reveal their hiding place. The work
could easily be accomplished in the midnight shadows: deliverance,
salvation, life itself depended on the tide of fate in the next few
hours.

She intended to steal the kyack of dried meat without which Ben and
herself could not live. She crept back farther into the underbrush; then
waited, scarcely breathing, while the fire died down. Already the three
men were preparing to go to their bunks. Chan had already lain down; her
father was removing his coat and boots. Ray, however, still sat in the
firelight.

The moments passed. Would he never rise and go? The fire, however, was
dying: its circle of ruddy light ever drew inward. The kyack was quite
in the shadow now, yet she dared not attempt its theft until the three
men were asleep. She waited, thrilling with excitement.

Chan and Neilson were seemingly asleep, and now Ray was knocking the
ashes from his pipe. He yawned, stretching wide his arms; then, as if
held by some intriguing thought, sat almost motionless, gazing into the
graying coals. Presently Beatrice heard him curse, softly, in the
shadows.

He got up, and removing his outer coat, rolled in his blankets. The
night hours began their mystic march across the face of the wilderness.

Now was the time to act. As far as she could tell, the three men were
deeply asleep: at least the likelihood would be as great as at any time
later in the night. The fire was a heap of gray ashes except for its
red-hot center: the kyack was in gloom. Very softly she crept through
the thickets, meanwhile encircling the dying fire, and came up behind
it.

Now it was almost in reach: now her hands were at its loops. She started
to lift it in her arms.

But disaster still dogged her trail. Ray Brent had been too wary of
attack, to-night, to sink easily into deep slumber. He heard the soft
movement as Beatrice lifted the heavy canvas bag off the ground; and
with a startled oath sprang to his feet.

He leaped like a panther. "Who's there?" he cried.

Sensing immediate discovery the girl placed all her hope in flight.
Perhaps yet she could lose her pursuers in the darkness. Still trying to
hold the kyack of food that meant life to Ben, she turned and darted
into the shadows.

Like a wolf Ray sped after her. The moonlight showed her fleeing figure
in the trees, and shouting aloud he sprang through the coverts to
intercept her flight. The chase was of short duration thereafter.
Emburdened by the heavy box she could not watch her step; and a
protruding root caught cruelly at her ankle. She was hurled with
stunning force to the ground.

Desperate and intent, but in realization of impending triumph, Ray's
strong arms went about her.




XXXIX

For the second time in his life Ray Brent felt the sting of Beatrice's
strong hand against his face. In the desperation of fear she had smote
him with all her force. His arms withdrew quickly from about her; and
her wide, disdainful eyes beheld a sinister change in his expression.
The moonlight was in his eyes, silver-white; and they seemed actually to
redden with fury, and again she saw that queer, ghastly twitching at the
corner of his lips. The girl's defiance was broken with that one blow.
She dropped her head, then walked past him into the presence of her
father.

Neilson and Chan were on their feet now, and they regarded her in the
utter silence of amazement. Breathing fast, Ray came behind her.

"Build up the fire, Chan," he said in a strange, grim voice. "We want to
see what we've caught."

Obediently Chan kicked the coals from under the ashes, and began to heap
on broken pieces of wood. The sticks smoked, then a little tongue of
yellow flame crept about the fuel. But still the emburdened silence
continued--the white-faced girl in the ring of silent, watching men.

Slowly the fire's glow crept out to her, revealing--even better than the
bright moonlight--her wide, frightened eyes and the dark, speculative
faces of the men. Then Ray spoke sharply in his place.

"Well, why don't you question her?" he demanded of Neilson. "I suppose
you know what she was doing. She was trying to steal food. It looks to
me like she's gone over to the opposite camp."

Her father sighed, a peculiar sound that seemed to come from above the
tree tops, as if fast-flying waterfowl were passing overhead. "Is that
so, daughter?" he asked simply.

"I was trying to take some of your food--to Ben," Beatrice replied
softly. "He's in need of it."

"You see, they're on intimate terms," Ray suggested viciously. "Ben was
in need of food--so she came here to steal it."

But Neilson acted as if he had not heard. "Why didn't you speak to
us--and tell us you were safe?" he asked. "We've come all the way here
to find you."

"Perhaps _you_ did. If you had been here alone, I would have told you.
But Ray and Chan came all the way here to find Ben. I heard what they
said--back there in the brush. They intend to kill him when they find
him. I--I didn't want him killed."

Her father stared at her from under his bushy brows. "After carrying you
from your home--taking you into danger and keeping you a prisoner--you
still want to protect him?"

The girl nodded. "And I want you to protect him, too," she said.
"Against these men." Suddenly she moved forward in earnest appeal. "Oh,
Father--I want you to save him. He's never touched me--he's treated me
with every respect--done everything he could for me. When he was injured
he told me to go back--to take what little food there was, and go
back--"

"I can take it, then, that you're out of food?" Ray asked.

"We're starving--and Ben's sick. Father, I make this one appeal--if your
love for me isn't all gone, you'll grant it. I love him. You might as
well know that now, as later. I want you to save the man your daughter
loves."

Chan cursed in the gloom, his lean face darkened; but Neilson made no
answer. Ray in his place sharply inhaled; but the sullen glow in his
eyes snapped into a flame.

If Beatrice had glanced at Ray, she would have ceased her appeal and
trusted everything to the doubtful mercy of flight,--into the gloom of
the forest. As it was, she did not fully comprehend the cruel lust, like
flame, that sped through his veins. She would have hoped for no mercy if
she could have seen the strange, black surge of wrath in his face.

"He has been kind to me--and he was in the right, not in the wrong. I
know about the claim-jumping. Father, I want you to stand between him
and these men--help him--and give him food. I didn't speak to you
because I was afraid for him--afraid you'd kill him or do some other
awful thing to him--"

Slowly her father shook his head. "But I can't save him now. He brought
this on himself."

"Remember, he was in the right," the girl pleaded brokenly. "You
won't--you couldn't be a partner to murder. That's all it would
be--murder--brutal, terrible, cold-blooded murder--if you kill him
without a fight. It couldn't be in defense of me--I tell you he hasn't
injured me--but was always kind to me. It would be just to take that
letter away from him--"

"So he has the letter, has he?" Ray interrupted. He smiled grimly, and
his tone was again flat and strained. "And he's sick--and starving. It
isn't for your father to say, Beatrice, what's to be done with Ben.
There's three of us here, and he's just one. Don't go interfering with
what doesn't concern you, either--about the claim. You take us where he
is, and we'll decide what to do with him."

Her eyes went to his face; and her lips closed tight. Here was one
thing, on this mortal earth, that she must not tell. Perhaps, by the
mercy of heaven, they would not find the cave, hidden as it was at the
edge of the little glade. The forests were boundless; perhaps they would
miss the place in their search. She straightened, scarcely perceptibly.

"Yes, tell us where he is," her father urged. "That's the first thing.
We'll find him, anyway, in the morning."

The girl shook her head. She knew now that even if they promised mercy
she must not reveal Ben's whereabouts. Their rage and cruelty would not
be stayed for a spoken promise. The only card she had left, her one
last, feeble hope of preserving Ben's life, lay in her continued
silence. Ray's foul-nailed, eager hands could claw her lips apart, but
he could not make her speak.

"I won't tell you," she answered at last, more clearly than she had
spoken since her capture. "You said a few minutes ago I had gone
over--to the opposite camp. I am, from now on. He was in the right, and
he gave up his fight against you long ago. Now I want to go."

Fearing that Neilson might show mercy, Ray leaped in front of her. "You
don't go yet awhile," he told her grimly. "I've got a few minutes'
business with you yet. I tell you that we'll find him, if we have to
search all year. And he'll have twice the chance of getting out alive if
you tell us where he is."

She looked into his face, and she knew what that chance was. Her eyelids
dropped halfway, and she shook her head. "I'd die first," she answered.

"It never occurred to you, did it, that there's ways of _making_ people
tell things." He suddenly whirled, with drawn lips, to her father.
"Neilson, is there any reason for showing any further consideration to
this wench of yours? She's betrayed us--gone over to the opposite
camp--lived for weeks, willing, with Ben. I for one am never going to
see her leave this camp till she tells us where he is. I'm tired of
talking and waiting. I'm going to get that paper away from him, and I'm
going to smash his heart with my heel. We've almost won out--and I'm
going to go the rest of the way."

Neilson straightened, his eyes steely and bright under his grizzled
brows. Only too well he knew that this was the test. Affairs were at
their crisis at last. But in this final moment his love for his daughter
swept back to him in all its unmeasured fullness,--and when all was said
and done it was the first, the mightiest impulse in his life. Ben had
been kind to her, and she loved him; and all at once he knew that he
could not yield him or her to the mercy of this black-hearted man before
him.

He had lived an iniquitous life; he was inured to all except the worst
forms of wickedness; but for the moment--in love of his daughter--he
stood redeemed. He was on the right side at last. His hand drew back,
and his face was like iron.

"Shut that foul mouth!" he cautioned, with a curious, deadly evenness of
tone. "I haven't surrendered yet to you two wolves. If one of you dares
to lay a hand on Beatrice, I'll kill him where he stands."

Even as he spoke his thought went to his rifle, leaning against a dead
log ten feet away. This was the moment of test: the jealousy and rivalry
and hatred between himself and Ray had reached the crisis. And the
spirit of murder, terrible past any demon of the Pit, came stalking from
the savage forest into the ruddy firelight.

Ray leered, his muscles bunching. "And I say to you, you're a dirty
traitor too," he answered. "She ain't your daughter any more. She's Ben
Darby's squaw. She's not fit for a white man to touch any more, for all
her lies. You say one word and you'll get it too."

And at that instant the speeding pace of time seemed to halt, showing
this accursed scene, so savage and terrible in the eerie light of the
camp fire, at the edge of the haunted, breathless darkness, in vivid and
ghastly detail. Neilson leaped forward with all his power; and if his
blow had gone home, Ray would have been shattered beneath it like a tree
in the lightning blast. But Ray's arms were incredibly swift, and his
rifle leaped in his hands.

The barrel gleamed. The roar reechoed in the silence. Neilson's head
bowed strangely; and for a moment he stood swaying, a ghastly blankness
on his face; then pitched forward in the dew-wet grass.

Beatrice's last defense had fallen, seriously wounded; and Ray's arm
seized her as, screaming, she tried to flee.




XL

The shot that wounded Jeffery Neilson carried far through the forest
aisles, reechoing against the hills, and arresting, for one breathless
moment, all the business of the wilderness. The feeding caribou swung
his horns and tried to catch the scent; the moose, grubbing for water
roots in the lake bottom, lifted his grotesque head and stood like a
form in black iron. It came clear as a voice to the cavern where Ben
lay.

The man started violently in his cot. His entire nervous system seemed
to react. Then there ensued a curious state in which his physical
functions seemed to cease,--his heart motionless in his breast, his body
tensely rigid, his breath held. There was an infinite straining and
travail in his mind.

The truth was that the sound acted much as a powerful stimulant to his
retarded nervous forces. It was the one thing his resting nerve-system
needed; it was as if chemicals were in suspension in a crucible, and at
a slight jar of the glass they made mysterious union and expelled a
precipitation. Almost instantly he recognized the sound that had reached
him, with a clear and unmistakable recognition such as he had not
experienced since the night of the accident, as the report of a rifle.
His mind gave a great leap and remembered its familiar world.

A rifle--probably discharged by Beatrice in a hunt after big game. It
was true that their meat supply was low; he remembered now. Yet it was
curious that she should be hunting after dark. The gloom was deep at
the cavern mouth. Besides, he had always kept his rifle from her,
fearing that she might turn it against him. He looked about him, trying
to locate the source of the flood of light on the cavern floor. It was
the moon, and it showed that the girl was gone. He started to sit up.

But his left arm did not react just properly to the command of his
brain. It impeded him, and its old strength was impaired. For a moment
more he lay quiet, deep in thought. Of course--he had been injured by
the falling tree. He remembered clearly, now. And the rifle had been
broken.

The only possible explanation for the shot was that a rifle had been
fired by some invader in their valley--in all probability Neilson or one
of his men. Beatrice's absence would also indicate this fact: perhaps
she had already joined her father and was on her way back to Snowy Gulch
with him. In that case, why had he himself been spared?

He looked out of the door of the cavern, trying to get some idea of the
lateness of the hour. The very quality of the darkness indicated that
the night was far advanced. Neilson would not be hunting game at this
hour. Was his own war--planned long ago--even now being waged in ways
beyond his ken?

His old concern for Beatrice swept through him. With considerable
difficulty he got to his feet, then holding on to the wail, guided
himself to the shelf where they ordinarily kept their little store of
matches. He scratched one of them against the wall.

In the flaring light his eyes made a swift but careful appraisal of his
surroundings. The girl's cot had not been slept in; and to his great
amazement he saw that their food supplies were spent. Still holding to
the wall he walked to the cave mouth.

Instantly his keen eyes saw the far-off gleam of the camp fire on the
distant margin of the lake. For all that the hour was late, it burned
high and bright. He watched it, vaguely conscious of the insidious
advance of a ghastly fear. Beatrice was his ally now--if these weeks had
sent home one fact to him it was this--and her absence might easily
indicate that she was helpless in the enemy's hands. The thing suggested
ugly possibilities. Yet he could not aid her. He could scarcely walk;
even the knife that he wore at his belt was missing, probably carried by
Beatrice when she gathered roots in the woods.

But presently all questions as to his course were settled for him. His
straining ear caught the faintest, almost imperceptible vibration in the
air--a soundwave so dim and obscure that it seemed impossible that the
human mind could interpret it--but Ben recognized it in a flash. In some
great trouble and horror, in the sullen light of that distant camp fire,
Beatrice had screamed for aid.

Only by the grace of the Red Gods had he heard the sound at all. Except
for the fact that the half-mile intervening was as still as death, and
that half the way the sound sped over water, he couldn't have hoped to
perceive it. If the wind had blown elsewhere than straight toward him
from the enemy camp, or if his marvelous sense of hearing had been less
acute, the result would have been the same; and there could have been no
answer from this dark man at the cave mouth who stood so tense and
still. Finally, by instinct as much as by conscious intelligence, he
identified the sound, marked it as a reality rather than a fancy, and
read the tragic need behind it. Swiftly he started down the glade toward
her.

Yet in a moment he knew that unless he conserved his strength he could
not hope to make a fourth of the distance. At the first steps he swayed,
half staggering. He had paid the price for his weeks of illness and his
injuries. If he had been in a sick room, under a physician's care, he
would have believed it impossible to walk unsupported across the room.
But need is the mother of strength, and this was the test. Besides, he
had had several days of convalescence that had put back into his sinews
a measure of his mighty strength. Mostly he progressed by holding on to
the trees, pulling himself forward step by step.

Likely he would come too late to change the girl's fate. Yet even now he
knew he must not turn back. If the penalty were death, there must be no
hesitancy in him; he must not withhold one step.

But it was a losing fight. The hill itself seemed endless; a hundred
cruel yards of marsh must be traversed before ever he reached the
nearest point by the lake. The enemy camp from where Beatrice had called
to him lay on the far side of the lake, a distance of a full mile if he
followed around the curving shore. And black and bitter self-hatred
swept like fire through him when he realized that he could not possibly
keep on his feet for so long a way.

Was this all he had fought for--surging upward through these long, weary
weeks out of the shadow of death--only to fall dead on the trail in the
moment of Beatrice's need? Instantly he knew that nothing in his life,
no other desire or dream, had ever meant as much to him as this: that he
might reach her side in time. Even his desire for vengeance, in that
twilight madness, like Roland's, that had shaped his destiny, had been
wavering and feeble compared to this. And no moment of his existence had
ever been so dark, so bereft of the last, dim star of hope that lights
men's way in the deep night of despair.

He gave no thought to the fact of his own helplessness against three
armed men in case he did succeed in reaching their camp. The point could
not possibly be considered. The imperious instincts that forced him on
simply could not take it into reckoning. He knew only he must reach her
side and put in her service all that he had.

He fell again and again as he tried to make headway in the marsh. But
always he forced himself up and on. Only too plain he saw that the time
was even now upon him when he could no longer keep his feet at all. But
still he plunged on, and with tragically slow encroachments the shore
line drew up to him.

But he could not go on. The fire itself was hardly a quarter of a mile
distant, directly across the lake, but to follow the long shore was an
insuperable mile. Already his leg muscles were failing him, refusing to
the respond to the impulse of his nerves. Yet it might be that if he
could make himself heard his enemies would leave the girl for a moment,
at least--give her an instant's respite--while they came and dispatched
his own life. Whatever they were doing to her, there in that ring of
firelight, might be stayed for a moment, at least.

But at that instant he remembered the canoe. He had always kept it
hidden in a little thicket of tall reeds,--if only the girl had not
removed it from its place in his weeks of sickness! He plunged down into
the tall tules. Yes, the boat was still in place.

It took all the strength of his weakened body to push it out from the
reeds into the water. Then he seized the long pole they had sometimes
used to propel themselves over the lake. Except for his injured arm,
the paddle would have been better--he could have made better time and
escaped the danger of being stranded in deep water--but he doubted that
he could handle it with his faltering arm. He pushed off, putting most
of the strain on his uninjured right arm.

The canoe was strongly but lightly made, so that it could be portaged
with greatest possible ease; and his strokes, though feeble, propelled
it slowly through the water. The great, white full moon, beloved of long
ago, looked down from above the tall, dark heads of the spruce and
changed the little water-body into a miracle of burnished silver. In its
light Ben's face showed pale, but with a curious, calm strength.

The lake seemed untouched by the faint breath of wind that blew from the
distant shore. The waters lay quiet, and the trout beneath saw the black
shadow of the canoe as it passed. A cow moose and her calf sprang up the
bank with a splash, frightened by the poling figure in the stern. And on
the far shore, clear where the lake had its outlet in a small river,
even more keen wilderness eyes might have beheld the black, moving dot
that was the craft. But the distance was too far and the wind was wrong
for the keen mind behind the eyes to make any sort of an interpretation.

It might have been that Fenris the wolf, running with a female and two
younger males that he had mastered that long-ago night on the ridge,
paused in his hunting to watch and wonder. But his wild brute thoughts
were not under the bondage of memory to-night; his savage heart was
thrilled and full; and more than likely he did not even turn his head.

Ray and Chan, standing beside their prisoner in their grisly camp on the
opposite shore, might have beheld Ben's approach if weightier matters
had not occupied their minds. They had only to walk to the edge of the
firelight and stare down through a rift in the trees to see him. But
they stood with the angry glare revealing a strange and sinister
intentness in their drawn faces and ominous speculations in their evil
eyes.




XLI

It was a wilderness moon that rose over the spruce to-night,--white as
new silver, incredibly large, inscrutably mysterious. The winds had
whisked away the last pale cloud that might have dimmed its glory, and
its light poured down with equal bounty on peak and hill, forest and
yellow marsh. The heavy woods partook most deeply of its enchantment:
tall, stately trees pale and nebulous as if with silver frost, each
little stream dancing and shimmering in its light, every glade laid with
a fairy tapestry, every shadow dreadful and black in contrast. The
wilderness breathed and shivered as if swept with passion.

The wilderness moon is the moon of desire; and all this great space of
silence seemed to respond. It seemed to throb, like one living entity,
as if in longing for something lost long ago--a half-forgotten
happiness, a glory and a triumph that were gone never to return. No
creatures that followed the woods trails were dull and flat to-night.
They were all swept with mystery, knowing vague longings or fierce
desires. It was the harvest moon; but here it did not light the fields
so that men might harvest grain. Rather it illumined the hunting trails
so that the beasts of prey might find relief from the wild lusts and
seething ferment that was in their veins. But mostly the forest mood was
disconsolate, rather than savage, to-night. The wild geese on the lake
called their weird and plaintive cries, their strange complaints that no
man understands; the loons laughed in insane despair; and the coyotes
on the ridge wailed out the pain of living and the vague longings of
their wild hearts.

In the glory of that moon Fenris the wolf knew the same, resistless
longings that so many times before had turned him from the game trails.
There was something here that was unutterably dear to him,--something
that drew him, called him like a voice, and he could not turn aside.
Because he was a beast, he likely did not know the force that was
drawing him again along the lake shore. Yet the souls of the lower
creatures no man knows; and perhaps he had conscious longings,
profoundly intense, for a moment's touch of a strong hand on his
shoulder,--one never-to-be-forgotten caress from a certain god that had
gone to a cave to live. It was true that his wild instincts, ever more
in dominance these past weeks, would likely halt him at the cavern maw,
permitting no intimacy other than to ascertain that all was well. They
were too strong ever to brook man's control again. The moon was a moon
of desire, but only because it was also the moon of memory,--and perhaps
memories, stirring and exalting, were sweeping through him. Straight as
an arrow he turned toward the cave.

His followers--the gaunt female and two younger males, the structure
about which the winter pack would form--hesitated at first. They had no
commanding memories of the cavern on the far side of the lake. Yet
Fenris was their leader; by the deep-lying laws of the pack they must
follow where he led. They could not decoy him into the trails of game.
As ever they sped swiftly, silently after him.

In this forest of desires Ben knew but one,--that he might yet be of aid
to Beatrice. But he knew in his heart that it was a vain hope. He was
within a hundred yards of Ray's camp now, but the struggle to reach the
lake and the poling across its waters had brought him seemingly to the
absolute limit of his strength, clear to the brink of utter exhaustion.
Never in his life before had he known the full meaning of
fatigue,--fatigue that was like a paralysis, blunting the mechanism of
the brain, burning like a slow fire in his muscles, poisoning the vital
fluids of his nerves. Stroke after stroke, never ceasing!--The flame was
high, crackling--just before him. Through a rift in the trees he could
see the outline of two men and the slim form of the girl. Just a few
yards more.

But of all the desires that the moon invoked in the woods people there
were none so unredeemed, so wicked and cruel as this that slowly wakened
in the evil hearts of these two degenerate men, Beatrice's captors. She
sensed it only vaguely at first. All the disasters that had fallen upon
her had not taught her to accept such a thing as this: surely this would
be spared her, at least. There is a kindly blind spot in the brain that
often will not let the ugly truth go home.

For a strange, still moment Ray's face seemed devoid of all expression.
It was flat and lifeless as dark clay. Then Beatrice felt the insult of
his quickening gaze.

"Put a rope around her wrists, Chan," he said. "We don't want to take
chances on her getting away."

He spoke slowly, rather flatly. There was nothing that her senses could
seize upon--either in his face or voice to justify the swift,
strangling, killing horror that came upon her. He stood simply gazing,
and as she met his gaze her lips parted and drew back in a grimace of
terror; thus they stood until the blood began to leap fast in Chan's
veins. She needed no further disillusionment. Chan spoke behind her, a
startled oath cut off short, and she felt him moving swiftly toward her.
It was her last instant of respite; and her muscle set and drew for a
final, desperate attempt at self-defense.

She wore Ben's knife at her belt, and her hand sped toward it. But the
motion, fast as it was, came too late. Chan saw it; and leaping swiftly,
his arms went about her and pinned her own arms to her sides.

She tried in vain to fight her way out of his grasp. She writhed,
screaming; and in the frenzy of her fear she all but succeeded in
hurling him off. She managed to draw the knife clear of the sheath, yet
she couldn't raise her arm to strike. Ray was aiding his confederate
now; and in an instant more she was helpless.

Their drawn faces bent close to hers. She felt their hot hands as they
drew her wrists in front of her and fastened them with a rope. "Not too
tight, Chan," Ray advised. "We don't want her to get uncomfortable
before we're done with her. Don't tie her ankles; she can't run through
the brush with her arms tied.--Now give her a moment to breathe."

They stood on each side of her, regarding her with secret, growing
excitement. Already they had descended too far to know pity for this
girl. The wide-open eyes, so dark with terror and in contrast with the
stark paleness of her face, the lips that trembled so piteously, the
slender, girlish figure so helpless to their depraved desires moved them
not at all.

The scene was one of never-to-be-forgotten vividness. The tenderness and
mercy, most of all the restraint that has become manifest in men in
these centuries since they have left their forest lairs to live in
permanent abodes, had no place here. About them ringed the primeval
forest, ensilvered by the moon; the fire crackled with a dread ferocity;
and at the edge of the thickets the motionless form of Jeffery Neilson
lay with face buried in the soft, summer grass. All was silent and
motionless, except the fierce crackling of the fire; except a curious,
intermittent, upward twitching of the corner of Ray's lips.

"So you and Ben are bunkies now, are you?" he asked slowly, without
emphasis.

But the girl made no reply, only gazing at him with starting eyes.

"A traitor to us, and Ben's squaw!" He turned fiercely to Chan. "I guess
that gives us right to do what we want to with her. And now she can yell
if she wants to for her lover to come and save her."

She did not even try to buy their mercy by informing them where they
might find Ben. Only too well she knew that their dreadful intentions
could not be turned aside: she would only sacrifice Ben without aiding
herself. Ray moved toward her, his eyes deeply sunken, the pupils
abnormally enlarged.

"You haven't lost all your looks," he told her breathlessly. "That mouth
is still pretty enough to kiss. And I guess you won't slap--this time--"

He drew her toward him, his dark face lowering toward hers. She
struggled, trying to wrench away from him. Helpless and alone, the
moment of final horror was at hand. In this last instant her whole being
leaped again to Ben,--the man whose strength had been her fort
throughout all their first weeks in the wilds, but whom she had left
helpless and sick in the distant cavern. Yet even now he would rise and
come to her if he knew of her peril. Her voice rose shrilly to a scream.
"Ben--help me!"

And Ray's hands fell from her shoulders as he heard the incredible
answer from the shore of the lake. The brush rustled and cracked: there
was a strange sound of a heavy footfall,--slow, unsteady, but
approaching them as certain as the speeding stars approach their
mysterious destinations in the far reaches of the sky. Ray
straightened, staring; Chan stood as if frozen, his hands half-raised,
his eyes wide open.

"I'm coming, Beatrice," some one said in the coverts. Her cries, uttered
when her father fell, had not gone unheard. In the last stages of
exhaustion, deathly pale yet with a face of iron, Ben came reeling
toward them out of the moonlight.




XLII

Ben walked quietly into the circle of firelight and stood at Beatrice's
side. But while Ray and Chan gazed at him as if he were a spectre from
the grave, Beatrice's only impulse was one of immeasurable and
unspeakable thankfulness. No fate on earth was so dreadful but that it
would be somewhat alleviated by the fact of his presence: just the sight
of him, standing beside her, put her in some vague way out of Ray's
power to harm. Exhausted, reeling, he was still the prop of her life and
hope.

"Here I am," he said quietly. "The letter's in my pocket. Do what you
want with me--but let Beatrice go."

His words brought Ray to himself in some degree at least. The ridiculous
fear of the moment before speedily passed away. Why, the man was
exhausted--helpless in their hands--and the letter was in his pocket. It
meant _triumph_--nothing else. All Ray's aims had been attained. With
Ben's death the claim, a fourth of which had been his motive when he had
slain Ezram, would pass entirely to him,--except for such share as he
would have to give Chan. His star of fortune was in the sky. It was his
moment of glory,--long-awaited but enrapturing him at last.

Neilson lay seriously wounded, perhaps dead by now. Whatever his
injuries, he would not go back with them to share in the gold of the
claim. The girl, also, was his prey,--to do with what he liked.

"I see you've come," he answered. "You might as well; we'd have found
you to-morrow." His voice was no longer flat, but rather exultant,
boasting. "You thought you could get away--but we've shown you."

Ben nodded. "You are--" he strained for the name he had heard Beatrice
speak so often--"Ray Brent?" His eyes fell to the form of Neilson,
wounded beyond the fire. "I see you've been at your old job--killing. It
was you who killed Ezra Melville."

Ray smiled, ever so faintly: this was what he loved. "You're talking to
the right man. Anything you'd like to do about it?"

Ben's face hardened. "There is nothing I can do, now. You came too late.
But I would have had something to do if I had my rifle. I'm glad it was
you, not Beatrice's father. I ask you this--will you accept my
proposition. To take Ezram's letter, destroy it and me too--and let the
girl go in safety?"

Beatrice stretched her bound arms and touched his hairy wrist. "No,
Ben," she told him quietly. "There's no use of trying to make such a
bargain as that. Men that murder--and assault women,--won't keep their
word."

"They were about to attack you, were they?" His voice dropped a tone;
otherwise it seemed the same.

"Yes--just as you came."

He turned once more to Ray, eyeing him with such a look of contempt and
scorn that it smarted like a whiplash in spite of the protecting mantel
of his new-found triumph. "Oh, you depraved dogs!" he told them quietly
and distinctly. "You yellow, mongrel cowards!"

Ray straightened, stung by the words. "And I'll make you wish you was
dead before you ever said that," he threatened. "I'll tell you what you
wanted to know a minute ago--and I tell you no. I won't make any deal
with you. We'll do what we like to you, and we'll do what we like with
your dirty squaw, too--the woman you've been living with all these
months. We've got you where we want you. You're in no fix to make terms.
Chan--put a rope around his legs and a gag in his rotten mouth!"

They moved toward him simultaneously, and Ben summoned the last jot of
his almost-spent strength to hurl them off. They did not need deadly
weapons for this wasted form. Yet for the duration of one second Ben
fought with an incredible ferocity and valor.

He hurled Chan from his path, and his sound right arm leaped to Ray's
throat in a death grip. For that one instant his old-time strength
returned to him,--as to Samson as his arms went about the pillars of the
temple. They found him no weakling, in that first instant, but a deadly,
fighting beast, the "Wolf" Darby of the provinces,--his finger nails
sinking ever deeper into the flesh of Ray's throat, his body braced
against Chan's attack. And for all that Beatrice's arms were tied, she
leaped like a she-wolf to her lover's aid.

But such an unequal battle could last only an instant. Ray focused his
attack upon Ben's injured left arm, Chan struck once at the girl,
hurling her to the ground with a base blow, then lashed brutal blows
into Ben's face. The burst of strength ebbed as quickly as it had come:
his legs wilted under him, and he sank slowly to the ground.

Maddened with battle, for a moment more Chan lashed cowardly blows into
his face; and he left the brutal labor only to help Ray affix ropes
about his ankles. Then the two conquerors stood erect, breathing loudly.

Seemingly the utter limit of their brutality was reached,--but for the
moment only. A strange and foreboding silence fell over the camp: only
the sound of troubled breathing was heard above the lessening crackle of
the fire. They did not turn at once again to the work of crushing Ben's
life out with their fists and boots, nor did they restrain Beatrice as
she crawled over the blood-stained grass to reach her lover's side.

"Let her go," Ray said to Charley. "She can't help him any."

It was true. They had put up their last defense. The girl crept nearer,
lying almost prone beside him, and her soft hands stole over his bruised
flesh. But no tears came now. She was past the kindly mercy of tears.
She could only gaze at him, and sometimes dry half-sobs clutched at her
throat. The man half-opened his eyes, smiling.

Life still remained in his rugged body. Even the cruel test of the last
hour had not taken that from him. The sturdy heart still beat, and the
breath still whispered through his lips: there was life in plenty to
afford such sport as Ray and Chan might have for him.

The last, least quality of redemption--such magic and beauty as might
have been wrought by the firelight dancing over the moonlit glade--was
quite gone now. The powers of wickedness were in the ascendency, and
this was only the abode of horror. Yet it was all tragically true, not a
nightmare from which she would soon waken. This was the remote heart of
Back There--a primeval land where the demons of lust and death walked
unrestrained--and the shadow of the moonlit trees fell dark upon her.

The back logs were burning dully now, and the coals were red, and Chan
and Ray took seats on a huge, dead spruce to talk over their further
plans. It was all easy enough. They could linger here, living mostly on
meat, until the rising waters of the Yuga could carry them down to the
Indian villages. Their methods and procedure in regard to Ben were the
only remaining questions.

For a few minutes they took little notice of the prone figures at the
far edge of the fading firelight. In their hands they were as helpless
as Jeffery Neilson, left already by the receding radiance to the soft
mercy of the shadows. Attention could be given them soon enough. Their
own triumph was beginning to give way to deep fatigue.

Ben and Beatrice had talked softly at first, accepting their fate at
last and trying to forget all things but the fact of each other's
presence. They had kept the faith to-night, they had both been true; and
perhaps they had conquered, in some degree, the horror of death. His
right hand held hers close to his lips, and only she could understand
the message in its soft pressure, and the gentle, kindly shadows in his
quiet eyes. But presently her gaze fastened on some object in the grass
beside him.

He did not understand at first. He knew enough not to attract his
enemies' attention by trying to turn. The girl relaxed again, but her
hand throbbed in his, and her eyes shone somberly as if the luster of
some strange, dark hope.

"What is it?" he asked whispering.

"I see a way out--for us both," she told him. She knew he would not
misunderstand and dream that she saw an actual avenue to life and
safety. "Don't give any sign."

"Then hurry," he urged. "They may be back any instant. What is it?"

"A way to cheat 'em--to keep them from torturing you--and to save
me--from all the things they'll do to me--when you're dead. Oh,
Ben--you won't fail me--you'll do it for me."

He smiled, gently and strongly. "Do you think I'd fail you now?"

"Then reach your good arm on the other side--soft as you can. There's a
knife lying there--your own knife--they knocked out of my hand. They'll
jump at the first gleam. You know what to do--first me, in the
throat--then yourself."

His face showed no horror at her words. They were down to the most
terrible realities; and as she had said, this was the way out! The great
kindness still dwelt in his eyes--and she knew he would do as she asked.

One gleam of steal, one swift touch at the throat--and they would never
know the unspeakable fate that their depraved captors planned for them.
_It was no less than victory in the last instant of despair!_ It was
freedom: although they did not know into what Mystery and what Fear the
act would dispatch them, it was freedom from Ray and Chan, none the
less. And Ben welcomed the plan as might a prisoner, waiting in the
death-cell, welcome a reprieve.

He turned, groping with his hand. There was no use of waiting longer.
The knife lay just beyond his reach; and softly he moved his body
through the grass.

But this gate to mercy was closed before they reached it. A sudden
flaring of the fire revealed them--the gleam of the blade and Ben's
stretching hand--and Ray left his log in a swift, catlike leap.

If Ben had possessed full use of both hands there still might have been
time to send home the two crucial blows, or at least to dispatch
Beatrice out of Ray's power to harm. But his injured arm impeded him,
and his hand fumbled as he tried to seize the hilt. With a sharp oath
Ray crushed the blade into the ground with his heel; then kicked
viciously at the prone body of his enemy.

And at that first base blow his rage and blood-lust that had been
gathering was swiftly freed. It was all that was needed to set him at
the work of torture. For an instant he stood almost motionless except
for the spasmodic twitching--now almost continuous--at his lips and for
the slow turning of his head as he looked about for a weapon with which
he could more quickly satiate the murder-madness in his veins. The knife
appealed to him not at all; but his eye fell on a long, heavy club of
spruce that had been cut for fuel. He bent and his strong hands seized
it.

As he swung it high the girl leaped between--with a last, frantic
effort, wholly instinctive--to shield Ben's body with her own. But it
was only an instant's reprieve. Chan had followed Ben, and sharing Ray's
fiendish mood, jerked her aside. Ben raised himself up as far as he
could at a final impulse to thrust the girl out of harm's way.

Yet it was to be that Ray's murderous blow was never to go home. A
mighty and terrible ally had come to Ben's aid. He came pouncing from
the darkness, a gaunt and dreadful avenger whose code of death was as
remorseless as Ray's own.

It was Fenris the wolf, and he had found his master at last. Missing him
at the accustomed place in the cave, he had trailed him to the lake
margin: a smell on the wind had led him the rest of the way. He was not
one to announce his coming by an audible footfall in the thicket. Like a
ghost he had glided almost to the edge of the firelight, lingering
there--with a caution learned in these last wild weeks of running with
his brethren--until he had made up his brute mind in regard to the
strangers in the camp. But he had waited only until he saw Ray kick the
helpless form before him,--that of the god that Fenris, for all the wild
had claimed him, still worshipped in his inmost heart. With fiendish,
maniacal fury he had sprung to avenge the blow.

And his three followers, trained by the pack laws to follow where he
led, and keyed to the highest pitch by their leader's fury, leaped like
gray demons of the Pit in his wake.



XLII

As a young tree breaks and goes down in the gale Ray Brent went down
before the combined attack of the wolves. What desperate struggle he
made only seemed to increase their fury and shatter him the faster.
Utterly futile were all his blows: his frantic, piercing screams of fear
and agony raised to heaven, but were answered with no greater mercy than
that he would have shown to Ben a moment before.

Seemingly in an instant he was on his back and the ravening pack were
about him in a ring. In that lurid firelight their fangs gleamed like
ivory as they flashed, here and there, over his body and throat, and
their fierce eyes blazed with pale-blue fire,--the mark and sign of the
blood madness of the beasts of prey.

Seemingly in a single instant the life had been torn from him, leaving
only a strange, huddled, ghastly thing beside the dying fire. But the
pack leaped from him at once. Fenris had caught sight of Chan's figure
as he ran for the nearest tree and seemingly with one leap he was upon
him. He sprang at him from the side; and his fangs gleamed once.

He had struck true, his fangs went home, and the life went out of Chan
Heminway in a single, neighing scream. He pitched forward, shuddered
once in the soft grass, and lay still. The pack surged around his body,
struck at it once or twice, then stood growling as if waiting for their
leader's command.

Before ever Ray fell, Ben had taken what measures of self-defense he
could in case the pack, forgetting its master's master, might turn on
himself and the girl. He had reached the knife hilt and severed the
ropes about the girl's wrists. "Stay behind me," he cautioned. "Don't
move a muscle."

He knew that any attempt to reach and climb a tree would attract the
attention of the pack and send them ravening about her. Again he knew
that her life as well as his own depended on his control of the pack
leader. He saw Chan go down, seemingly in a single instant, and he
braced himself against attack. "Down, Fenris!" he shouted. "Down--get
down!"

The great wolf started at the voice, then stood beside the fallen,
gazing at Ben with fierce, luminous eyes. "Down, down, boy," Ben
cautioned, in a softer voice. "There, old fellow--down--down."

Then Fenris whined in answer, and Ben knew that he was no longer to be
feared. The three lesser wolves seemed startled, standing in a nervous
group, yet growling savagely and eyeing him across the dying fire. For a
moment Fenris's fury had passed to them, but now that his rage was dead,
all they had left was an inborn fear of such a breed as this,--these
tall forms that died so easily in their fangs. Fenris trotted slowly
toward Ben, but with the true instincts of the wild his followers knew
that this was no affair of fangs and death. He came in love, in a
remembered comradeship, just as often he had led them to the mouth of
the cavern, and they did not understand. They slowly backed away into
the shadows, fading like ghosts.

Ben's arms, in unspeakable gratitude, went about the shoulders of the
wolf. Beatrice, sobbing uncontrollably yet swept with that infinite
thankfulness of the redeemed, crept to his side. Fenris whined and
shivered in the arms of his god.

Quietude came at last to that camp beside the lake, in the far, hidden
heart of Back There. Once more the blood moved with sweet, normal
tranquillity in the veins, the thrill and stir died in the air, and the
moonlight was beautiful on the spruce.

The wolves had gone. Fenris's three brethren had slipped away, perhaps
wholly mystified and deeply awed by their madness of a moment before;
and from the ridge top they had called for their leader to join them. He
had done his work, he had avenged the base blow that had seemed to
strike at his own wild heart, he had received the caress he had
craved,--and there was no law for him to stay. The female called
enticingly; the wild game was running for his pleasure on the trails.

Ben had watched the struggle in his fierce breast, and Beatrice's eyes
were soft and wonderfully lustrous in the subdued light as she gave the
wolf a parting caress. But he could not stay with them. The primal laws
of his being bade otherwise. His was the way of the open trails, the
nights of madness and the rapture of hunting--and these were folk of the
caves! They were not his people, although his love for them burned like
fire in his heart.

He could not deny the call of his followers on the ridge. It was like a
chain, drawing him remorselessly to them. Whining, he had sped away into
the darkness.

The fire had been built up, Beatrice had rallied her spent strength by
full feeding of the rich, dried meat, and had done what she could for
Neilson's injury. Ben, exhausted, had lain down in some of the blankets
of his enemy's outfit. Neilson was not, however, mortally hurt. The
bullet had coursed through the region of his shoulder, missing his heart
and lungs, and although he was all but unconscious, they had every
reason to believe that a few weeks of rest would see him well again.

Beatrice bathed the wound, bandaged it the best she could, then covered
him up warmly and let him go to sleep. And the time came at last, long
past the midnight hour, that she crept once more to Ben's side.

There was little indeed for them to say. The stress of the night had
taken from them almost all desire to talk. But Ben took her hand in his
feebly, and held it against his lips.

"We're safe now," Beatrice told him, her eye's still bright with tears.
"We've seen it through, and we're safe."

Ben nodded happily. It was true: there was nothing further for them to
fear. With the aid of the rifles of the three fallen, they could procure
meat in plenty for their remaining time at Back There; besides, the
store of jerked caribou and moose was enough to hold them over. When the
rains came again, the three of them--Neilson and Ben and Beatrice--could
glide on down to the Indian encampments in the canoe. Thence they could
reach the white settlements beyond the mountains.

Her glance into the future went still farther, because she knew certain
news that as yet Ben had not heard. She had heard from Ray's lips that
night that Ben's claim had been legally filed; he had only to return and
take possession. It straightened out the future, promised success in the
battle of life, gave him an interest to hold him in these northern
forests. But she would not tell him to-night. It could wait for a more
quiet hour.

Presently she saw that he was trying to speak to her, whispering; trying
to draw her ear down to his lips. She smiled, with an infinite
tenderness. Dimly though he spoke, she heard him every word.

"I love you," he told her simply. He watched her face, as intently as
the three Wise Men watched the East, for a sign. And he saw it, clear
and ineffably wonderful, in the stars that came into her eyes.

"I love you," she answered, with equal simplicity. They lay a while in
silence, blissful in this wonder each had for the other, wholly content
just that their hands and lips should touch.

The same miracle was upon them both; and the girl's thought, ranging
far, seized upon a deep and moving discovery. "All this belongs to us,"
she told him, indicating with one movement of her arm the boundless
solitudes about them. "This is our own country, isn't it, Ben? We can't
ever--go away."

It was true: they could never leave the forest for long. They were its
children, bred in the bone. Their strong thews would waste in a gentler
land. It was their heritage. They must not go where they could not
behold the dark line of the forest against the sky.

The fire burned down. The moon wheeled through the sky. The tall spruce
saw the dawn afar and beckoned.

THE END.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Sky Line of Spruce, by Edison Marshall

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SKY LINE OF SPRUCE ***

***** This file should be named 11402.txt or 11402.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/1/4/0/11402/

Produced by Audrey Longhurst and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


