The Project Gutenberg EBook of Oriental Literature, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Oriental Literature
       The Literature of Arabia

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: November 18, 2003 [EBook #10121]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ORIENTAL LITERATURE ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Beth Trapaga and PG Distributed
Proofreaders





ORIENTAL LITERATURE

THE LITERATURE OF ARABIA


With Critical and Biographical Sketches by

Epiphanius Wilson, A.M.


1900




CONTENTS


THE ROMANCE OF ANTAR

Introduction
The Early Fortunes of Antar
Khaled and Djaida
The Absians and Fazareans


ARABIAN POETRY

Introduction
SELECTIONS.--
  An Elegy
  The Tomb of Mano
  Tomb of Sayid
  On the Death of His Mistress
  On Avarice
  The Battle of Sabla
  Verses to My Enemies
  On His Friends
  On Temper
  The Song of Maisuna
  To My Father
  On Fatalism
  To the Caliph Harun-al-Rashid
  Lines to Harun and Yahia
  The Ruin of Barmecides
  To Taher Ben Hosien
  The Adieu
  To My Mistress
  To a Female Cup-bearer
  Mashdud on the Monks of Khabbet
  Rakeek to His Female Companions
  Dialogue by Rais
  To a Lady Weeping
  On a Valetudinarian
  On a Miser
  To Cassim Obio Allah
  A Friend's Birthday
  To a Cat
  An Epigram upon Ebn Naphta-Wah
  Fire
  To a Lady Blushing
  On the Vicissitudes of Life
  To a Dove
  On a Thunder Storm
  To My Favorite Mistress
  Crucifixion of Ebn Bakiah
  Caprices of Fortune
  On Life
  Extempore Verses
  On the Death of a Son
  To Leila
  On Moderation in our Pleasures
  The Vale of Bozaa
  To Adversity
  On the Incompatibility of Pride and True Glory
  The Death of Nedham Almolk
  Lines to a Lover
  Verses to My Daughters
  Serenade to My Sleeping Mistress
  The Inconsistent
  The Capture of Jerusalem
  To a Lady
  An Epigram
  On a Little Man with a Very Large Beard
  Lamiat Alajem
  To Youth
  On Love
  A Remonstrance with a Drunkard
  Verses
  On Procrastination
  The Early Death of Abou Alhassan Aly
  The Interview


ARABIAN NIGHTS

THE SEVEN VOYAGES OF SINDBAD
  First Voyage
  Second Voyage
  Third Voyage
  Fourth Voyage
  Fifth Voyage
  Sixth Voyage
  Seventh and Last Voyage
ALADDIN'S WONDERFUL LAMP




THE ROMANCE OF ANTAR

[_Translation by Etienne Delecluse and Epiphanius Wilson_]


INTRODUCTION

The romantic figure of Antar, or Antarah, takes the same place in
Arabian literature as that of Achilles among the Greeks. The Cid in
Spain, Orlando in Italy, and Arthur in England, are similar examples of
national ideals put forth by poets and romance writers as embodiments of
a certain half-mythic age of chivalry, when personal valor, prudence,
generosity, and high feeling gave the warrior an admitted preeminence
among his fellows. The literature of Arabia is indeed rich in novels and
tales. The "Thousand and One Nights" is of world-wide reputation, but
the "Romance of Antar" is much less artificial, more expressive of high
moral principles, and certainly superior in literary style to the
fantastic recitals of the coffee house and bazaar, in which Sindbad and
Morgiana figure. A true picture of Bedouin society, in the centuries
before Mohammed had conquered the Arabian peninsula, is given us in the
charming episodes of Antar. We see the encampments of the tribe, the
camels yielding milk and flesh for food, the women friends and
councillors of their husbands, the boys inured to arms from early days,
the careful breeding of horses, the songs of poet and minstrel stirring
all hearts, the mail-clad lines of warriors with lance and sword, the
supreme power of the King--often dealing out justice with stern, sudden,
and inflexible ferocity. Among these surroundings Antar appears, a
dazzling and irresistible warrior and a poet of wonderful power. The
Arab classics, in years long before Mohammed had taken the Kaaba and
made it the talisman of his creed, were hung in the little shrine where
the black volcanic stone was kept. They were known as Maallakat, or
Suspended Books, which had the same meaning among Arabian literati as
the term classic bore among the Italian scholars of the Renaissance.
Numbered with these books of the Kaaba were the poems of Antar, who was
thus the Taliessin of Arabian chivalry.

It is indeed necessary to recollect that in reading the episodes of
Antar we have been taken back to the heroic age in the Arabian
peninsula. War is considered the noblest occupation of a man, and Khaled
despises the love of a noble maiden "from pride in his passion for war."
Antar has his famous horse as the Cid had his Babicca, and his
irresistible sword as Arthur his Excalibur. The wealth of chiefs and
kings consists in horses and camels; there is no mention of money or
jewelry. When a wager is made the stakes are a hundred camels. The
commercial spirit of the Arabian Nights is wanting in this spirited
romance of chivalry. The Arabs had sunk to a race of mere traders when
Aladdin became possessed of his lamp, and the trickery, greed, and
avarice of peddlers and merchants are exhibited in incident after
incident of the "Thousand and One Nights." War is despised or feared,
courage less to be relied upon than astute knavery, and one of the facts
that strikes us is the general frivolity, dishonesty, and cruelty which
prevail through the tales of Bagdad. The opposite is the case with
Antar. Natural passion has full play, but nobility of character is taken
seriously, and generosity and sensibility of heart are portrayed with
truthfulness and naivete. Of course the whole romance is a collection of
many romantic stories: it has no epic unity. It will remind the reader
of the "Morte d'Arthur" of Sir Thomas Malory, rather than of the
"Iliad." We have chosen the most striking of these episodes as best
calculated to serve as genuine specimens of Arabian literature. They
will transport the modern reader into a new world--which is yet the old,
long vanished world of pastoral simplicity and warlike enthusiasm, in
primitive Arabia. But the novelty lies in the plot of the tales. Djaida
and Khaled, Antar and Ibla, and the race between Shidoub and the great
racers Dahir and Ghabra, bring before our eyes with singular freshness
the character of a civilization, a domestic life, a political system,
which were not wanting in refinement, purity, and justice. The
conception of such a dramatic personage as Antar would be original in
the highest degree, if it were not based upon historic fact. Antar is a
more real personage than Arthur, and quite as real and historic as the
Cid. Yet his adventures remind us very much of those which run through
the story of the Round Table.

The Arabs, in the days of romance, were a collection of tribes and
families whose tents and villages were spread along the Red Sea, between
Egypt and the Indian Ocean. There were some tribes more powerful than
others, and the result of their tyranny was often bitter war. There was
no central monarchy, no priesthood, and no written law. The only stable
and independent unit was the family. Domestic life with its purest
virtues constituted the strong point amongst the Arabian tribes, where
gentleness, free obedience, and forbearance were conspicuous. Each tribe
bore the name of its first ancestor, and from him and his successors
came down a traditionary, unwritten law, the violation of which was
considered the most heinous of offences. There was no settled religion
before the conquest of Mohammed; each tribe and each family worshipped
whom they would--celestial spirits, sun and moon, or certain idols. In
the account given in Antar of the Council of War, the ancients, or old
men of the tribe, came forth with idols or amulets round their necks,
and the whole account of the council, in which the bard as well as the
orator addressed the people, is strictly accurate in historic details.
The custom of infanticide in the case of female children was perfectly
authorized among the Arabs, and illustrates the motive of the pretty
episode of Khaled and Djaida. War was individual and personal among the
Arabs, and murder was atoned for by murder, or by the price of a certain
number of camels. Raising of horses, peaceful contests in arms, or
poetic competitions where each bard recited in public his compositions,
formed their amusements. They were very sensible to the charms of music,
poetry and oratory, and as a general rule the Arab chieftain was brave,
generous, and munificent.

All these historic facts are fully reflected in the highly emotional
tale of "Antar," which is the greatest of all the national romances of
Arabia. It would scarcely be possible to fix upon any individual writer
as its author, for it has been edited over and over again by Arabian
scribes, each adding his own glosses and enriching it with incidents.
Its original date may have been the sixth century of our era, about five
hundred years before the production of the "Thousand and One Nights."

E.W.




THE EARLY FORTUNES OF ANTAR

At the time the "Romance of Antar" opens, the most powerful and the best
governed of the Bedouin tribes were those of the Absians and the
Adnamians. King Zoheir, chief of the Absians, was firmly established
upon his throne, so that the kings of other nations, who were subject to
him, paid him tribute. The whole of Arabia in short became subject to
the Absians, so that all the chiefs of other tribes and all inhabitants
of the desert dreaded their power and depredations.

Under these circumstances, and as a consequence of a flagrant act of
tyranny on the part of Zoheir, several chieftains, among whom was
Shedad, a son of Zoheir, seceded from the Absian tribe, and set out to
seek adventures, to attack other tribes, and to carry off their cattle
and treasure. These chieftains arrived at the dwelling-place of a
certain tribe, named Djezila, whom they fought with and pillaged.
Amongst their booty was a black woman of extraordinary beauty, the
mother of two children. Her name was Zebiba; her elder son was Djaris;
her younger Shidoub. Shedad became passionately enamoured of this woman,
and yielded all the rest of his share in the booty in order to obtain
possession of her and her two children. He dwelt in the fields with this
negress, whose sons took care of the cattle. In course of time Zebiba
bore a son to Shedad. This child was born tawny as an elephant; his eyes
were bleared, his head thick with hair, his features hard and fixed. The
corners of his mouth drooped, his eyes started from his head, his bones
were hard, his feet long; he had ears of prodigious size, and his glance
flashed like fire. In other respects he resembled Shedad, who was
transported with delight at the sight of his son, whom he named Antar.

Meanwhile the child waxed in strength, and his name soon became known.
Then the companions of Shedad wished to dispute the possession of the
boy with him, and King Zoheir was informed of the matter. He demanded
that the boy should be brought into his presence, and Shedad complied.
As soon as the king caught sight of this extraordinary child, he uttered
a cry of astonishment, and flung him a piece of goat's flesh. At the
same moment a dog, who happened to be in the tent, seized the meat and
ran off with it. But Antar, filled with rage, pursued the animal, and,
violently taking hold of him, drew his jaws apart, splitting the throat
down to the shoulders, and thus recovered the meat. King Zoheir, in
amazement, deferred the matter to the Cadi, who confirmed Shedad's
possession of Zebiba, and her three children, Djaris, Shidoub, and
Antar.

Shedad therefore provided a home for Zebiba, in order that his sons
might be educated in their business of tending the herds. It was at this
time that Antar began to develop his strength of body, his courage, and
intelligence. When he was ten years of age he slew a wolf which
threatened to attack the herds committed to his charge. Although brutal,
headstrong, and passionate, he early exhibited a love of justice, and a
disposition to protect the weak, especially women. He put to death a
slave who beat an old woman, his slave and companion; and this action,
although at first misunderstood, eventually gained the admiration of
King Zoheir, who treated Antar with distinction, because of his nobility
of character. In consequence of this action, which had been so much
applauded by King Zoheir, the young Arab women and their mothers hung
round Antar to learn the details of this courageous deed, and to
congratulate him on his magnanimity.

Among the young women was Ibla, daughter of Malek, the son of Zoheir.
Ibla, fair as the full moon, was somewhat younger than Antar. She was
accustomed to banter him in a familiar way, feeling that he was her
slave. "And you," she said to him, "you, born so low, how dared you kill
the slave of a prince? What provocation can you have against him?"
"Mistress," replied Antar, "I struck that slave because he deserved it,
for he had insulted a poor woman. He knocked her down, and made her the
laughing stock of all the servants." "Of course you were right,"
answered Ibla, with a smile, "and we were all delighted that you escaped
from the adventure safe and sound. Because of the service you have
rendered us by your conduct, our mothers look upon you as a son, and we
as a brother."

From that moment Antar made the service of women his special duty above
all others. At that time the Arabian ladies had the habit of drinking
camel's milk morning and evening, and it was especially the duty of
those who waited upon them to milk the camels, and to cool it in the
wind before offering it to them. Antar had been for some time released
from this duty, when one morning he entered the dwelling of his uncle
Malek, and found there his aunt, engaged in combing the hair of her
daughter Ibla, whose ringlets, black as the night, floated over her
shoulders. Antar was struck with surprise, and Ibla, as soon as she knew
that he had seen her, fled and left him with his eyes fixed abstractedly
on her disappearing form.

It was from this incident that the love of Antar for the daughter of his
uncle took its origin. He saw how Ibla shone in society, and his passion
grew to such an extent that he ventured to sound her praises, and to
express the feeling she excited in him by writing verses which, while
they gained the admiration of the multitude, incurred also the envy of
the chieftains. Moreover his father could not pardon the presumption of
Antar, who, born a slave, had dared to cast eyes on his free-born
cousin.

When therefore he slew a slave who had slandered him, his father ordered
him to be flogged, and sent away to watch over the cattle in the
pastures. He had now before him a fresh opportunity for exhibiting his
prodigious strength and invincible courage. A lion attempted to attack
the herds committed to his care. He killed it at the very moment that
his father Shedad, enraged against him, had come, accompanied by his
brother, to do him ill. But a mingled feeling of admiration and fear
held their hands, and in the evening, when Antar returned from the
pastures, his father and his uncle made him seat himself at dinner with
them, while the rest of the attendants stood behind them.

Meanwhile King Zoheir was called upon a warlike expedition against the
tribe of Temin. All his warriors followed him; the women alone remained
behind. Shedad entrusted them to the protection of Antar, who pledged
his life for their safety. During the absence of the warriors, Semiah,
the lawful wife of Shedad, conceived the idea of giving an entertainment
on the bank of the lake Zatoulizard. Ibla attended it with her mother,
and Antar witnessed all the amusements in which his beloved took part.
His passion for her became intensified. He was once tempted to violate
the modesty of love by the violence of desire, but, at that moment, he
saw a great cloud of dust rise in the distance; the shouts of war were
heard; and suddenly the warriors of the tribe of Cathan appeared on the
scene, and, descending on the pleasure-seekers, carried off the women,
including Ibla. Antar, being unarmed, ran after one of the horsemen,
seized him, strangled and threw him to the ground. Then he put on the
armor of the vanquished foe, attacked and put to flight the tribe of
Cathan, rescued the women, and obtained a booty of twenty-five horses.
From that moment Semiah, the wife of Shedad, who hitherto had a
pronounced aversion to Antar, conceived a sincere affection for him.

King Zoheir, meantime, had returned victorious from his expedition.
Shedad returned at the same moment, and went to visit his herds. Seeing
Antar surrounded by horses which he did not know, and mounted upon a
fine black courser, he asked, "Where did these animals, and particularly
this superb horse, come from?" Then Antar, not willing to betray the
imprudence of Semiah, declared that, as the Cathanians had left their
horses behind them, he had seized them. Shedad was indignant, and
treated Antar as a robber, reproached him for his wickedness, and after
repeatedly telling him how wrong it was to rouse discord among the
Arabs, struck him with his whip, with such violence as to draw blood.
Then Semiah, distressed by the sight of this unjust treatment, took off
her veil, letting her hair fall over her shoulders, took Antar into her
arms and told all that had happened and how she and all the other women
of her tribe were indebted to this hero for their honor and liberty.
Shedad could not restrain his tenderness on learning the magnanimity of
his son's silence. Soon afterwards King Zoheir, to whom this incident
had been related, summoned Antar into his presence, and declared that a
man who could exhibit such courage and generosity was bound to become
preeminent among his companions. All the chieftains who surrounded the
king congratulated Antar, and one of his friends, in order to give the
court a complete idea of this young man's remarkable gifts, asked him to
recite some of his verses.

In compliance with this request he recited a poem in praise of warriors
and war, and the king and all the court manifested their delight. Zoheir
bade Antar approach, gave him a robe of honor, and thanked him. That
evening Antar departed with his father Shedad, his heart full of joy
over the honors which had been lavished on him, and his love for Ibla
still more heightened.

In spite of the indisputable virtues of Antar, in spite of the great
services he had rendered the Absians, the chieftains of this tribe still
regarded him as merely a common slave and tender of cattle. The
beginning of his rise to favor excited a feeling of keen hatred, and
caused many plots to be laid against him. A series of intrigues was
entered upon, the aim of which was the death of the hero. But each
attack upon his reputation and his life redounded to his benefit, and
furnished him with an opportunity of putting his enemies to silence and
defeat. For by his generosity and magnanimity, even his envious foes
felt themselves under obligation to him. On each of his triumphs the
mutual love between himself and Ibla went on increasing.

After the performance of many feats as a horseman, Antar came into
possession of a famous horse named Abjer, and a sword of marvellous
temper, Djamy--and every time he appeared on the field of combat, as
well as when he returned victorious from the fight, he made a poetic
address, finishing with the words, "I am the lover of Ibla." At the
conclusion of a war in which he had performed prodigies of valor, King
Zoheir gave him the surname of Alboufauris, which means, "The Father of
Horsemen."

The greater grew his name, the more highly he was honored by King
Zoheir, so much the more did the hatred of the chieftains and the love
of Ibla towards him increase. But it came to pass that Ibla was asked in
marriage by Amarah, a stupid youth, puffed up by his wealth and lineage.
Antar, on hearing the news, was transported with rage, and attacked his
young rival with such violence that all the Arabian chiefs begged of
Zoheir to punish the aggressor. The king left to Shedad, Antar's father,
the pronouncing of sentence. Shedad had, like the others, viewed the
rise of Antar, the black slave, to favor, with jealous eye, and sent him
back to the pastures to keep the herds.

It was at this point that the greatness of Antar's character appeared in
its full dimensions. The hero submitted with resignation to the orders
of his father, "to whom," he said, "he owed obedience as to his master,
since he was his slave"; and he swore to him, in the presence of
witnesses, not to mount horse, nor engage in battle, without his
permission. Tears flowed from his eyes, and before departing for the
pastures he went to see his mother Zebiba, and to talk with her
concerning Ibla. "Ibla?" said his mother--"but a moment ago she was
here beside me, and said to me, 'Comfort the heart of Antar, and tell
him from me, that even should my father torture me to death in trying to
change my mind, I would not desire nor ask for other husband than
Antar.'"

These words of Ibla filled with rapture the heart of Antar, as he
started for the pastures in company with his brothers, Djaris and
Shidoub.

At this time the tribe of Abs, which Zoheir ruled over, was at war with
that of Tex, on account of the carrying off of Anima, daughter of the
chief of the Tex, a man known as "The Drinker of Blood." Animated by the
desire to take vengeance and recover his daughter, this chief and his
army fell upon the Absians like a thunderbolt. The Absians were
defeated, and their women, among whom was Ibla, taken prisoners. All
pride was then, in this time of need, laid aside, and to their
assistance Antar was summoned. But before acting Antar laid down his
conditions, and stipulated that, in case he succeeded in subduing the
foe and recovering the women, Ibla should be given him in marriage.
Malek, the father of Ibla, and Shedad, the father of Antar, assented,
and bound themselves by an oath to fulfil these conditions and to
reinstate Antar in all the honors and dignities belonging to him.

Antar was victorious. He rescued Ibla, and received grateful expressions
of gratitude from his beloved, while King Zoheir gave him the kiss of
royal honor. Everything seemed to unite in fulfilling the hopes of
Antar. But at the very moment in which he was honored by royal
felicitations, several chieftains, indignant at the elevation of a black
slave, employed every means to prevent his marriage with Ibla, and to
force him to undertake enterprises which would prove fatal to him.
Shedad, his father, and Malek, the father of Ibla, connived at these
plots. They demanded of Antar, who was of that trusting disposition
which belongs to generous and brave men, that he give as a wedding
present to his bride, a thousand camels, of a particular breed, not to
be found excepting on the borders of the Persian kingdom. The hero made
no remark on hearing this treacherous demand, and was so eager to please
Ibla, that he took no count of the difficulties to be undergone. He set
off and soon found himself engaged in conflict with a large army of
Persians, who made him prisoner, and led him off with the view of
bringing him into the presence of their king. There he was taken, bound
and on horseback, when at that instant, the news came that a fierce lion
of extraordinary size was ravaging the country. It was alleged that even
armed men fled before it. Antar, who was on the point of being put to
death, asked the King of Persia to cause his arms at least to be
unbound, and to let him confront the lion. His prayer was granted; he
rushed upon the savage creature, and transfixed it with his lance. Nor
was this the only service he did the King of Persia, who in gratitude
for many others, not only gave Antar the thousand camels he was looking
for, but loaded him with treasures, with which to do homage to Ibla.

On his return Antar was received with a rapturous welcome by the Absian
tribe. But the hostile and the envious continued to plot against him.
They still aimed at preventing his marriage, and compassing his death.
Amarah, who aspired to Ibla's hand, backed by all the chieftains hostile
to Antar, renewed his suit and pretensions. Ibla was carried off from
her house among the Absians, and taken to another tribe. Then Antar set
out in search of her, and at length rescued her: their mutual love was
intensified by this reunion. By a series of wiles and intrigues
skilfully conducted, the chiefs who surrounded Ibla persuaded her to
demand still further dowry from Antar. She spoke of Khaled and Djaida,
whose history has already been related; she said, in presence of Antar,
that that young warrior girl would not consent to marry Khaled, saving
on the condition that her camel's bridle be held by the daughter of
Moawich. This word was sufficient for Antar, and he promised to Ibla
that Djaida should hold the bridle of her camel on her wedding day; and
more than that, the head of Khaled should be slung round the neck of the
warrior girl. Thus the hero, constantly loving and beloved by Ibla,
incessantly deceived by the cunningly devised obstacles raised by his
foes, sustained his reputation for greatness of character and strength
of arm, submitted with resignation to the severest tests, and passed
victoriously through them all. After the death of King Zoheir, whom he
avenged, he undertook to assist Cais, Zoheir's son, in all his
enterprises, and after a long series of adventures which tired the
patience, love, and courage of Antar, this hero, recognized as chief
among Arabian chieftains, obtained the great reward of his long
struggles and mighty toils, by marriage to his well-loved Ibla.




KHALED AND DJAIDA

Moharib and Zahir were brothers, of the same father and mother; the
Arabs call them "brothers germane." Both were, renowned for courage and
daring. But Moharib was chief of the tribe, and Zahir, being subject to
his authority, was no more than his minister, giving him counsel and
advice. Now it happened that a violent dispute arose between them. Zahir
subsequently retired to his tent, in profound sorrow, and not knowing
what course to take. "What is the matter with you?" asked his wife, "Why
are you so troubled? What has happened to you? Has any one displeased or
insulted you--the greatest of Arab chiefs?" "What am I to do?" replied
Zahir; "the man who has injured me is one whom I cannot lay hands on, or
do him wrong; he is my companion in the bosom of my family, my brother
in the world. Ah, if it had been any one but he, I would have shown him
what sort of a man he was at odds with, and have made an example of him
before all the chiefs of our tribes!" "Leave him; let him enjoy his
possessions alone," cried his wife, and, in order to persuade her
husband to take this course, she recited verses from a poet of the time,
which dissuade a man from tolerating an insult even at the hands of his
parents.

Zahir assented to the advice of his wife. He made all preparations for
departure, struck his tents, loaded his camels, and started off on the
road towards the camp of the Saad tribe, with whom he was in alliance.
Yet in spite of all, he felt a keen pang at separating himself from his
brother--and thus he spoke: "On starting on a journey which removes me
from you, I shall be a thousand years on the way, and each year will
carry me a thousand leagues.... Even though the favors you heap upon me
be worth a thousand Egypts, and each of these Egypts had a thousand
Niles, all those favors would be despised. I shall be contented with
little so long as I am far from you. Away from you, I shall recite this
distich, which is worth more than a necklace of fine pearls: 'When a man
is wronged on the soil of his tribe, there is nothing left him but to
leave it; you, who have so wickedly injured me, before long shall feel
the power of the kindly divinity, for he is your judge and mine, he is
unchangeable and eternal."

Zahir continued his journey, until he reached the Saad tribe, when he
dismounted from his horse. He was cordially received and was pressed to
take up his abode with them. His wife was at that time soon to become a
mother, and he said to her: "If a son is given to us, he will be right
welcome; but if it be a daughter, conceal her sex and let people think
we have a male child, so that my brother may have no reason to crow over
us." When her time came Zahir's wife brought into the world a daughter.
They agreed that her name should be actually Djaida, but that publicly
she should be known as Djonder, that people might take her for a boy. In
order to promote this belief, they kept up feasting and entertainment
early and late for many days.

About the same time Moharib, the other brother, had a son born to him,
whom he named Khaled (The Eternal). He chose this name in gratitude to
God, because, since his brother's departure, his affairs had prospered
well.

The two children eventually reached full age, and their renown was
widespread among the Arabs. Zahir had taught his daughter to ride on
horseback, and had trained her in all the accomplishments fitting to a
warrior bold and daring. He accustomed her to the severest toils, and
the most perilous enterprises. When he went to war, he put her among the
other Arabs of the tribe, and in the midst of these horsemen she soon
took her rank as one of the most valiant of them. Thus it came to pass
that she eclipsed all her comrades, and would even attack the lions in
their dens. At last her name became an object of terror; when she had
overcome a champion she never failed to cry out: "I am Djonder, son of
Zahir, horseman of the tribes."

Her cousin Khaled, on the other hand, distinguished himself equally by
his brilliant courage. His father Moharib, a wise and prudent chief, had
built houses of entertainment for strangers; all horsemen found a
welcome there. Khaled had been brought up in the midst of warriors. In
this school his spirit had been formed, here he had learned to ride, and
at last had become an intrepid warrior, and a redoubtable hero. It was
soon perceived by the rest of the army that his spirit and valor were
unconquerable.

Eventually he heard tell of his cousin Djonder, and his desire to see
and know him and to witness his skill in arms became extreme. But he
could not satisfy this desire because of the dislike which his father
showed for his cousin, the son of his uncle. This curiosity of Khaled
continued unsatisfied until the death of his father Moharib, which put
him in possession of rank, wealth, and lands. He followed the example of
his father in entertaining strangers, protecting the weak and
unfortunate, and giving raiment to the naked. He continued also to scour
the plains on horseback with his warriors, and in this way waxed greater
in bodily strength and courage. After some time, gathering together a
number of rich gifts, he started, in company with his mother, to visit
his uncle. He did not draw rein until he reached the dwelling of Zahir,
who was delighted to see him, and made magnificent preparations for his
entertainment; for the uncle had heard tell on many occasions of his
nephew's worth and valor. Khaled also visited his cousin. He saluted
her, pressed her to his bosom, and kissed her forehead, thinking she was
a young man. He felt the greatest pleasure in her company, and remained
ten days with his uncle, regularly taking part in the jousts and
contests of the horsemen and warriors. As for his cousin, the moment she
had seen how handsome and valiant Khaled was, she had fallen violently
in love with him. Her sleep left her; she could not eat; and her love
grew to such a pitch that feeling her heart completely lost to him, she
spoke to her mother and said: "O mother, should my cousin leave without
taking me in his company, I shall die of grief at his absence." Then her
mother was touched with pity for her, and uttered no reproaches, feeling
that they would be in vain. "Djaida," she said, "conceal your feelings,
and restrain yourself from grief. You have done nothing improper, for
your cousin is the man of your choice, and is of your own blood. Like
him, you are fair and attractive; like him, brave and skilful in
horsemanship. Tomorrow morning, when his mother approaches us, I will
reveal to her the whole matter; we will soon afterwards give you to him
in marriage, and finally we will all return to our own country."

The wife of Zahir waited patiently until the following morning, when the
mother of Khaled arrived. She then presented her daughter, whose head
she uncovered, so as to allow the hair to fall to her shoulders. At the
sight of such charms the mother of Khaled was beyond measure astonished,
and exclaimed: "What! is not this your son Djonder?" "No! it is
Djaida--she the moon of beauty, at last has risen." Then she told her
all that had passed between herself and her husband, and how and why
they had concealed the sex of their child. "Dear kinswoman," replied the
mother of Khaled, still quite surprised, "among all the daughters of
Arabia who have been celebrated for their beauty I have never seen one
more lovely than this one. What is her name?" "I have already told you
that it is Djaida, and my especial purpose in telling you the secret is
to offer you all these charms, for I ardently desire to marry my
daughter to your son, so that we may all be able to return to our own
land." The mother of Khaled at once assented to this proposal, and said:
"The possession of Djaida will doubtless render my son very happy." She
at once rose and went out to look for Khaled, and communicated to him
all she had seen and learned, not failing to extol especially the charms
of Djaida. "By the faith of an Arab," said she, "never, my son, have I
seen in the desert, or in any city, a girl such as your cousin; I do not
except the most beautiful. Nothing is so perfect as she is, nothing more
lovely and attractive. Make haste, my son, to see your uncle and ask him
for his daughter in marriage. You will be happy indeed if he grants your
prayer: Go, my son, and do not waste time in winning her."

When Khaled had heard these words, he cast his eyes to the ground, and
remained for some time thoughtful and gloomy. Then he replied: "My
mother, I cannot remain here any longer. I must return home amid my
horsemen and troops. I have no intention of saying anything more to my
cousin; I am convinced that she is a person whose temper and ideas of
life are uncertain; her character and manner of speech are utterly
destitute of stability and propriety. I have always been accustomed to
live amid warriors, on whom I spend my wealth, and with whom I win a
soldier's renown. As for my cousin's love for me, it is the weakness of
a woman, of a young girl." He then donned his armor, mounted his horse,
bade his uncle farewell, and announced his intention of leaving at once.
"What means this haste?" cried Zahir. "I can remain here no longer,"
answered Khaled, and, putting his horse to a gallop, he flung himself
into the depths of the wilderness. His mother, after relating to Djaida
the conversation she held with her son, mounted a camel and made her way
towards her own country.

The soul of Djaida felt keenly this indignity. She brooded over
it--sleepless and without appetite. Some days afterwards, as her father
was preparing with his horsemen to make a foray against his foes, his
glance fell on Djaida, and seeing how altered she was in face, and
dejected in spirit, he refrained from saying anything, thinking and
hoping that she would surely become herself again after a short time.

Scarcely was Zahir out of sight of his tents, when Djaida, who felt
herself like to die, and whose frame of mind was quite unsupportable,
said to her mother: "Mother, I feel that I am dying, and that this
miserable Khaled is still in the vigor of life. I should like, if God
gives me the power, to make him taste the fury of death, the bitterness
of its pang and torture." So saying, she rose like a lioness, put on her
armor, and mounted her horse, telling her mother she was going on a
hunting expedition. Swiftly, and without stopping, she traversed rocks
and mountains, her excitement increasing as she approached the
dwelling-place of her cousin. As she was disguised, she entered,
unrecognized, into the tent where strangers were received. Her visor
was, however, lowered, like that of a horseman of Hijaz. Slaves and
servants received her, offered her hospitality, comporting themselves
towards her as to one of the guests, and the most noble personages of
the land. That night Djaida took rest; but the following day she joined
the military exercises, challenged many cavaliers, and exhibited so much
address and bravery, that she produced great astonishment among the
spectators. Long before noon the horsemen of her cousin were compelled
to acknowledge her superiority over themselves. Khaled wished to witness
her prowess, and, surprised at the sight of so much skill, he offered to
match himself with her. Djaida entered the contest with him, and then
both of them joining in combat tried, one after another, all the methods
of attack and defence, until the shadows of night came on. When they
separated both were unhurt, and none could say who was the victor. Thus
Djaida, while rousing the admiration of the spectators, saw the
annoyance they felt on finding their chief equalled in fight by so
skilful an opponent. Khaled ordered his antagonist to be treated with
all the care and honor imaginable, then retired to his tent, his mind
filled with thoughts of his conflict. Djaida remained three days at her
cousin's habitation. Every morning she presented herself on the ground
of combat, and remained under arms until night. She enjoyed it greatly,
still keeping her _incognito_, whilst Khaled, on the other hand,
made no enquiries, and asked no questions of her, as to who she was and
to what tribe she might belong.

On the morning of the fourth day, while Khaled, according to his custom,
rode over the plain, and passed close to the tents reserved for
strangers, he saw Djaida mounting her horse. He saluted her, and she
returned his salute. "Noble Arab," said Khaled, "I should like to ask
you one question. Up to this moment I have failed in courtesy towards
you, but, I now beg of you, in the name of that God who has endowed you
with such great dexterity in arms, tell me, who are you, and to what
noble princes are you allied? For I have never met your equal among
brave cavaliers. Answer me, I beseech you, for I am dying to learn."
Djaida smiled, and raising her visor, replied: "Khaled, I am a woman,
and not a warrior. I am your cousin Djaida, who offered herself to you,
and wished to give herself to you; but you refused her--from the pride
you felt in your passion for arms." As she spoke she turned her horse
suddenly, stuck spurs into him, and dashed off at full gallop towards
her own country.

Khaled filled with confusion withdrew to his tent, not knowing what to
do, nor what would be the end of the passionate love which he suddenly
felt rise within him. He was seized with disgust for all these warlike
habits and tastes, which had reduced him to the melancholy plight in
which he found himself. His distaste for women was changed into love. He
sent for his mother and related to her all that had occurred. "My son,"
she said, "all these circumstances should render Djaida still dearer to
you. Wait patiently a little, until I have been able to go and ask her
of her mother." She straightway mounted her camel, and started through
the desert on the tracks of Djaida, who immediately on her arrival home
had told her mother all that had happened. As soon as the mother of
Khaled had arrived, she flung herself into the arms of her kinswoman and
demanded Djaida in marriage for her son, for Zahir had not yet returned
from his foray. When Djaida heard from her mother the request of Khaled,
she said, "This shall never be, though I be forced to drink the cup of
death. That which occurred at his tents was brought about by me to
quench the fire of my grief and unhappiness, and soothe the anguish of
my heart."

At these words the mother of Khaled, defeated of her object, went back
to her son, who was tortured by the most cruel anxiety. He rose suddenly
to his feet, for his love had reached the point of desperation, and
asked with inquietude what were the feelings of his cousin. When he
learned the answer of Djaida his distress became overwhelming, for her
refusal only increased his passion. "What is to be done, my mother," he
exclaimed. "I see no way of escaping from this embarrassment," she
replied, "excepting you assemble all your horsemen from among the Arab
sheiks, and from among those with whom you are on friendly terms. Wait
until your uncle returns from the campaign, and then, surrounded by your
followers, go to him, and in the presence of the assembled warriors,
demand of him his daughter in marriage. If he deny that he has a
daughter, tell him all that has happened, and urge him until he gives
way to your demand." This advice, and the plan proposed moderated the
grief of Khaled. As soon as he learned that his uncle had returned home,
he assembled all the chiefs of his family and told his story to them.
All of them were very much astonished, and Madi Kereb. one of the
Khaled's bravest companions, could not help saying: "This is a strange
affair; we have always heard say that your uncle had a son named
Djonder, but now the truth is known. You are certainly the man who has
most right to the daughter of your uncle. It is therefore our best
course to present ourselves in a body and prostrate ourselves before
him, asking him to return to his family and not to give his daughter to
a stranger." Khaled, without hearing any more, took with him a hundred
of his bravest horsemen, being those who had been brought up with
Moharib and Zahir from their childhood, and, having provided themselves
with presents even more costly than those they had taken before, they
started off, and marched on until they came to the tribe of Saad. Khaled
began by complimenting his uncle on his happy return from war, but no
one could be more astonished than Zahir at this second visit, especially
when he saw his nephew accompanied by all the chieftains of his family.
It never for a moment occurred to him that his daughter Djaida had
anything to do with Khaled's return, but thought that his nephew merely
wished to persuade him to return to his native territory. He offered
them every hospitality, provided them with tents and entertained them
magnificently. He ordered camels and sheep to be killed, and gave a
banquet; he furnished his guests with all things needful and proper for
three days. On the fourth day Khaled arose, and after thanking his uncle
for all his attentions, asked him for his daughter in marriage, and
begged him to return to his own land. Zahir denied that he had any child
but his son Djonder, but Khaled told him all that he had learned, and
all that had passed between himself and Djaida. At these words Zahir was
overcome with shame and turned his eyes to the ground. He remained for
some moments plunged in thought, and after reflecting that the affair
must needs proceed from bad to worse, he addressed those present in the
following words: "Kinsmen, I will no longer delay acknowledging this
secret; therefore to end the matter, she shall be married to her cousin
as soon as possible, for, of all the men I know, he is most worthy of
her." He offered his hand to Khaled, who immediately clasped it in
presence of the chiefs who were witnesses to the contract. The dowry was
fixed at five hundred brown black-eyed camels, and a thousand camels
loaded with the choicest products of Yemen. The tribe of Saad, in the
midst of which Zahir had lived, were excluded from all part in this
incident.

But when Zahir had asked his daughter's consent to this arrangement,
Djaida was overwhelmed with confusion at the course her father had
taken. Since he let his daughter clearly understand that he did not wish
her to remain unmarried, she at last replied: "My father, if my cousin
desires to have me in marriage, I shall not enter into his tent until he
undertakes to slaughter at my wedding a thousand camels, out of those
which belong to Gheshem, son of Malik, surnamed 'The Brandisher of
Spears.'" Kahled agreed to this condition; but the sheiks and the
warriors did not leave Zahir before he had collected all his possessions
for transportation to his own country. No sooner were these preparations
completed than Khaled marched forth at the head of a thousand horsemen,
with whose assistance he subdued the tribe of Aamir. Having thrice
wounded "The Brandisher of Spears," and slain a great number of his
champions, he carried off their goods and brought back from their
country even a richer spoil than Djaida had demanded. Loaded with booty
he returned, and was intoxicated with success. But when he asked that a
day should be fixed for the wedding, Djaida begged him to approach, and
said to him: "If you desire that I become your wife, fulfil first of all
my wishes, and keep the engagement I make with you. This is my demand: I
wish that on the day of my marriage, some nobleman's daughter, a
free-born woman, hold the bridle of my camel; she must be the daughter
of a prince of the highest rank, so that I may be the most honored of
all the daughters of Arabia." Khaled consented, and prepared to carry
out her wishes. That very day he started with his horsemen, and
traversed plains and valleys, searching the land of Ymer, even till he
reached the country of Hijar and the hills of Sand. In this place he
attacked the tribe-family of Moawich, son of Mizal. He burst upon them
like a rain-storm, and cutting a way with his sword through the opposing
horsemen, he took prisoner Amima, daughter of Moawich, at the very
moment when she was betaking herself to flight.

After having accomplished feats which rendered futile the resistance of
the most experienced heroes, after having scattered all the tribes in
flight, and carried off all the wealth of all the Arabs in that country,
he returned home. But he did not wish to come near his tents until he
had first gathered in all the wealth which he had left at different
points and places in the desert.

The young maidens marched before him sounding their cymbals and other
instruments of music. All the tribe rejoiced; and when Khaled appeared,
he distributed clothing to the widows and orphans, and invited his
companions and friends to the feast he was preparing for his wedding.
All the Arabs of the country came in a crowd to the marriage. He caused
them to be regaled with abundance of flesh and wine. But while all the
guests abandoned themselves to feasting and pleasure, Khaled,
accompanied by ten slaves, prepared to scour the wild and marshy places
of the land, in order to attack hand to hand in their caverns the lions
and lionesses and their cubs, and bear them slain to the tents, in order
to provide meat for all those who attended the festival.

Djaida had been informed of this design. She disguised herself in coat
of mail, mounted her horse, and left the tents; as three days of
festivities still remained, she hastily followed Khaled into the desert,
and met him face to face in a cavern. She flung herself upon him with
the impetuosity of a wild beast, and attacked him furiously, crying
aloud, "Arab! dismount from your horse, take off your coat of mail, and
your armor; if you hesitate to do so, I will run this lance through your
heart." Khaled was resolved at once to resist her in this demand. They
engaged in furious combat. The struggle lasted for more than an hour,
when the warrior saw in the eyes of his adversary an expression which
alarmed him. He remounted his horse, and having wheeled round his steed
from the place of combat, exclaimed: "By the faith of an Arab, I adjure
you to tell me what horseman of the desert you are; for I feel that your
attack and the violence of your blows are irresistible. In fact, you
have prevented me from accomplishing that which I had intended, and all
that I had eagerly desired to do." At these words Djaida raised her
visor, thus permitting him to see her face. "Khaled," she cried, "is it
necessary for the girl you love to attack wild beasts, in order that the
daughters of Arabia may learn that this is not the exclusive privilege
of a warrior?" At this cutting rebuke Khaled was overcome with shame.
"By the faith of an Arab," he replied, "no one but you can overcome me;
but is there anyone in this country who has challenged you, or are you
come hither merely to prove to me the extent of your valor?" "By the
faith of an Arab," replied Djaida, "I came into this desert solely for
the purpose of helping you to hunt wild beasts, and in order that your
warriors might not reproach you for choosing me as your wife." At these
words Khaled felt thrilled with surprise and admiration, that such
spirit and resolution should have been exhibited in the conduct of
Djaida.

Then both of them dismounted from their horses and entered into a
cavern. There Khaled seized two ferocious wild beasts, and Djaida
attacked and carried off a lion and two lionesses. After these exploits
they exchanged congratulations, and Djaida felt happy to be with Khaled.
"Meanwhile," she said, "I shall not permit you to leave our tents until
after our marriage." She immediately left him in haste and betook
herself to her own dwelling.

Khaled proceeded to rejoin the slaves whom he had left a little way off,
and ordered them to carry to the tents the beasts he had slain.
Trembling with fright at the view of what Khaled had done, they extolled
him with admiration above all other champions of the land.

The feasts meanwhile went on, and all who came were welcomed with
magnificence. The maidens sounded their cymbals; the slaves waved their
swords in the air, and the young girls sang from morn till evening. It
was in the midst of such rejoicings that Djaida and Khaled were married.
Amima, the daughter of Moawich, held the reins of the young bride's
camel, and men and women alike extolled the glory of Djaida.




THE ABSIANS AND FAZAREANS

King Cais, chief of the Absians, distrusting the evil designs of
Hadifah, the chief of the tribe of Fazarah, had sent out his slaves in
every direction to look after Antar. One of these slaves on his return
said to the king: "As for Antar, I have not even heard his name; but as
I passed by the tribe of Tenim, I slept one night in the tents of the
tribe Byah. There I saw a colt of remarkable beauty. He belonged to a
man named Jahir, son of Awef. I have never seen a colt so fine and
swift." This recital made a profound impression upon Cais. And in truth
this young animal was the wonder of the world, and never had a handsomer
horse been reared among the Arabs. He was in all points high-bred and
renowned for race and lineage, for his sire was Ocab and his dam Helweh,
and these were horses regarded by the Arabs as quicker than lightning.
All the tribes admired their points, and the tribe of Byah had become
celebrated above all others, because of the mare and stallion which
pertained to it.

As for this fine colt, one day, when his sire Ocab had been put out on
pasture, he was being led by the daughter of Jahir along the side of a
lake at noonday, and there he saw the mare Helweh, who was tethered
close to the tent of her master. He immediately began to neigh, and
slipped his halter. The young girl in her embarrassment let him go, and
for modesty took refuge in the tent of a friend. The stallion remained
on the spot until the girl returned. She seized the halter and took him
to the stables.

But her father discerned the anxiety which she could not conceal. He
questioned her, and she told him what had happened. He became furious
with rage on hearing her story, for he was naturally choleric; he ran
among the tents, flinging off his turban, and crying at the top of his
voice, while all the Arabs crowded round him, "Tribe of Byah, tribe of
Byah! Kinsmen and friends, hear me." Then he related what his daughter
had told him. "I cannot permit," he added, "that the blood of my horse
should be blended with that of Helweh; yet I am not willing to sell him
for the most costly sheep and camels; and if I cannot otherwise prevent
Helweh from bearing a colt to my stallion, I shall be glad if some one
will put the mare to death." "By all means," cried his listeners, "do as
you please, for we can have no objection." Such were the usual terms of
Arabian courtesy.

Nevertheless, Helweh, in course of time, bore a fine colt, whose birth
brought great joy to her master. He named the young horse Dahir. The
colt waxed in strength and beauty, until he actually excelled his sire
Ocab. His chest was broad, his neck long, his hoofs hard, his nostrils
widely expanded. His tail swept the ground, and he was of the gentlest
temper; in short, he was the most perfect creature ever seen. Being
reared with the greatest care, his shape was perfect as the archway of a
royal palace. When the mare Helweh, followed by her colt, was one day
moving along the shore of a lake, Ocab's owner chanced to see them. He
seized the young horse, and took him home with him, leaving his mother
in grief for his difference. "As for Jahir," he said, "this colt belongs
to me, and I have more right to him than anyone else."

The news of the colt's disappearance soon reached his owner's ears. He
assembled the chiefs of the tribe, and told them what had happened. They
sent to Jahir, and he was reproached bitterly. "Jahir," they said, "you
have not suffered, yet have done injustice, in that you carried off that
which belonged to another man." "Say no more," answered Jahir, "and
spare me these reproaches, for, by the faith of an Arab, I will not
return the colt, unless compelled by main force. I will declare war
against you first." At that moment the tribe was not prepared for a
quarrel; and several of them said to Jahir: "We are too much attached to
you to push things to such an extreme as that; we are your allies and
kinsmen. We will not fight with you, though an idol of gold were at
stake." Then Kerim, son of Wahrab (the latter being the owner of the
mare and colt, a man renowned among the Arabs for his generosity),
seeing the obstinacy of Jahir, said to him: "Cousin, the colt is
certainly yours, and belongs to you; as for the mare here, accept her as
a present from my hand, so that mother and colt will not be separated,
and no one will ever be able to accuse me of wronging a kinsman."

The tribe highly applauded this act, and Jahir was so humiliated by the
generosity with which he had been treated, that he returned mare and
colt to Kerim, adding to the gift a pair of male and a pair of female
camels.

Dahir soon became a horse of absolute perfection in every point, and
when his master Kerim undertook to race him with another horse, he rode
the animal himself, and was in the habit of saying to his antagonist,
"Even should you pass me like an arrow, I could catch you up, and
distance you," and in fact this always happened.

As soon as King Cais heard tell of this horse, he became beside himself
with longing and mortification, and his sleep left him. He sent to
Kerim, offering to buy the horse for as much gold or silver as the owner
demanded, and adding that the price would be forwarded without delay.
This message enraged Kerim. "Is not this Cais a fool, or a man of no
understanding?" he exclaimed. "Does he think I am a man of traffic--a
horse-dealer, who cannot mount the horses he owns? I swear by the faith
of an Arab that if he had asked for Dahir, as a present, I would have
sent the horse, and a troop of camels besides: but if he thinks of
obtaining him by bidding a price, he will never have him; even were I
bound to drink the cup of death."

The messenger returned to Cais, and gave him the answer of Kerim, at
which the latter was much annoyed. "Am I a king over the tribes of Abs,
of Adnan, of Fazarah, and of Dibyan," he exclaimed, "and yet a common
Arab dares to oppose me!" He summoned his people and his warriors.
Immediately there was the flash of armor, of coats of mail, and swords
and helmets appeared amid the tents; the champions mounted their steeds,
shook their spears, and marched forth against the tribe of Byah. As soon
as they reached their enemy's territory they overran the pastures, and
gathered an immense booty in cattle, which Cais divided among his
followers. They next made for the tents and surprised the dwellers
there, who were not prepared for such an attack: Kerim being absent with
his warriors on an expedition of the same sort. Cais at the head of the
Absians, pushing his way into the dwellings, carried off the wives and
daughters of his foe.

As for Dahir, he was tethered to one of the tent-pegs, for Kerim never
used him as a charger, for fear some harm might befall him, or he might
be killed. One of the slaves who had been left in the encampment, and
had been among the first to see the approach of the Absians, went up to
Dahir for the purpose of breaking the line by which he was hobbled. This
he failed to accomplish, but mounting him, and digging his heels into
his flanks, he forced the horse, although he was hobbled, to rush off
prancing like a fawn, until he reached the desert. It was in vain that
the Absians pursued him; they could not even catch up with the trail of
dust that he left behind him.

As soon as Cais perceived Dahir, he recognized him, and the desire of
possessing him became intensified. He hurried on, but his chagrin was
great, as he perceived that, do what he would, he never could catch up
with him. At last the slave, perceiving that he had quite out-distanced
the Absians, dismounted, untied the feet of Dahir, leapt again into the
saddle, and galloped off. Cais, who had kept up the pursuit, gained
ground during this stop, and coming within ear-shot of the slave,
shouted out, "Stop, Arab, there is no cause for fear; you have my
protection; by the faith of a noble Arab, I swear it." At these words
the slave stopped. "Do you intend to sell that horse?" said King Cais to
him, "for in that case you have the most eager buyer of all the Arabian
tribesmen." "I do not wish to sell him, sire," replied the slave,
"excepting at one price, the restoration of all the booty." "I will buy
him then," the King answered, and he clasped the hand of the Arab as
pledge of the bargain. The slave dismounted from the young horse, and
delivered him over to King Cais, and the latter overjoyed at having his
wish, leapt on to his back, and set out to rejoin the Absians, whom he
commanded to restore all the booty which they had taken. His order was
executed to the letter. King Cais, enchanted at the success of his
enterprise, and at the possession of Dahir, returned home. So great was
his fondness for the horse that he groomed and fed him with his own
hands. Soon as Hadifah, chief of the tribe of Fazarah, heard that Cais
had possession of Dahir, jealousy filled his heart. In concert with
other chiefs he plotted the death of this beautiful horse.

Now it came to pass that at this time Hadifah gave a great feast, and
Carwash, kinsman of King Cais, was present. At the end of the meal, and
while the wine circulated freely the course of conversation turned to
the most famous chiefs of the time. The subject being exhausted, the
guests began to speak about their most celebrated horses, and next, of
the journeys made by them in the desert. "Kinsmen," said Carwash, "none
of you ever saw a horse like Dahir, which belongs to my ally Cais. It is
vain to seek his equal; his pace is absolutely terrifying. He chases
away sorrow from the heart of him who beholds him, and protects like a
strong tower the man who mounts him." Carwash did not stop here, but
continued to praise, in the highest and most distinguished language, the
horse Dahir, until all of the tribe of Fazarah and of the family of
Zyad, felt their hearts swell with rage. "Do you hear him, brother?"
said Haml to Hadifah; "come, that is enough," he added, turning towards
Carwash. "All that you have said about Dahir is absolute nonsense--for
at present there are no horses better or finer than mine, and those of
my brother."

With these words he ordered his slaves to bring his horses and parade
them before Carwash. This was done. "Come, Carwash, look at that horse."
"He is not worth the hay you feed him on," said the other. Then those of
Hadifah were led out; among them was a mare, named Ghabra, and a
stallion called Marik. "Now look at these," said Hadifah. "They are not
worth the hay they eat," replied Carwash. Hadifah, filled with
indignation at these words: "What, not even Ghabra?" "Not even Ghabra,
or all the horses in the world," repeated Carwash. "Would you like to
make a bet for us with King Cais?" "Certainly," answered Carwash--"I
will wager that Dahir will beat all the horses of the tribe of Fazarah,
even if he carries a hundred weight of stone on his back." They
discussed the matter for a long time, the one affirming the other
denying the statements, until Hadifah closed the altercation by saying,
"I hold to the wager, on condition that the winner takes from the loser
as many male and female camels as he chooses." "You are going to play me
a nice trick," said Carwash, "and for my part I tell you plainly that I
won't bet more than twenty camels; the man whose horse loses shall pay
this forfeit." The matter was arranged accordingly. They sat at table
until nightfall, and then rested.

The next day Carwash left his tent at early morn, went to the tribe of
Abs, to find Cais, whom he told about the wager. "You were wrong," said
Cais. "You might have made a bet with anyone excepting Hadifah, who is a
man of tricks and treachery. If you have made the wager, you will have
to declare it off." Cais waited until certain persons who were with him
had retired, then he at once took horse, and repaired to the tribe of
Fazarah, where everybody was taking their morning meal in their tents.
Cais dismounted, took off his arms, and seating himself among them began
to eat with them, like a noble Arab. "Cousin," said Hadifah to him
jokingly, "What large mouthfuls you take; heaven preserve me from having
an appetite like yours." "It is true," said Cais, "that I am dying of
hunger, but by Him who abides always, and will abide forever, I came not
here merely to eat your victuals. My intention is to annul the wager
which was yesterday made between you and my kinsman Carwash, I beg of
you to cancel this bet, for all that is uttered over cups and flagons is
of no serious account, and ought to be forgotten." "I would have you to
know," was the answer, "that I will not withdraw from the challenge,
unless you forfeit the camels which are staked. If you accept this
condition, I shall be perfectly indifferent to everything else.
Nevertheless, if you wish it, I will seize the camels by force, or, if
it be your good pleasure, I will waive every claim, save as a debt of
honor." In spite of all that Cais could say, Hadifah remained firm in
his resolution, and as his brother began to deride Cais, the latter lost
his temper, and with a face blazing with wrath he asked of Hadifah,
"What stake did you offer in your wager with my cousin?" "Twenty
she-camels," said Hadifah. "As for this first wager," answered Cais, "I
cancel it, and propose another one in its stead: I will bet thirty
camels." "And I forty," replied Hadifah, "I make it fifty," was the
retort of Cais. "Sixty," quickly added the other; and they continued
raising the terms of the wager, until the number of camels staked was
one hundred. The contract of the bet was deposited in the hands of a man
named Sabic, son of Wahhab, and in the presence of a crowd of youths and
old men. "What shall be the length of the race?" asked Hadifah of Cais.
"One hundred bow-shots," replied Cais, "and we have an archer here,
Ayas, the son of Mansour, who will measure the ground." Ayas was in fact
the strongest and most accomplished archer then living among the Arabs.
King Cais, by choosing Ayas, wished the course to be made long, knowing
the endurance of his horse, and the longer distance Dahir had to travel,
the more he gained speed, from the increased excitement of his spirit.
"Well now, we had better fix the day for the race," said Cais to
Hadifah. "Forty days will be required," replied Hadifah, "to bring the
horses into condition." "You are right," said Cais, and they agreed that
the horses should be trained for forty days, that the race should take
place by the lake Zatalirsad, and that the horse that first reached the
goal should be declared winner. All these preliminaries having been
arranged, Cais returned to his tents.

Meanwhile one of the horsemen of the tribe of Fazarah said to his
neighbors: "Kinsmen, you may rest assured that there is going to be a
breach between the tribe of Abs and that of Fazarah, as a result of this
race between Dahir and Ghabra. The two tribes, you must know, will be
mutually estranged, for King Cais has been there in person; now he is a
prince and the son of a prince. He has made every effort to cancel the
bet, but Hadifah would by no means consent. All this is the beginning of
a broil, which may be followed by a war, possibly lasting fifty years,
and many a one will fall in the struggle."

Hadifah hearing this prediction, said: "I don't trouble myself much
about the matter, and your suggestion seems to me absurd." "O Hadifah,"
exclaimed Ayas, "I am going to tell you what will be the result of all
your obstinacy towards Cais." Then he recited some verses, with the
following meaning: "In thee, O Hadifah, there is no beauty; and in the
purity of Cais there is not a single blot. How sincere and honest was
his counsels, although they were lacking in prudence and dignity. Make a
wager with a man who does not possess even an ass, and whose father has
never been rich enough to buy a horse. Let Cais alone; he has wealth,
lands, horses, a proud spirit, and he is the owner of this Dahir, who is
always first on the day of a race, whether he is resting or
running--this Dahir, a steed whose feet even appear through the
obscurity of night like burning brands." "Ayas," replied Hadifah, "do
you think I would break my word? I will take the camels of Cais, and
will not permit my name to be inscribed among the number of those who
have been vanquished. Let things run their course."

As soon as King Cais had regained his tents he hastened to tell his
slaves to begin the training of his horses, and to pay especial
attention to Dahir. Then he told his kinsmen all that had taken place
between himself and Hadifah. Antar was present at this recital, and as
he took great interest in all that concerned the king, he said, "Cais,
calm your fears, keep your eyes well open, run the race, and have no
fear. For, by the faith of an Arab, if Hadifah makes any trouble or
misunderstanding, I will kill him, as well as the whole tribe of
Fazarah."

The conversation on this subject continued until they reached the tents,
which Antar declined to enter before seeing Dahir. He walked several
times round this animal, and saw at a glance that the horse actually
possessed qualities which astonished any one who saw him.

Hadifah quickly learned the return of Antar, and knew that the hero was
encouraging King Cais to run the race. Haml, Hadifah's brother, had also
heard the news, and in the distress which he felt remarked to Hadifah,
"I fear lest Antar should fall upon me, or some one of the family of
Beder, and kill us, and thus render us disgraced. Give up this race, or
we are ruined. Let me go to King Cais, and I will not leave him until he
promises to come to you and cancel the contract." "Do as you please,"
answered Hadifah. Thereupon Haml took horse, and went immediately to
King Cais. He found him with his uncle Assyed, a wise and prudent man.
Haml approached Cais, saluted him by kissing his hand, and after saying
that he was the bearer of an important message, added: "Kinsman, you
know that my brother Hadifah is a low fellow, whose mind is full of
intrigues. I have spent the last three days in trying to persuade him to
cancel this wager. At last he has said: 'Very good, if Cais comes to me,
and wishes to be released from the contract, I will annul it; but do not
let any Arab think that I abandon the bet through fear of Antar.' Now
you, Cais, are aware that the greatest proof of attachment between
kinsmen is their willingness to give way to one another. So I am here to
beg that you will come to the dwelling of my brother Hadifah and ask him
to give up the race, before it causes trouble, and the tribe be utterly
driven away from its territories." At this address of Haml, Cais became
flushed with shame, for he was trusting and generous. He at once arose,
and leaving his uncle Assyed in charge of his domestic business, he
accompanied Haml to the land of Fazarah. When they were midway on their
journey Haml began to utter lavish praises of Cais to the latter's face,
and to blame his own brother's faults, in the following terms: "O Cais,
do not let your wrath be stirred up against Hadifah, for he is verily a
man headstrong and unjust in his actions. O Cais, if you persist in
holding to the bet, great disasters will follow. Both you and he are
impulsive and passionate, and this is what causes me to feel anxiety
about you, Cais. Put aside your private feelings, be kind and generous,
and it will come to pass that the oppressor himself will become the
oppressed."

Haml continued to abuse his brother, and to flatter Cais with
expressions of admiration all the way, until in the evening they arrived
at the tribe of Fazarah. Hadifah, who at the moment was surrounded by
many powerful chiefs, upon whose aid he depended in the hour of need,
had changed his mind since his brother Haml's departure, and in place of
coming to terms and making peace with Cais he had determined to yield in
nothing, but to maintain rigorously the conditions of the coming race.
He was speaking of this very matter with one of the chiefs at the moment
when Cais and Haml presented themselves before him. As soon as Hadifah
saw Cais, he resolved to cover him with shame. Turning therefore to his
brother, he asked: "Who ordered you to go to this man? By the faith of a
noble Arab, even if all the men who cover the surface of the earth were
to come and importune me, saying, 'O Hadifah, give up one hair of these
camels,' I would not yield until a lance had pierced my heart and a
sword stricken the head from my shoulders." Cais crimsoned, and
immediately remounted his horse, bitterly reproaching Haml. He returned
home with the utmost haste, and found his uncle and brothers waiting for
him in extreme anxiety. "O my son!" said his uncle Assyed as soon as he
saw him, "you have had a disastrous journey, for it has caused you to be
disgraced."

"If Hadifah had not been surrounded by certain chiefs, who gave him
treacherous counsels, I could have arranged the whole affair," answered
Cais. "There is now nothing left but to carry out the race and the bet."

King Cais did not sleep the whole of that night. On the morrow he
thought of nothing but the training of his horses during the forty days'
interval before the race. All the Arabs of the land agreed to come to
the pastures and see the race, and when the forty days had expired the
horsemen of the two tribes came in a crowd to the banks of lake
Zatalirsud. Next arrived the archer Ayas, who, turning his back to the
lake at the point where the horses were to start, drew his bow as he
walked toward the north a hundred times, and measured out to the goal
the course of a hundred bow-shots. Soon the horsemen of Ghitfan and
Dibyan arrived, for they were of the same territory, and because of
their friendly relations and kinship were comprised as one tribe under
the name of Adnan. King Cais had begged Antar not to show himself on
this occasion, fearing that his appearance might cause dissension. Antar
listened to this advice, but was unable to rest quiet in the tents. The
interest he felt in Cais, and the deep distrust with which the falseness
of the Fazareans--who were always ready for treason--inspired him,
induced him to show himself. Girding on his sword Dhami, and mounting
his famous charger, Abjer, he took with him his brother Shidoub, and
reached the spot fixed upon for the race, in order that he might watch
over the safety of King Zoheir's sons. On his arrival he seemed to excel
all that crowd, like a lion clad in coat of mail. He carried his naked
sword, and his eyes flashed like blazing coals. As soon as he had
reached the middle of the crowd, he cried out with a loud voice, that
struck terror to all hearts: "Hearken, noble Arabian chieftains and men
of renown assembled here--all of you know that I was supported and
favored by King Zoheir, father of King Cais, that I am a slave bound to
him, by his goodness and munificence; that it is he who caused my
parents to acknowledge me, and gave me my rank, making me to be numbered
among Arab chiefs. Although he is no longer living, I wish to show my
gratitude to him, and bring the kings of the land into subjection to
him, even after his death. He has left a son, whom his brothers have
acknowledged, and have set on the throne of his father. This son is
Cais, whom they have thus distinguished, because of his wisdom,
rectitude, and noble heart. I am the slave of Cais, and am his property;
I intend to be the supporter of him whom I love, and the enemy of
whosoever resists him. It shall never be said, as long as I live, that I
have suffered an enemy to affront him. As to the conditions of this
wager, it is our duty to see them observed. The best thing, accordingly,
to do is to let the horses race unobstructed, for victory comes from the
creator of day and night. I make an oath, therefore, by the holy house
at Mecca, by the temple, by the eternal God, who never forgets his
servants and never sleeps, that if Hadifah commits any act of violence,
I will make him drink the cup of vengeance and of death; and will make
the whole tribe of Fazarah the byword of all the world. And you, Arab
chieftains, if you sincerely desire the race to take place, conduct
yourselves with justice and impartiality; otherwise, by the eyes of my
dear Ibla, I will make the horses run the race in blood." "Antar is
right," the horsemen shouted on all sides.

Hadifah chose, as the rider of Ghabra, a groom of the tribe of Dibyan.
This man had passed all his days and many of his nights in rearing and
tending horses. Cais, on the other hand, chose as rider of Dahir a groom
of the tribe of Abs, much better trained and experienced in his
profession than was the Dibyanian. When the two contestants had mounted
their horses King Cais gave this parting instruction to his groom: "Do
not let the reins hang too loosely in managing Dahir; if you see him
flag, stand up in your stirrups, and press his flanks gently with your
legs. Do not urge him too much, or you will break his spirit." Hadifah
heard this advice and repeated it, word for word, to his rider.

Antar began to laugh. "By the faith of an Arab," he said to Hadifah,
"you will be beaten. Are words so scarce that you are obliged to use
exactly those of Cais? But as a matter of fact Cais is a king, the son
of a king; he ought always to be imitated by others, and since you have
followed, word by word, his speech, it is a proof that your horse will
follow his in the desert."

At these words the heart of Hadifah swelled with rage and indignation,
and he swore with an oath that he would not let his horse run that day,
but that he wished the race to take place at sunrise, next morning. This
delay was indispensable to him in preparing the act of perfidy which he
meditated, for he had no sooner seen Dahir than he was speechless with
astonishment at the beauty and perfections of the horse.

The judges had already dismounted and the horsemen of the various tribes
were preparing to return home, when Shidoub began to cry out with a loud
voice, "Tribes of Abs, of Adnan, of Fazarah and of Dibyan, and all here
present attend to me for an instant, and listen to words which shall be
repeated from generation to generation." All the warriors stood
motionless. "Speak on," they cried, "what is your will? Perhaps there
may be something good in your words." "Illustrious Arabs," continued
Shidoub, "you know what happened in consequence of the match between
Dahir and Ghabra: I assure you on my life that I will outstrip both of
them in running, even were they swifter than the wind. But listen to the
condition I offer; if I am the winner, I am to take the hundred camels
which are at stake; but if I am beaten, I am to forfeit fifty." Upon
this one of the Sheiks of Fazarah exclaimed, "What is that you are
saying, vile slave? Why should you receive a hundred camels if you win
and only forfeit fifty if you lose?" "Do you ask why, ancient mire of a
dunghill," replied Shidoub, "because I have but two legs to run on and a
horse has four, not counting his tail." All the Arabs burst out
laughing; yet as they were astonished at the conditions proposed by
Shidoub, and extremely curious to see him run the race, they agreed that
he should make the hazardous experiment.

When all had returned to the tents Antar said to Shidoub: "Come, now,
thou son of a cursed mother, how dared thou say that thou couldst
outstrip these two horses, whose race all horsemen of our tribes have
assembled to see, and who all the world admits have no equals in speed,
not even among the birds of the air?" "By him who created the springs in
the rocks and who knows all things," replied Shidoub, "I will outstrip
those two horses, be they fleet as the winds. Yes, and my victory will
have an advantageous result, for when the Arabs hear of it, they will
give up all idea of pursuing me, when I run across the desert." Antar
laughed, for he was in doubt about Shidoub's plan. The latter went to
find King Cais and his brothers, and the other witnesses of the race,
and made oath on his life that he would outstrip the two horses. All
present acknowledged themselves witnesses of the oath, and left the
spot, filled with astonishment at the proposition.

As for the trickster Hadifah, in the evening he summoned one of his
slaves named Dames, a rascal, if ever there was one. "O Dames," he said,
"you frequently boast of your cunning, but hitherto I have had no
opportunity of putting it to the proof." "My Lord," answered the slave,
"tell me in what way I can be useful to you." "I desire," said Hadifah,
"that you go and post yourself in the great pass. Remain in this place,
and go and hide yourself there in the morning. Watch the horses well,
and see if Dahir is in advance. If he is, show yourself suddenly, strike
him on the head, and cause him to stop, so that Ghabra may outstrip him,
and we may not incur the disgrace of defeat. For I confess that since I
have seen Dahir, his excellent points have made me doubt the superiority
of Ghabra, and I fear my mare will be beaten, and we shall become the
laughing stock of all the Arabs." "But, sir, how shall I distinguish
Dahir from Ghabra when they advance, both of them wrapped in a cloud of
dust?" Hadifah replied, "I am going to give you a sign, and to explain
how the matter may be free from difficulty." As he spoke he picked up
some stones from the ground and said: "Take these stones with you at
sunrise, begin to count them, and throw them to the earth, four at a
time. You must repeat the operation five times, and the last time Ghabra
will arrive. That is the calculation I have made, so that if a cloud of
dust presents itself to you, and some of the stones, a third or a half
of them, still remain in your hand, you may be sure that Dahir has
gained first place, and is before your eyes. You must then hurl a stone
at his head, as I said, and stop his running, so that my mare may gain
the lead." The slave agreed to do so. He provided himself with stones
and went to hide himself at the great pass, and Hadifah felt confident
of gaining the wager.

At the dawn of day, the Arabs, coming from all quarters, were assembled
on the race ground. The judges gave the signal for the start, and the
two riders uttered loud shouts. The racers started like flashes of
lightning which dazzle the sight and seemed like the wind when, as it
blows, it increases in fury. Ghabra passed ahead of Dahir and distanced
him. "Now you are lost, my brother of the tribe of Abs," cried the
Fazarean groom to the Absian, "try and console yourself for this
defeat." "You lie," retorted the Absian, "and in a few moments you will
see how completely you are mistaken. Wait till we have passed this
uneven ground. Mares always travel faster on rough roads than on smooth
country." And so it happened, for when they arrived in the plain, Dahir
shot forward like a giant, leaving a trail of dust behind him. It seemed
as if he went on wings, not legs; in the twinkling of an eye he had
outstripped Ghabra. "Here," cried the Absian to the Fazarean groom,
"send a messenger from me to the family of Beder, and you yourself drink
the bitter cup of patience behind me." Meanwhile Shidoub, swift as the
north wind, kept ahead of Dahir, bounding like a fawn and running like
an ostrich, until he reached the defile where Dames was hidden. The
slave had only thrown down less than a third of his pebbles, when he
looked up and saw Dahir approaching.

He waited till the horse passed close by him, and suddenly showed
himself with a shout, and hit the racer violently between the eyes with
a stone. The horse reared, stopped one moment, and the rider was on the
point of being unseated. Shidoub was a witness to the incident, and
having looked at the slave, recognized him as belonging to the
treacherous Hadifah. In the violence of his rage he flung himself upon
Dames, and struck him dead with his sword: then he approached Dahir for
the purpose of speaking soothingly to him, and starting him again on the
race; but, alas, the mare Ghabra rushed up like the wind. Then Shidoub,
fearing defeat, thinking of the camels he would forfeit, set out running
at full speed towards the lake, where he arrived two bow-shots in
advance of the horses. Ghabra followed, then Dahir last, bearing on his
forehead the mark of the missile; his cheeks were covered with blood and
tears.

All the spectators were astounded on seeing the agility and endurance of
Shidoub; but as soon as Ghabra had reached the finish the Fazareans
uttered loud shouts of joy. Dahir was led home all bleeding, and his
rider told the men of the tribe of Abs what the slave had done. Cais
examined the wound of his horse and asked for full details of the
occurrence. Antar grew crimson with anger, and laid his hand upon his
invincible sword, as if impatient to annihilate the tribe of the
Fazareans. But the sheiks restrained him, although with difficulty,
after which they went to Hadifah to cover him with shame, and to
reproach him with the infamous deed he had done. Hadifah denied it, with
false oaths, affirming that he knew nothing of the blow dealt to Dahir;
then he added, "I demand the camels which are due to me, and I do not
admit the treacherous pretext on which they are being withheld."

"That blow is doubtless of evil augury for the tribe of Fazarah," said
Cais. "God will certainly give us victory and triumph, and destroy them.
For Hadifah only desired this race to take place in order that it might
cause trouble and discord, and the disturbance which this contest is
sure to excite will stir up one tribe against another, so that there
will be many men killed, and children made orphans." The conversation
which followed among the tribesmen became more and more excited,
confusion followed, shouts rang out on all sides, and drawn swords
flashed. Bloodshed would have resulted had not the sheiks and wise men
dismounted and with bared heads mingled with the crowd, with humble
mien, imploring them, until at last the matter was settled as
harmoniously as possible. It was agreed that Shidoub should receive the
amount of the wager--a hundred camels from the tribe of Fazarah, and
that Hadifah should abandon his claims and refrain from all dispute.
Such were the measures taken to extinguish the hostility and disorder
which threatened to burst out among the tribes. Then the different
families retired to their own dwellings, but the hearts of all were
filled with bitter hatred. One whose resentment seemed keenest was
Hadifah, especially when he learned of the slave Dames's death. As for
Cais, he was also filled with mute rage and intense hatred. Yet Antar
tried to reassure him. "King," he said to him, "do not let your heart be
a prey to mortification; for I swear by the tomb of King Zoheir, your
father, that I will cause disgrace and infamy to fall on Hadifah, and it
is only from regard for you that I have up to this time delayed action."
Soon after all returned to their tents.

The following morning Shidoub killed twenty of the camels he had won the
day before, and caused the meat to be distributed among the widows and
those who had been wounded and crippled in war. He slaughtered twenty
others, which he used in entertaining the tribe of Abs, including women
and slaves. Finally, the next day, he killed the rest of the camels and
made a great feast near the lake Zatalirsad, to which he invited the
sons of King Zoheir and his noblest chieftains. At the end of this
banquet, when the wine circulated among the guests, all praised the
behavior of Shidoub. But the news of the camel slaughter and of all the
feasting was soon known to the tribe of Fazarah. All the enraged
tribesmen hastened to seek Hadifah. "What," said they, "while we were
first in the race, slaves and traitorous Absians have eaten our camels!
Send for an equal number of camels, by all means; but if he refuses them
let us make a terrible war upon the Absians."

Hadifah raised his eyes upon his son Abou-Firacah. "Mount horse at
once," he said to him, "and go and say to Cais: my father says that you
must this instant pay the wager, or he will come and seize the amount by
main force, and will bring trouble upon you." There was then present a
chief among the sheiks, who, hearing the order that Hadifah had given to
his son, said: "O Hadifah, are you not ashamed to send such a message to
the tribe of the Absians? Are they not our kindred and allies? Does this
proposal harmonize with the counsel and desire of allaying dissensions?
The genuine man shows gratitude for generosity and kindness. I think it
quite reasonable to expect that you desist from this perverse mood,
which will end in our total extermination. Cais has shown himself quite
impartial and has done wrong to no one; cherish, therefore, peace with
the horsemen of the tribe of Abs. Take warning from what happened to the
slave Dames; he struck Dahir, the horse of King Cais, and God punished
him at once; he is left bathed in his slavish blood. I beg you to listen
to none but wise counsels; act nobly, and abandon base designs. While
you are thus forewarned as to your situation, keep a prudent eye on your
affairs." This discourse rendered Hadifah furious. "Contemptible sheik!
Dog of a traitor!" he exclaimed. "What! Must I be in fear of Cais and
the whole tribe of the Absians? By the faith of an Arab, I will let all
men of honor know that if Cais refuse to send the camels I will not
leave one of his tents standing." The sheik was indignant, and to
increase the fear he would cast into the heart of Hadifah he spoke to
him in verses, to the following effect: "Insult is cowardliness, for it
takes by surprise him who is not expecting it, as the night enwraps
those who wander in the desert. When the sword shall once be drawn look
out for blows. Be just and do not clothe thyself with dishonor. Enquire
of those who know the fate of Themond and his tribe, when they committed
acts of rebellion and tyranny. They will tell you that a command of God
from on high destroyed them in one night, and on the morrow they lay
scattered on the ground, their eyes turned towards the sky."

Hadifah dissembled his contempt for these verses and the sheik who had
pronounced them, but he ordered his son to go at once to Cais.
Abou-Firacah started for the tribe of Abs, and as soon as he arrived
there repaired to the home of Cais, who was absent. The messenger asked
then for his wife Modelilah, the daughter of Rebia. "What do you desire
of my husband?" she asked. "I demand my due, the prize of the horse
race." "Misfortune take you and that which you demand," she replied.
"Son of Hadifah! Do you not fear the consequences of such perfidy? If
Cais were here he would send you to your death, instantly." Abou-Firacah
returned to his father, to whom he told all that the wife of Cais had
said "What, you coward," shouted Hadifah, "do you come back without
completing your errand? Are you afraid of the daughter of Rebia? Go to
him again."

As Abou-Firacah reminded his father that it was now near night-fall, the
message was postponed until the next day. As for Cais, when he
re-entered his home, he learned from his wife that Abou-Firacah had come
to ask for the camels. "By the faith of an Arab," he said, "if I had
been here I would have slain him. But the matter is closed; let us think
no more of it." Yet King Cais passed the night in grief and annoyance
until sunrise, at which time he betook himself to his tent Antar came to
see him. Cais rose, and making him take a seat, mentioned the name of
Hadifah. "Would you believe he had the shamelessness to send his son to
demand the camels of me? Ah, if I had been present I would have slain
the messenger." Scarcely had he finished uttering these words when
Abou-Firacah presented himself on horseback. Without dismounting, and
uttering no word of salutation or preface, he said: "Cais, my father
desires that you send him that which is his due; by so doing your
conduct will be that of a generous man; but if you refuse, my father
will come against you, carry off his property by force, and plunge you
into misfortune."

On hearing these words Cais felt the light change to darkness before his
eyes. "O thou son of a vile coward," he exclaimed "how is it that you
are not more respectful in your address to me?" He seized a javelin and
plunged it into the breast of Abou-Firacah. Pierced through, the young
messenger lost control of his horse.--Antar dragged him down and flung
him on the ground. Then, turning the horse's head away from the
direction of Fazarah, he struck him on the flank with a holly-stick, and
the horse took the road towards the pastures, and finally entered his
stable, all covered with blood. The shepherds at once led him to the
tents, crying out, "Misfortune! Misfortune!"

Hadifah became furious. He smote upon his breast, repeating the words:
"Tribe of Fazarah, to arms, to arms, to arms!" and all the disaffected
came to Hadifah once more, begging him to declare war on the Absians,
and to take vengeance on them. "Kinsmen!" replied Hadifah, with
alacrity, "let none of us sleep to-night without our armor on." And so
it happened.

At break of day Hadifah was on horseback; the warriors were ready, and
only women and children and the feeble were left in the tents. Cais, on
the other hand, after slaying Abou-Firacah, expected that the Fazareans
would come and attack himself and his warriors; he therefore prepared
for battle. Antar was charged with taking the necessary reconnoitre. He
left in the tents only women, children, and those too feeble to bear the
sword; then he put himself in command of the heroes of Carad. Nothing
could be more brilliant than the ranks of the Absians in their coats of
mail and gleaming weapons. These preparations caused an anxious moment
for both parties. They marched forth against each other, and the sun had
scarcely appeared, before scimitars flashed, and the whole country was
in a turmoil.

Antar was impatient to press forward, and satisfy his thirst for battle;
but, lo! Hadifah, dressed in a black robe, advances, his heart broken by
the death of his son. "Son of Zoheir," he cried to Cais, "it is a base
action to slay a child; but it is good to meet in battle, to decide with
these lances which shall predominate, you or me." These words cut Cais
to the quick. Hurried along by passion he left his standard and rushed
against Hadifah. Then the two chiefs, spurred on by mutual hatred,
fought together on their noble chargers, until nightfall. Cais was
mounted on Dahir, and Hadifah on Ghabra. In the course of this combat
the exploits of the past were eclipsed. Each tribe despaired of his
chieftain's safety, and they were eager to make a general attack, in
order to stop the struggle of the chieftains and the fury with which
they contended. Cries began to be heard in the air. Scimitars were
drawn, and lances advanced over the ears of Arabian chargers. Antar
approached certain Absian chiefs and said, "Let us attack the traitors."
He prepared to charge, when the ancients of the two tribes came forth
into the middle of the plain, with heads uncovered, their feet bared,
and their idols hung from their shoulders. Standing between the two
armies they spoke as follows: "Kinsmen and allies, in the name of that
harmony which has hitherto prevailed among us, let us do nothing that
will make us the byword of our slaves. Let us not furnish our enemies
with ground for reproaching us. Let us forget all matter of dispute and
dissension. Let us not turn wives into widows and our children into
orphans. Satisfy your warlike ardor by attacking those among the Arabs
who are your real foes; and you, kinsmen of Fazarah, show yourselves
more humble and less haughty, towards your brethren the Absians. Above
all, forget not that insolent wrong has often caused the destruction of
many tribes, which have had sore reason to regret their impious actions;
in this way many men have been deprived of their possessions, and a vast
number been plunged into the gulf of despair and regret. Expect the
fatal hour of death, the day of dissolution, for it is upon you. You
will be rent asunder by the threatening eagles of destruction, and
enclosed in the dark prison-house of the tomb. Take care, that when your
bodies are separated from life, men may think about you without any
other memory than that of your virtues."

The sheiks talked together for a long time, and meanwhile the flame of
passion which had been kindled in the soul of the two heroes, Cais and
Hadifah, became quenched. Hadifah withdrew from the fight, and it was
agreed that Cais should pay as the price of Abou-Firacah's blood a
quantity of cattle and a string of camels. The sheiks did not wish even
then to quit the field of battle until Cais and Hadifah embraced each
other and had agreed to all the arrangements. Antar was crimson with
rage. "O King Cais," he exclaimed, "what have you done? What! while our
swords flash in our hands shall the tribe of Fazarah exact a price for
the blood of its dead? And we never be able to obtain retaliation
excepting with our spear points! The blood of our dead is shed, and
shall we not avenge it?" Hadifah was beside himself on hearing these
words. "And you, vile bastard," said Antar to him, "you son of a vile
mother, must your honor be purchased at the expense of our disgrace? But
for the presence of these noble sheiks I would annihilate you and all
your people this very instant."

Then Hadifah's indignation and anger overleaped all bounds. "By the
faith of an Arab," he said to the sheiks, "I wish to hear no talk of
peace at the moment that the enemy is ready to spear me." "Do not talk
in that way, dear son of my mother," said Haml to his brother. "Do not
dart away on the path of imprudence; abandon these gloomy resolutions.
Remain in peace with the allies of the Absians, for they are shining
stars: the burnished sun that guides all Arabs who love glory. It was
but the other day that you wronged them by causing the horse Dahir to be
wounded, and thus erred from the path of justice. As for your son, he
was justly slain, for you had sent him to demand something that was not
due you. After all, nothing is so proper as to make peace, for he who
would seek and stir up war is a tyrant, and an oppressor. Accept
therefore the compensation offered you, or you are likely to call up
around us a fire which will burn us in the flames of hell." Haml
concluded with verses of the following import: "By the truth of him who
has rooted firm the mountains, without foundations, if you decline to
accept the compensation offered by the Absians, you are in the wrong.
They acknowledge Hadifah as their chief; be a chief in very deed, and be
content with the cattle and camels offered you. Dismount from the horse
of outrage, and mount it not again, for it will carry you to the sea of
grief and calamity. Hadifah, renounce like a generous man, all violence,
but particularly the idea of contending with the Absians. Make of them
and of their leader a powerful rampart against the enemies that may
attack us. Make of them friends that will remain faithful, for they are
men of the noblest intentions. Such are the Absians, and if Cais has
acted unjustly towards you, it is you who first set him the example some
days ago."

When Haml finished these verses, the chiefs of the different tribes
thanked him, and Hadifah having consented to accept the compensation
offered, all the Arabs renounced violence and war. All who carried arms
remained at home. Cais sent to Hadifah two hundred camels, six
men-slaves, ten women-slaves, and ten horses. Thus peace was
reestablished and every one rested in tranquillity throughout the land.




SELECTIONS FROM ARABIAN POETRY

[_Translation by J.D. Carlyle_]


INTRODUCTION

The essential qualities of Arabian poetry appear in the "Romance of
Antar," and the tales of the "Thousand and One Nights." For such a
blending of prose and verse is the favorite form of Arabian literature
in its highest and severest form, even in the drama. But the character
of the people is most clearly shown in the lyrical poems of the Bedouin
country. The pastoral poetry of the peninsula is so local in its
allusions that it cannot adequately be translated into English. It is in
the lyrics that we find that "touch of nature which makes the whole
world kin." The gorgeousness of Hindoo literature, with its lavish
description of jewelry and gold, precious stones and marbles, hideous
demons, and mighty gods, is not to be looked for in Arabia. There the
horizon is clear, and the plain has nothing but human occupants. The
common passions of men are the only powers at work; love, war, sorrow,
and wine, are the subjects of these little songs, some of which might
have been written by "Anacreon" Moore, and others by Catullus. The
influence of Greek poetry is indeed manifest in these light and
sometimes frivolous effusions. The sweetness and grace which distinguish
some are only equalled by the wit of others. For wit is the prevailing
characteristic of Arabian poetry, which is attractive for its
cleverness, its brightness, the alternate smiles and tears which shine
through it, and make the present selections so refreshing and
interesting a revelation of the national heart and intellect.

I use the word refreshing, because some of the imagery of these lyrics
is new to me, and quite unparalleled in European literature. What can
be more novel, and at the same time more charming than the following
simile, with which a short elegy concludes:--

  "But though in dust thy relics lie,
  Thy virtues, Mano, ne'er shall die;
  Though Nile's full stream be seen no more,
  That spread his waves from shore to shore,
  Still in the verdure of the plain
  His vivifying smiles remain."

The praise of a humble lot has been sung from Hafiz to Horace, but
never illustrated by a prettier conceit than the Arabic poet has
recourse to in this stanza:--

  "Not always wealth, not always force
    A splendid destiny commands;
  The lordly vulture gnaws the corse
    That rots upon yon barren sands.

  "Nor want nor weakness still conspires
    To bind us to a sordid state;
  The fly that with a touch expires,
    Sips honey from the royal plate."

This is undoubtedly a very original way of stating the philosophic axiom
of the Augustan poet,

  "The lord of boundless revenues,
  Do not salute as happy."

I have spoken of the wit of these verses, which is certainly one of
their distinguishing qualities. It is quite Attic in its flavor and
exquisitely delicate in its combined good-humor and freedom from rancor.
An epigram, according to the old definition, should be like a bee; it
should carry the sweetness of honey, although it bears a sting at the
end. Sometimes the end has a point which does not sting, as in the
following quatrain of an Arabic poet:--

  "When I sent you my melons, you cried out with scorn,
    They ought to be heavy and wrinkled and yellow;
  When I offered myself, whom those graces adorn,
    You flouted, and called me an ugly old fellow."

Martial himself could not have excelled the wit of an epigram addressed
to a very little man who wore a very big beard, which thus concludes:--

  "Surely thou cherishest thy beard
  In hope to hide thyself behind it."

To study a literature like that of the Arabians, even partially and in a
translation, is one of those experiences which enlarge and stimulate the
mind and expand its range of impressions with a distinctly elevating and
liberalizing effect. It has the result of genuine education, in that it
increases our capacity for sympathy for other peoples, making us better
acquainted with the language in which they reveal that common human
heart which they share with us.

E.W.




AN ELEGY[1]

  Those dear abodes which once contain'd the fair,
    Amidst Mitata's wilds I seek in vain,
  Nor towers, nor tents, nor cottages are there,
    But scatter'd ruins and a silent plain.

  The proud canals that once Rayana grac'd,
    Their course neglected and their waters gone,
  Among the level'd sands are dimly trac'd,
    Like moss-grown letters on a mouldering stone.

  Rayana say, how many a tedious year
    Its hallow'd circle o'er our heads hath roll'd,
  Since to my vows thy tender maids gave ear,
    And fondly listened to the tale I told?

  How oft, since then, the star of spring, that pours
    A never-failing stream, hath drenched thy head?
  How oft, the summer cloud in copious showers
    Or gentle drops its genial influence shed?

  How oft since then, the hovering mist of morn
    Hath caus'd thy locks with glittering gems to glow?
  How oft hath eve her dewy treasures borne
    To fall responsive to the breeze below?

  The matted thistles, bending to the gale,
    Now clothe those meadows once with verdure gay;
  Amidst the windings of that lonely vale
    The teeming antelope and ostrich stray.

  The large-eyed mother of the herd that flies
    Man's noisy haunts, here finds a sure retreat,
  Here watches o'er her young, till age supplies
    Strength to their limbs and swiftness to their feet.

  Save where the swelling stream hath swept those walls
    And giv'n their deep foundations to the light
  (As the retouching pencil that recalls
    A long-lost picture to the raptur'd sight).

  Save where the rains have wash'd the gathered sand
    And bared the scanty fragments to our view,
  (As the dust sprinkled on a punctur'd hand
    Bids the faint tints resume their azure hue).

  No mossy record of those once lov'd seats
    Points out the mansion to inquiring eyes;
  No tottering wall, in echoing sounds, repeats
    Our mournful questions and our bursting sighs.

  Yet, midst those ruin'd heaps, that naked plain,
    Can faithful memory former scenes restore,
  Recall the busy throng, the jocund train,
    And picture all that charm'd us there before.

  Ne'e shall my heart the fatal morn forget
    That bore the fair ones from these seats so dear--
  I see, I see the crowding litters yet,
    And yet the tent-poles rattle in my ear.

  I see the maids with timid steps descend,
    The streamers wave in all their painted pride,
  The floating curtains every fold extend,
    And vainly strive the charms within to hide.

  What graceful forms those envious folds enclose!
    What melting glances thro' those curtains play!
  Sure Weira's antelopes, or Tudah's roes
    Thro' yonder veils their sportive young survey!

  The band mov'd on--to trace their steps I strove,
    I saw them urge the camel's hastening flight,
  Till the white vapor, like a rising grove,
    Snatch'd them forever from my aching sight.

  Nor since that morn have I Nawara seen,
    The bands are burst which held us once so fast,
  Memory but tells me that such things have been,
    And sad Reflection adds, that they are past.

_Lebid Ben Rabiat Alamary_.

 [1] The author of this poem was a native of Yemen. He was contemporary
     with Mohammed and was already celebrated as a poet when the prophet
     began to promulgate his doctrines. Lebid embraced Islamism and was
     one of the most aggressive helpers in its establishment. He fixed
     his abode in the city of Cufa, where he died at a very advanced age.
     This elegy, as is evident, was written previous to Lebid's conversion
     to Islamism. Its subject is one that must be ever interesting to
     the feeling mind--the return of a person after a long absence to
     the place of his birth--in fact it is the Arabian "Deserted Village."


THE TOMB OF MANO

  Friends of my heart, who share my sighs!
  Go seek the turf where Mano lies,
  And woo the dewy clouds of spring,
  To sweep it with prolific wing.

  Within that cell, beneath that heap,
  Friendship and Truth and Honor sleep,
  Beneficence, that used to clasp
  The world within her ample grasp.

  There rests entomb'd--of thought bereft--
  For were one conscious atom left
  New bliss, new kindness to display,
  'Twould burst the grave, and seek the day.

  But tho' in dust thy relics lie,
  Thy virtues, Mano, ne'er shall die;
  Tho' Nile's full stream be seen no more,
  That spread his waves from shore to shore,
  Still in the verdure of the plain
  His vivifying smiles remain.

_Hassan Alasady_.


TOMB OF SAYID[2]

  Blest are the tenants of the tomb!
    With envy I their lot survey!
  For Sayid shares the solemn gloom,
    And mingles with their mouldering clay.

  Dear youth! I'm doom'd thy loss to mourn
    When gathering ills around combine;
  And whither now shall Malec turn,
    Where look for any help but thine?

  At this dread moment when the foe
    My life with rage insatiate seeks,
  In vain I strive to ward the blow,
    My buckler falls, my sabre breaks.

  Upon thy grassy tomb I knelt,
    And sought from pain a short relief--
  Th' attempt was vain--I only felt
    Intenser pangs and livelier grief.

  The bud of woe no more represt,
    Fed by the tears that drench'd it there,
  Shot forth and fill'd my laboring breast
    Soon to expand and shed despair.

  But tho' of Sayid I'm bereft,
    From whom the stream of bounty came,
  Sayid a nobler meed has left--
    Th' exhaustless heritage of fame.

  Tho' mute the lips on which I hung,
    Their silence speaks more loud to me
  Than any voice from mortal tongue,
    "What Sayid was let Malec be."

_Abd Almalec Alharithy_.

 [2] Abd Almalec was a native of Arabia Felix. The exact period when
     he flourished is unknown, but as this production is taken from the
     Hamasa it is most probable that he was anterior to Mohammedanism.


THE DEATH OF HIS MISTRESS[3]

  Dost thou wonder that I flew
  Charm'd to meet my Leila's view?
  Dost thou wonder that I hung
  Raptur'd on my Leila's tongue?
  If her ghost's funereal screech
  Thro' the earth my grave should reach,
  On that voice I lov'd so well
  My transported ghost would dwell:--
  If in death I can descry
  Where my Leila's relics lie,
  Saher's dust will flee away,
  There to join his Leila's clay.

_Abu Saher Alhedily_.

 [3] The sentiment contained in this production determines its
     antiquity. It was the opinion of the Pagan Arabs that upon the
     death of any person a bird, by them called Manah, issued from his
     brain, which haunted the sepulchre of the deceased, uttering a
     lamentable scream.


ON AVARICE[4]

  How frail are riches and their joys?
  Morn builds the heap which eve destroys;
  Yet can they have one sure delight--
  The thought that we've employed them right.

  What bliss can wealth afford to me
  When life's last solemn hour I see,
  When Mavia's sympathizing sighs
  Will but augment my agonies?

  Can hoarded gold dispel the gloom
  That death must shed around his tomb?
  Or cheer the ghost which hovers there,
  And fills with shrieks the desert air?

  What boots it, Mavia, in the grave,
  Whether I lov'd to waste or save?
  The hand that millions now can grasp,
  In death no more than mine shall clasp.

  Were I ambitious to behold
  Increasing stores of treasured gold,
  Each tribe that roves the desert knows
  I might be wealthy if I chose:--

  But other joys can gold impart,
  Far other wishes warm my heart--
  Ne'er may I strive to swell the heap,
  Till want and woe have ceas'd to weep.

  With brow unalter'd I can see
  The hour of wealth or poverty:
  I've drunk from both the cups of fate,
  Nor this could sink, nor that elate.

  With fortune blest, I ne'er was found
  To look with scorn on those around;
  Nor for the loss of paltry ore,
  Shall Hatem seem to Hatem poor.

_Hatem Tai_.

 [4] Hatem Tai was an Arabian chief, who lived a short time prior to
     the promulgation of Mohammedanism. He has been so much celebrated
     through the East for his generosity that even to this day the
     greatest encomium which can be given to a generous man is to say
     that he is as liberal as Hatem. Hatem was also a poet; but his
     talents were principally exerted in recommending his favorite
     virtue.


THE BATTLE OF SABLA[5]

  Sabla, them saw'st th' exulting foe
    In fancied triumphs crown'd;
  Thou heard'st their frantic females throw
    These galling taunts around:--

  "Make now your choice--the terms we give,
    Desponding victims, hear;
  These fetters on your hands receive,
    Or in your hearts the spear."

  "And is the conflict o'er," we cried,
    "And lie we at your feet?
  And dare you vauntingly decide
    The fortune we must meet?

  "A brighter day we soon shall see,
    Tho' now the prospect lowers,
  And conquest, peace, and liberty
    Shall gild our future hours."

  The foe advanc'd:--in firm array
    We rush'd o'er Sabla's sands,
  And the red sabre mark'd our way
    Amidst their yielding bands.

  Then, as they writh'd in death's cold grasp,
    We cried, "Our choice is made,
  These hands the sabre's hilt shall clasp,
    Your hearts shall have the blade."

_Jaafer Ben Alba_.

 [5] This poem and the one following it are both taken from the Hamasa
     and afford curious instances of the animosity which prevailed
     amongst the several Arabian clans, and of the rancor with which
     they pursued each other, when once at variance.


VERSES TO MY ENEMIES

  Why thus to passion give the rein?
    Why seek your kindred tribe to wrong?
  Why strive to drag to light again
    The fatal feud entomb'd so long?

  Think not, if fury ye display,
    But equal fury we can deal;
  Hope not, if wrong'd, but we repay
    Revenge for every wrong we feel.

  Why thus to passion give the rein?
    Why seek the robe of peace to tear?
  Rash youths desist, your course restrain,
    Or dread the wrath ye blindly dare.

  Yet friendship we not ask from foes,
    Nor favor hope from you to prove,
  We lov'd you not, great Allah knows,
    Nor blam'd you that ye could not love.

  To each are different feelings given,
    This slights, and that regards his brother;
  'Tis ours to live--thanks to kind heav'n--
    Hating and hated by each other.

_Alfadhel Ibn Alabas_.


ON HIS FRIENDS[6]

  With conscious pride I view the band
  Of faithful friends that round me stand,
  With pride exult that I alone
  Can join these scatter'd gems in one:--
  For they're a wreath of pearls, and I
  The silken cord on which they lie.

  'Tis mine their inmost souls to see,
  Unlock'd is every heart to me,
  To me they cling, on me they rest,
  And I've a place in every breast:--
  For they're a wreath of pearls, and I
  The silken cord on which they lie.

_Meskin Aldaramy_.

 [6] These lines are also from the Hamasa.


ON TEMPER[7]

  Yes, Leila, I swore by the fire of thine eyes,
    I ne'er could a sweetness unvaried endure;
  The bubbles of spirit, that sparkling arise,
    Forbid life to stagnate and render it pure.

  But yet, my dear maid, tho' thy spirit's my pride,
    I'd wish for some sweetness to temper the bowl;
  If life be ne'er suffer'd to rest or subside,
    It may not be flat, but I fear 'twill be foul.

_Nabegat Beni Jaid_.

 [7] There have been several Arabian poets of the name of Nabegat. The
     author of these verses was descended from the family of Jaid. As
     he died in the fortieth year of the Hegira, aged one hundred and
     twenty, he must have been fourscore at the promulgation of Islamism;
     he, however, declared himself an early convert to the new faith.


THE SONG OF MAISUNA[8]

  The russet suit of camel's hair,
    With spirits light, and eye serene,
  Is dearer to my bosom far
    Than all the trappings of a queen.

  The humble tent and murmuring breeze
    That whistles thro' its fluttering wall,
  My unaspiring fancy please
    Better than towers and splendid halls.

  Th' attendant colts that bounding fly
    And frolic by the litter's side,
  Are dearer in Maisuna's eye
    Than gorgeous mules in all their pride.

  The watch-dog's voice that bays whene'er
    A stranger seeks his master's cot,
  Sounds sweeter in Maisuna's ear
    Than yonder trumpet's long-drawn note.

  The rustic youth unspoilt by art,
    Son of my kindred, poor but free,
  Will ever to Maisuna's heart
    Be dearer, pamper'd fool, than thee.

 [8] Maisuma was a daughter of the tribe of Calab; a tribe, according
     to Abulfeda, remarkable both for the purity of dialect spoken in
     it, and for the number of poets it had produced. She was married,
     whilst very young, to the Caliph Mowiah. But this exalted situation
     by no means suited the disposition of Maisuna, and amidst all the
     pomp and splendor of Damascus, she languished for the simple
     pleasures of her native desert.


TO MY FATHER[9]

  Must then my failings from the shaft
    Of anger ne'er escape?
  And dost thou storm because I've quaff'd
    The water of the grape?

  That I can thus from wine be driv'n
    Thou surely ne'er canst think--
  Another reason thou hast giv'n
    Why I resolve to drink.

  'Twas sweet the flowing cup to seize,
    'Tis sweet thy rage to see;
  And first I drink myself to please;
    And next--to anger thee.

_Yezid_.

 [9] Yezid succeeded Mowiah in the Caliphate A.H. 60; and in most
     respects showed himself to be of a very different disposition from
     his predecessor. He was naturally cruel, avaricious, and debauched;
     but instead of concealing his vices from the eyes of his subjects,
     he seemed to make a parade of those actions which he knew no good
     Mussulman could look upon without horror; he drank wine in public,
     he caressed his dogs, and was waited upon by his eunuchs in sight
     of the whole court.


ON FATALISM[10]

  Not always wealth, not always force
    A splendid destiny commands;
  The lordly vulture gnaws the corse
    That rots upon yon barren sands.

  Nor want, nor weakness still conspires
    To bind us to a sordid state;
  The fly that with a touch expires
    Sips honey from the royal plate.

_Imam Shafay Mohammed Ben Idris_.

[10] Shafay, the founder of one of the four orthodox sects into
     which the Mohammedans are divided, was a disciple of Malek Ben
     Ans, and master to Ahmed Ebn Hanbal; each of whom, like himself,
     founded a sect which is still denominated from the name of its
     author. The fourth sect is that of Abou Hanifah. This differs
     in tenets considerably from the three others, for whilst the
     Malekites, the Shafaites, and the Hanbalites are invariably
     bigoted to tradition in their interpretations of the Koran, the
     Hanifites consider themselves as at liberty in any difficulty to
     make use of their own reason.


TO THE CALIPH HARUN-AL-RASHID[11]

  Religion's gems can ne'er adorn
  The flimsy robe by pleasure worn;
  Its feeble texture soon would tear,
  And give those jewels to the air.

  Thrice happy they who seek th' abode
  Of peace and pleasure, in their God!
  Who spurn the world, its joys despise,
  And grasp at bliss beyond the skies.

_Ibrahim Ben Adham_.

[11] The author of this poem was a hermit of Syria, equally celebrated
     for his talents and piety. He was son to a prince of Khorasan, and
     born about the ninety-seventh year of the Hegira. This poem was
     addressed to the Caliph upon his undertaking a pilgrimage to Mecca.


LINES TO HARUN AND YAHIA[12]

  Th' affrighted sun ere while he fled,
  And hid his radiant face in night;
  A cheerless gloom the world overspread--
  But Harun came, and all was bright.

  Again the sun shoots forth his rays,
  Nature is deck'd in beauty's robe--
  For mighty Harun's sceptre sways,
  And Yahia's arm sustains the globe.

_Isaac Almousely_.

[12] Isaac Almousely is considered by the Orientals as the most
     celebrated musician that ever flourished in the world. He was born
     in Persia, but having resided almost entirely at Mousel, he is
     generally supposed to have been a native of that place.


THE RUIN OF BARMECIDES[13]

  No, Barmec! Time hath never shown
    So sad a change of wayward fate;
  Nor sorrowing mortals ever known
    A grief so true, a loss so great.

  Spouse of the world! Thy soothing breast
    Did balm to every woe afford;
  And now no more by thee caress'd,
    The widow'd world bewails her Lord.

[13] The family of Barmec was one of the most illustrious in the
     East. They were descended from the ancient kings of Persia, and
     possessed immense property in various countries; they derived still
     more consequence from the favor which they enjoyed at the court of
     Bagdad, where, for many years, they filled the highest offices of
     the state with universal approbation.


TO TAHER BEN HOSIEN[14]

  A pair of right hands and a single dim eye
  Must form not a man, but a monster, they cry:--
  Change a hand to an eye, good Taher, if you can,
  And a monster perhaps may be chang'd to man.

[14] Taher Ben Hosien was ambidexter and one-eyed and, strange to say,
     the most celebrated general of his time.


THE ADIEU[15]

  The boatmen shout, "Tis time to part,
    No longer we can stay"--
  'Twas then Maimnna taught my heart
    How much a glance could say.

  With trembling steps to me she came;
    "Farewell," she would have cried,
  But ere her lips the word could frame
    In half-form'd sounds it died.

  Then bending down with looks of love,
    Her arms she round me flung,
  And, as the gale hangs on the grove,
    Upon my breast she hung.

  My willing arms embraced the maid,
    My heart with raptures beat;
  While she but wept the more and said,
    "Would we had never met!"

_Abou Mohammed_.

[15] This was sung before the Caliph Wathek, by Abou Mohammed, a
     musician of Bagdad, as a specimen of his musical talents; and such
     were its effects upon the Caliph, that he immediately testified his
     approbation of the performance by throwing his own robe over the
     shoulders of Abou Mohammed, and ordering him a present of an hundred
     thousand dirhems.


TO MY MISTRESS[16]

  Ungenerous and mistaken maid,
    To scorn me thus because I'm poor!
  Canst thou a liberal hand upbraid
    For dealing round some worthless ore?

  To spare's the wish of little souls,
    The great but gather to bestow;
  Yon current down the mountain rolls,
    And stagnates in the swamp below.

_Abou Teman Habib_.

[16] Abou Teman is considered the most excellent of all the Arabian
     poets. He was born near Damascus A.H. 190, and educated in Egypt;
     but the principal part of his life was spent at Bagdad, under the
     patronage of the Abasside Caliphs.


TO A FEMALE CUP-BEARER[17]

  Come, Leila, fill the goblet up,
    Reach round the rosy wine,
  Think not that we will take the cup
    From any hand but thine.

  A draught like this 'twere vain to seek,
    No grape can such supply;
  It steals its tint from Leila's cheek,
    Its brightness from her eye.

_Abd Alsalam Ben Ragban_.

[17] Abd Alsalam was a poet more remarkable for abilities than morality.
     We may form an idea of the nature of his compositions from the
     nickname he acquired amongst his contemporaries of Cock of the
     Evil Genii. He died in the 236th year of the Hegira, aged near
     eighty.


MASHDUD ON THE MONKS OF KHABBET[18]

  Tenants of yon hallow'd fane!
    Let me your devotions share,
  There increasing raptures reign--
    None are ever sober there.

  Crowded gardens, festive bowers
    Ne'er shall claim a thought of mine;
  You can give in Khabbet's towers--
    Purer joys and brighter wine.

  Tho' your pallid faces prove
    How you nightly vigils keep,
  'Tis but that you ever love
    Flowing goblets more than sleep.

  Tho' your eye-balls dim and sunk
    Stream in penitential guise,
  'Tis but that the wine you've drunk
    Bubbles over from your eyes.

[18] The three following songs were written by Mashdud, Rakeek, and
     Rais, three of the most celebrated improvisators in Bagdad, at an
     entertainment given by Abou Isy.


RAKEEK TO HIS FEMALE COMPANIONS

  Tho' the peevish tongues upbraid,
    Tho' the brows of wisdom scowl,
  Fair ones here on roses laid,
    Careless will we quaff the bowl.

  Let the cup, with nectar crown'd,
    Thro' the grove its beams display,
  It can shed a lustre round,
    Brighter than the torch of day.

  Let it pass from hand to hand,
    Circling still with ceaseless flight,
  Till the streaks of gray expand
    O'er the fleeting robe of night.

  As night flits, she does but cry,
    "Seize the moments that remain"--
  Thus our joys with yours shall vie,
    Tenants of yon hallow'd fane!


DIALOGUE BY RAIS

  _Rais_:

  Maid of sorrow, tell us why
    Sad and drooping hangs thy head?
  Is it grief that bids thee sigh?
    Is it sleep that flies thy bed?

  _Lady_:

  Ah! I mourn no fancied wound,
    Pangs too true this heart have wrung,
  Since the snakes which curl around
    Selim's brows my bosom stung.

  Destin'd now to keener woes,
    I must see the youth depart,
  He must go, and as he goes
    Rend at once my bursting heart.

  Slumber may desert my bed,
    Tis not slumber's charms I seek--
  'Tis the robe of beauty spread
    O'er my Selim's rosy cheek.


TO A LADY WEEPING[19]

  When I beheld thy blue eyes shine
    Thro' the bright drop that pity drew,
  I saw beneath those tears of thine
    A blue-ey'd violet bath'd in dew.

  The violet ever scents the gale,
    Its hues adorn the fairest wreath,
  But sweetest thro' a dewy veil
    Its colors glow, its odors breathe.

  And thus thy charms in brightness rise--
    When wit and pleasure round thee play,
  When mirth sits smiling in thine eyes,
    Who but admires their sprightly ray?
  But when thro' pity's flood they gleam,
    Who but must love their soften'd beam?

_Ebn Alrumi_.

[19] Ebn Alrumi is reckoned by the Arabian writers as one of the most
     excellent of all their poets. He was by birth a Syrian, and passed
     the greatest part of his time at Emessa, where he died A.H. 283.


ON A VALETUDINARIAN

  So careful is Isa, and anxious to last,
    So afraid of himself is he grown,
  He swears thro' two nostrils the breath goes too fast,
    And he's trying to breathe thro' but one.

_Ebn Alrumi_.


ON A MISER

  "Hang her, a thoughtless, wasteful fool,
    She scatters corn where'er she goes"--
  Quoth Hassan, angry at his mule,
    That dropt a dinner to the crows.

_Ebn Alrumi_.


TO CASSIM OBIO ALLAH[20]

  Poor Cassim! thou art doom'd to mourn
      By destiny's decree;
  Whatever happens it must turn
      To misery for thee.

  Two sons hadst thou, the one thy pride,
      The other was thy pest;
  Ah, why did cruel death decide
      To snatch away the best?

  No wonder thou shouldst droop with woe,
      Of such a child bereft;
  But now thy tears must doubly flow,
      For, ah! the other's left.

_Aly Ben Ahmed Ben Mansour_.

[20] Aly Ben Ahmed distinguished himself in prose as well as poetry,
     and an historical work of considerable reputation, of which he was
     the author, is still extant. But he principally excelled in satire,
     and so fond was he of indulging this dangerous talent that no one
     escaped his lash; if he could only bring out a sarcasm, it was
     matter of indifference to him whether an enemy or a brother smarted
     under its severity. He died at Bagdad A.H. 302.


A FRIEND'S BIRTHDAY[21]

  When born, in tears we saw thee drown'd,
  While thine assembled friends around,
    With smiles their joy confest;
  So live, that at thy parting hour,
  They may the flood of sorrow pour,
    And thou in smiles be drest!

[21] The thought contained in these lines, appears so natural and so
     obvious, that one wonders it did not occur to all who have attempted
     to write upon a birthday or a death.


TO A CAT

  Poor Puss is gone! 'Tis fate's decree--
    Yet I must still her loss deplore,
  For dearer than a child was she,
    And ne'er shall I behold her more.

  With many a sad presaging tear
    This morn I saw her steal away,
  While she went on without a fear
    Except that she should miss her prey.

  I saw her to the dove-house climb,
    With cautious feet and slow she stept
  Resolv'd to balance loss of time
    By eating faster than she crept.

  Her subtle foes were on the watch,
    And mark'd her course, with fury fraught,
  And while she hoped the birds to catch,
    An arrow's point the huntress caught.

  In fancy she had got them all,
    And drunk their blood and suck'd their breath;
  Alas! she only got a fall,
    And only drank the draught of death.

  Why, why was pigeons' flesh so nice,
    That thoughtless cats should love it thus?
  Hadst thou but liv'd on rats and mice,
    Thou hadst been living still, poor Puss.

  Curst be the taste, howe'er refined,
    That prompts us for such joys to wish,
  And curst the dainty where we find
    Destruction lurking in the dish.

_Ibn Alalaf Alnaharwany_.


AN EPIGRAM UPON EBN NAPHTA-WAH[22]

  By the former with ruin and death we are curst,
  In the latter we grieve for the ills of the first;
  And as for the whole, where together they meet,
  It's a drunkard, a liar, a thief, and a cheat.

_Mohammed Ben Zeid Almotakalam_.

[22] Mohammed Ben Arfa, here called Naphta-Wah, was descended from a
     noble family in Khorasan. He applied himself to study with
     indefatigable perseverance, and was a very voluminous author in
     several branches of literature, but he is chiefly distinguished as
     a grammarian. He died in the year of the Hegira 323.


FIRE[23]

_A Riddle_.

  The loftiest cedars I can eat,
    Yet neither paunch nor mouth have I,
  I storm whene'er you give me meat,
    Whene'er you give me drink, I die.

[23] This composition seems a fit supplement to the preceding one;
     notwithstanding its absurdity, however. It is inserted merely to
     show that this mode of trifling was not unknown to the Orientals.
     It is taken from the Mostatraf, where a great number of similar
     productions on various subjects are preserved.


TO A LADY BLUSHING[24]

  Leila, whene'er I gaze on thee
    My altered cheek turns pale,
  While upon thine, sweet maid, I see
    A deep'ning blush prevail.

  Leila, shall I the cause impart
    Why such a change takes place?
  The crimson stream deserts my heart,
    To mantle on thy face.

_The Caliph Radhi Billah_.

[24] Radhi Billah, son to Moctader, was the twentieth Caliph of the
     house of Abbas, and the last of these princes who possessed any
     substantial power.


ON THE VICISSITUDES OF LIFE

  Mortal joys, however pure,
    Soon their turbid source betray;
  Mortal bliss, however sure,
    Soon must totter and decay.

  Ye who now, with footsteps keen,
    Range through hope's delusive field,
  Tell us what the smiling scene
    To your ardent grasp can yield?

  Other youths have oft before
    Deem'd their joys would never fade,
  Till themselves were seen no more
    Swept into oblivion's shade.

  Who, with health and pleasure gay,
    E'er his fragile state could know,
  Were not age and pain to say
    Man is but the child of woe?

_The Caliph Radhi Billah_.


TO A DOVE

  The Dove to ease an aching breast,
    In piteous murmurs vents her cares;
  Like me she sorrows, for opprest,
    Like me, a load of grief she bears.

  Her plaints are heard in every wood,
    While I would fain conceal my woes;
  But vain's my wish, the briny flood,
    The more I strive, the faster flows.

  Sure, gentle Bird, my drooping heart
    Divides the pangs of love with thine,
  And plaintive murm'rings are thy part,
    And silent grief and tears are mine.

_Serage Alwarak_.


ON A THUNDER STORM

  Bright smil'd the morn, till o'er its head
  The clouds in thicken'd foldings spread
      A robe of sable hue;
  Then, gathering round day's golden king,
  They stretch'd their wide o'ershadowing wing,
      And hid him from our view.

  The rain his absent beams deplor'd,
  And, soften'd into weeping, pour'd
      Its tears in many a flood;
  The lightning laughed with horrid glare;
  The thunder growl'd, in rage; the air
      In silent sorrow stood.

_Ibrahim Ben Khiret Abou Isaac_.


TO MY FAVORITE MISTRESS

  I saw their jealous eyeballs roll,
    I saw them mark each glance of mine,
  I saw thy terrors, and my soul
    Shar'd ev'ry pang that tortur'd thine.

  In vain to wean my constant heart,
    Or quench my glowing flame, they strove;
  Each deep-laid scheme, each envious art,
    But wak'd my fears for her I love.

  'Twas this compelled the stern decree,
    That forc'd thee to those distant towers,
  And left me nought but love for thee,
    To cheer my solitary hours.

  Yet let not Abla sink deprest,
    Nor separation's pangs deplore;
  We meet not--'tis to meet more blest;
    We parted--'tis to part no more.

_Saif Addaulet, Sultan of Aleppe_.


CRUCIFIXION OF EBN BAKIAH[25]

  Whatever thy fate, in life and death,
    Thou'rt doom'd above us still to rise,
  Whilst at a distance far beneath
    We view thee with admiring eyes.

  The gazing crowds still round thee throng,
    Still to thy well-known voice repair,
  As when erewhile thy hallow'd tongue
    Pour'd in the Mosque the solemn prayer.

  Still, generous Vizir, we survey
    Thine arms extended o'er our head,
  As lately, in the festive day,
    When they were stretch'd thy gifts to shed.

  Earth's narrow boundaries strove in vain
    To limit thy aspiring mind,
  And now we see thy dust disdain
    Within her breast to be confin'd.

  The earth's too small for one so great,
    Another mansion thou shalt have--
  The clouds shall be thy winding sheet,
    The spacious vault of heaven thy grave.

_Abou Hassan Alanbary_.

[25] Ebn Bakiah was vizir to Azzad Addaulet or Bachteir, Emir Alomra
     of Bagdad, under the Caliphs Moti Lillah and Tay Lillah; but Azzad
     Addaulet being deprived of his office, and driven from Bagdad by
     Adhed Addaulet, Sultan of Persia, Ebn Bakiah was seized and
     crucified at the gates of the city, by order of the conqueror.


CAPRICES OF FORTUNE[26]

  Why should I blush that Fortune's frown
    Dooms me life's humble paths to tread?
  To live unheeded, and unknown?
    To sink forgotten to the dead?

  'Tis not the good, the wise, the brave,
    That surest shine, or highest rise;
  The feather sports upon the wave,
    The pearl in ocean's cavern lies.

  Each lesser star that studs the sphere
    Sparkles with undiminish'd light:
  Dark and eclips'd alone appear
    The lord of day, the queen of night.

_Shems Almaali Cabus_.

[26] History can show few princes so amiable and few so unfortunate
     as Shems Almaali Cabus. He is described as possessed of almost every
     virtue and every accomplishment: his piety, justice, generosity, and
     humanity, are universally celebrated; nor was he less conspicuous
     for intellectual powers; his genius was at once penetrating, solid,
     and brilliant, and he distinguished himself equally as an orator, a
     philosopher, and a poet.


ON LIFE

  Like sheep, we're doom'd to travel o'er
    The fated track to all assign'd,
  These follow those that went before,
    And leave the world to those behind.

  As the flock seeks the pasturing shade,
    Man presses to the future day,
  While death, amidst the tufted glade,
    Like the dun robber,[A] waits his prey.

[A] The wolf.


EXTEMPORE VERSES[27]

  Lowering as Barkaidy's face
    The wintry night came in,
  Cold as the music of his bass,
    And lengthen'd as his chin.

  Sleep from my aching eyes had fled,
    And kept as far apart,
  As sense from Ebn Fahdi's head,
    Or virtue from his heart.

  The dubious paths my footsteps balk'd,
    I slipp'd along the sod,
  As if on Jaber's faith I'd walk'd,
    Or on his truth had trod.

  At length the rising King of day
    Burst on the gloomy wood,
  Like Carawash's eye, whose ray
    Dispenses every good.

_Ebn Alramacram_.

[27] The occasion of the following composition is thus related by
     Abulfeda. Carawash, Sultan of Mousel, being one wintry evening
     engaged in a party of pleasure along with Barkaidy, Ebn Fahdi, Abou
     Jaber, and the improvisatore poet, Ebn Alramacram, resolved to
     divert himself at the expense of his companions. He therefore
     ordered the poet to give a specimen of his talents, which at the
     same time should convey a satire upon the three courtiers, and a
     compliment to himself. Ebn Alramacram took his subject from the
     stormy appearance of the night, and immediately produced these
     verses.


ON THE DEATH OF A SON[28]

  Tyrant of man! Imperious Fate!
    I bow before thy dread decree,
  Nor hope in this uncertain state
    To find a seat secure from thee.

  Life is a dark, tumultuous stream,
    With many a care and sorrow foul,
  Yet thoughtless mortals vainly deem
    That it can yield a limpid bowl.

  Think not that stream will backward flow,
    Or cease its destin'd course to keep;
  As soon the blazing spark shall glow
    Beneath the surface of the deep.

  Believe not Fate at thy command
    Will grant a meed she never gave;
  As soon the airy tower shall stand,
    That's built upon a passing wave.

  Life is a sleep of threescore years,
    Death bids us wake and hail the light,
  And man, with all his hopes and fears,
    Is but a phantom of the night.

_Aly Ben Mohammed Altahmany_.

[28] Aly Ben Mohammed was a native of that part of Arabia called Hejaz;
     and was celebrated not only as a poet, but as a politician.


TO LEILA

  Leila, with too successful art,
    Has spread for me love's cruel snare;
  And now, when she has caught my heart,
    She laughs, and leaves it to despair.

  Thus the poor sparrow pants for breath,
    Held captive by a playful boy,
  And while it drinks the draught of death,
    The thoughtless child looks on with joy.

  Ah! were its flutt'ring pinions free,
    Soon would it bid its chains adieu,
  Or did the child its suff'rings see,
    He'd pity and relieve them too.


ON MODERATION IN OUR PLEASURES[29]

  How oft does passion's grasp destroy
    The pleasure that it strives to gain?
  How soon the thoughtless course of joy
    Is doom'd to terminate in pain?

  When prudence would thy steps delay,
    She but restrains to make thee blest;
  Whate'er from joy she lops away,
    But heightens and secures the rest.

  Wouldst thou a trembling flame expand,
    That hastens in the lamp to die?
  With careful touch, with sparing hand,
    The feeding stream of life supply.

  But if thy flask profusely sheds
    A rushing torrent o'er the blaze,
  Swift round the sinking flame it spreads,
    And kills the fire it fain would raise.

_Abou Alcassim Ebn Tabataba_.

[29] Tabataba deduced his pedigree from Ali Ben Abou Taleb, and Fatima,
     the daughter of Mohammed. He was born at Ispahan, but passed the
     principal part of his life in Egypt, where he was appointed chief
     of the sheriffs, i.e. the descendants of the Prophet, a dignity
     held in the highest veneration by every Mussulman. He died in the
     year of the Hegira 418, with the reputation of being one of the
     most excellent poets of his time.


THE VALE OF BOZAA[30]

  The intertwining boughs for thee
    Have wove, sweet dell, a verdant vest,
  And thou in turn shalt give to me
    A verdant couch upon thy breast.

  To shield me from day's fervid glare
    Thine oaks their fostering arms extend,
  As anxious o'er her infant care
    I've seen a watchful mother bend.

  A brighter cup, a sweeter draught,
    I gather from that rill of thine,
  Than maddening drunkards ever quaff'd,
    Than all the treasures of the vine.

  So smooth the pebbles on its shore,
    That not a maid can thither stray,
  But counts her strings of jewels o'er,
    And thinks the pearls have slipp'd away.

_Ahmed Ben Yousef Almenazy_.

[30] Ben Yousef for many years acted as vizir to Abou Nasser, Sultan
     of Diarbeker. His political talents are much praised, and he is
     particularly celebrated for the address he displayed while upon
     an embassy to the Greek Emperor at Constantinople. Yousef's
     poetry must be looked upon merely as a jeu d'esprit suggested
     by the beauties of the vale of Bozaa, as he passed through it.


TO ADVERSITY[31]

  Hail, chastening friend Adversity! 'Tis thine
  The mental ore to temper and refine,
  To cast in virtue's mould the yielding heart,
  And honor's polish to the mind impart.
  Without thy wakening touch, thy plastic aid,
  I'd lain the shapeless mass that nature made;
  But form'd, great artist, by thy magic hand,
  I gleam a sword to conquer and command.

_Abou Menbaa Carawash_.


[31] The life of this prince was checkered with various adventures;
     he was perpetually engaged in contests either with the neighboring
     sovereigns, or the princes of his own family. After many struggles
     he was obliged to submit to his brother, Abou Camel, who
     immediately ordered him to be seized, and conveyed to a place
     of security.


ON THE INCOMPATIBILITY OF PRIDE AND TRUE GLORY[32]

  Think not, Abdallah, pride and fame
    Can ever travel hand in hand;
  With breast oppos'd, and adverse aim,
    On the same narrow path they stand.

  Thus youth and age together meet,
    And life's divided moments share;
  This can't advance till that retreat,
    What's here increas'd, is lessen'd there.

  And thus the falling shades of night
    Still struggle with the lucid ray,
  And e'er they stretch their gloomy flight
    Must win the lengthen'd space from day.

_Abou Alola_.

[32] Abou Alola is esteemed as one of the most excellent of the
     Arabian poets. He was born blind, but this did not deter him from
     the pursuit of literature. Abou Alola died at Maara in the year
     449, aged eighty-six.


THE DEATH OF NEDHAM ALMOLK

  Thy virtues fam'd thro' every land,
    Thy spotless life, in age and youth,
  Prove thee a pearl, by nature's hand,
    Form'd out of purity and truth.

  Too long its beams of Orient light
    Upon a thankless world were shed;
  Allah has now reveng'd the slight,
    And call'd it to its native bed.

_Shebal Addaulet_.


LINES TO A LOVER

  When you told us our glances soft, timid and mild,
    Could occasion such wounds in the heart,
  Can ye wonder that yours, so ungovern'd and wild,
    Some wounds to our cheeks should impart?

  The wounds on our cheeks are but transient, I own,
    With a blush they appear and decay;
  But those on the heart, fickle youths, ye have shown
    To be even more transient than they.

_Waladata_.


VERSES TO MY DAUGHTERS[33]

  With jocund heart and cheerful brow
    I used to hail the festal morn--
  How must Mohammed greet it now?--
    A prisoner helpless and forlorn.

  While these dear maids in beauty's bloom,
    With want opprest, with rags o'erspread,
  By sordid labors at the loom
    Must earn a poor, precarious bread.

  Those feet that never touched the ground,
    Till musk or camphor strew'd the way,
  Now bare and swoll'n with many a wound.
    Must struggle thro' the miry clay.

  Those radiant cheeks are veil'd in woe,
    A shower descends from every eye,
  And not a starting tear can flow,
    That wakes not an attending sigh.

  Fortune, that whilom own'd my sway,
    And bow'd obsequious to my nod,
  Now sees me destin'd to obey,
    And bend beneath oppression's rod.

  Ye mortals with success elate,
    Who bask in hope's delusive beam,
  Attentive view Mohammed's fate,
    And own that bliss is but a dream.

_Mohammed Bed Abad_.

[33] Seville was one of those small sovereignties into which Spain
     had been divided after the extinction of the house of Ommiah. It
     did not long retain its independence, and the only prince who ever
     presided over it as a separate kingdom seems to have been Mohammed
     Ben Abad, the author of these verses. For thirty-three years he
     reigned over Seville and the neighboring districts with considerable
     reputation, but being attacked by Joseph, son to the Emperor of
     Morocco, at the head of a numerous army of Africans, was defeated,
     taken prisoner, and thrown into a dungeon, where he died in the year
     488.


SERENADE TO MY SLEEPING MISTRESS[34]

  Sure Harut's[B] potent spells were breath'd
    Upon that magic sword, thine eye;
  For if it wounds us thus while sheath'd,
    When drawn, 'tis vain its edge to fly.

  How canst thou doom me, cruel fair,
    Plung'd in the hell[C] of scorn to groan?
  No idol e'er this heart could share,
    This heart has worshipp'd thee alone.

_Aly Ben Abd_.

[34] This author was by birth an African; but having passed over to
     Spain, he was much patronized by Mohammed, Sultan of Seville. After
     the fall of his master, Ben Abd returned to Africa, and died at
     Tangier, A.H. 488.

[B] A wicked angel who is permitted to tempt mankind by teaching them
    magic; see the legend respecting him in the Koran.

[C] The poet here alludes to the punishments denounced in the Koran
    against those who worship a plurality of Gods: "their couch shall
    be in hell, and over them shall be coverings of fire."


THE INCONSISTENT[35]

  When I sent you my melons, you cried out with scorn,
    They ought to be heavy and wrinkled and yellow;
  When I offer'd myself, whom those graces adorn,
    You flouted, and call'd me an ugly old fellow.

[35] Written to a lady upon her refusal of a present of melons, and her
     rejection of the addresses of an admirer.


THE CAPTURE OF JERUSALEM[36]

  From our distended eyeballs flow
    A mingled stream of tears and blood;
  No care we feel, nor wish to know,
    But who shall pour the largest flood.

  But what defense can tears afford?
    What aid supply in this dread hour?
  When kindled by the sparkling sword
    War's raging flames the land devour.

  No more let sleep's seductive charms
    Upon your torpid souls be shed:
  A crash like this, such dire alarms,
    Might burst the slumbers of the dead.

  Think where your dear companions lie--
    Survey their fate, and hear their woes--
  How some thro' trackless deserts fly,
    Some in the vulture's maw repose;

  While some more wretched still, must bear
    The tauntings of a Christian's tongue--
  Hear this--and blush ye not to wear
    The silken robe of peace so long?

  Remember what ensanguin'd showers
    The Syrian plains with crimson dyed,
  And think how many blooming flowers
    In Syrian forts their beauties hide.

  Arabian youths! In such a cause
    Can ye the voice of glory slight?
  Warriors of Persia! Can ye pause,
    Or fear to mingle in the fight?

  If neither piety nor shame
    Your breasts can warm, your souls can move,
  Let emulation's bursting flame
    Wake you to vengeance and to love.

_Almodhafer Alabiwerdy_.

[36] The capture of Jerusalem took place in the 492d year of the Hegira,
     A.D. 1099. Alabiwerdy, who wrote these verses, was a native of
     Khorasan; he died A.H. 507.


TO A LADY

  No, Abla, no--when Selim tells
  Of many an unknown grace that dwells
      In Abla's face and mien,
  When he describes the sense refin'd,
  That lights thine eye and fills thy mind,
      By thee alone unseen.

  Tis not that drunk with love he sees
  Ideal charms, which only please
      Thro' passion's partial veil,
  'Tis not that flattery's glozing tongue
  Hath basely fram'd an idle song,
      But truth that breath'd the tale.

  Thine eyes unaided ne'er could trace
  Each opening charm, each varied grace,
      That round thy person plays;
  Some must remain conceal'd from thee,
  For Selim's watchful eye to see,
      For Selim's tongue to praise.

  One polish'd mirror can declare
  That eye so bright, that face so fair,
      That cheek which shames the rose;
  But how thy mantle waves behind,
  How float thy tresses on the wind,
      Another only shows.


AN EPIGRAM[37]

  Whoever has recourse to thee
    Can hope for health no more,
  He's launched into perdition's sea,
    A sea without a shore.

  Where'er admission thou canst gain,
    Where'er thy phiz can pierce,
  At once the Doctor they retain,
    The mourners and the hearse.

_George_.

[37] Written to Abou Alchair Selamu, an Egyptian physician. The author
     was a physician of Antioch.


ON A LITTLE MAN WITH A VERY LARGE BEARD

  How can thy chin that burden bear?
    Is it all gravity to shock?
  Is it to make the people stare?
    And be thyself a laughing stock?

  When I behold thy little feet
     After thy beard obsequious run,
  I always fancy that I meet
    Some father followed by his son.

  A man like thee scarce e'er appear'd--
    A beard like thine--where shall we find it?
  Surely thou cherishest thy beard
    In hope to hide thyself behind it.

_Isaai, Ben Khalif_.


LAMIAT ALAJEM[38]

  No kind supporting hand I meet,
  But Fortitude shall stay my feet;
  No borrow'd splendors round me shine,
  But Virtue's lustre all is mine;
  A Fame unsullied still I boast,
  Obscur'd, conceal'd, but never lost--
  The same bright orb that led the day
  Pours from the West his mellow'd ray.

  Zaura, farewell! No more I see
  Within thy walls, a home for me;
  Deserted, spurn'd, aside I'm toss'd,
  As an old sword whose scabbard's lost:
  Around thy walls I seek in vain
  Some bosom that will soothe my pain--
  No friend is near to breathe relief,
  Or brother to partake my grief.
  For many a melancholy day
  Thro' desert vales I've wound my way;
  The faithful beast, whose back I press,
  In groans laments her lord's distress;

  In every quiv'ring of my spear
  A sympathetic sigh I hear;
  The camel bending with his load,
  And struggling thro' the thorny road,
  'Midst the fatigues that bear him down,
  In Hassan's woes forgets his own;
  Yet cruel friends my wanderings chide,
  My sufferings slight, my toils deride.

  Once wealth, I own, engrossed each thought,
  There was a moment when I sought
  The glitt'ring stores Ambition claims
  To feed the wants his fancy frames;
  But now 'tis past--the changing day
  Has snatch'd my high-built hopes away,
  And bade this wish my labors close--
  Give me not riches, but repose.
  'Tis he--that mien my friend declares,
  That stature, like the lance he bears;
  I see that breast which ne'er contain'd
  A thought by fear or folly stain'd,
  Whose powers can every change obey,
  In business grave, in trifles gay,
  And, form'd each varying taste to please,
  Can mingle dignity with ease.

  What, tho' with magic influence, sleep,
  O'er every closing eyelid creep:
  Tho' drunk with its oblivious wine
  Our comrades on their bales recline,
  My Selim's trance I sure can break--
  Selim, 'tis I, 'tis I who speak.
  Dangers on every side impend,
  And sleep'st thou, careless of thy friend?
  Thou sleep'st while every star on high,
  Beholds me with a wakeful eye--
  Thou changest, ere the changeful night
  Hath streak'd her fleeting robe with white.

  'Tis love that hurries me along--
  I'm deaf to fear's repressive song--
  The rocks of Idham I'll ascend,
  Tho' adverse darts each path defend,
  And hostile sabres glitter there,
  To guard the tresses of the fair.

  Come, Selim, let us pierce the grove,
  While night befriends, to seek my love.
  The clouds of fragrance as they rise
  Shall mark the place where Abla lies.
  Around her tent my jealous foes,
  Like lions, spread their watchful rows;
  Amidst their bands, her bow'r appears
  Embosom'd in a wood of spears--
  A wood still nourish'd by the dews,
  Which smiles, and softest looks diffuse.
  Thrice happy youths! who midst yon shades
  Sweet converse hold with Idham's maids,
  What bliss, to view them gild the hours,
  And brighten wit and fancy's powers,
  While every foible they disclose
  New transport gives, new graces shows.
  'Tis theirs to raise with conscious art
  The flames of love in every heart;
  'Tis yours to raise with festive glee
  The flames of hospitality:
  Smit by their glances lovers lie,
  And helpless sink and hopeless die;
  While slain by you the stately steed
  To crown the feast, is doom'd to bleed,
  To crown the feast, where copious flows
  The sparkling juice that soothes your woes,
  That lulls each care and heals each wound,
  As the enlivening bowl goes round.
  Amidst those vales my eager feet
  Shall trace my Abla's dear retreat,
  A gale of health may hover there,
  To breathe some solace to my care.
  I fear not love--I bless the dart
  Sent in a glance to pierce the heart:
  With willing breast the sword I hail
  That wounds me thro' an half-clos'd veil:
  Tho' lions howling round the shade,
  My footsteps haunt, my walks invade,
  No fears shall drive me from the grove,
  If Abla listen to my love.

  Ah, Selim! shall the spells of ease
  Thy friendship chain, thine ardor freeze!
  Wilt thou enchanted thus, decline
  Each gen'rous thought, each bold design?
  Then far from men some cell prepare;
  Or build a mansion in the air--
  But yield to us, ambition's tide,
  Who fearless on its waves can ride;
  Enough for thee if thou receive
  The scattered spray the billows leave.

  Contempt and want the wretch await
  Who slumbers in an abject state--
  'Midst rushing crowds, by toil and pain
  The meed of Honor we must gain;
  At Honor's call, the camel hastes
  Thro' trackless wilds and dreary wastes,
  Till in the glorious race she find
  The fleetest coursers left behind:
  By toils like these alone, he cries,
  Th' adventurous youths to greatness rise;
  If bloated indolence were fame,
  And pompous ease our noblest aim,
  The orb that regulates the day
  Would ne'er from Aries' mansion stray.

  I've bent at Fortune's shrine too long--
  Too oft she heard my suppliant tongue--
  Too oft has mock'd my idle prayers,
  While fools and knaves engross'd her cares,
  Awake for them, asleep to me,
  Heedless of worth she scorn'd each plea.
  Ah! had her eyes, more just survey'd
  The diff'rent claims which each display'd,
  Those eyes from partial fondness free
  Had slept to them, and wak'd for me.

  But, 'midst my sorrows and my toils,
  Hope ever sooth'd my breast with smiles;
  Her hand remov'd each gathering ill,
  And oped life's closing prospects still.
  Yet spite of all her friendly art
  The specious scene ne'er gain'd my heart;
  I lov'd it not altho' the day
  Met my approach, and cheer'd my way;
  I loath it now the hours retreat,
  And fly me with reverted feet.

  My soul from every tarnish free
  May boldly vaunt her purity,
  But ah, how keen, however bright,
  The sabre glitter to the sight,
  Its splendor's lost, its polish vain,
  Till some bold hand the steel sustain.

  Why have my days been stretch'd by fate,
  To see the vile and vicious great--
  While I, who led the race so long,
  Am last and meanest of the throng?
  Ah, why has death so long delay'd
  To wrap me in his friendly shade,
  Left me to wander thus alone,
  When all my heart held dear is gone!

  But let me check these fretful sighs--
  Well may the base above me rise,
  When yonder planets as they run
  Mount in the sky above the sun.
  Resigned I bow to Fate's decree,
  Nor hope his laws will change for me;
  Each shifting scene, each varying hour,
  But proves the ruthless tyrants' power.

  But tho' with ills unnumber'd curst,
  We owe to faithless man the worst;
  For man can smile with specious art,
  And plant a dagger in the heart.
  He only's fitted for the strife
  Which fills the boist'rous paths of life,
  Who, as he treads the crowded scenes,
  Upon no kindred bosom leans.
  Too long my foolish heart had deem'd
  Mankind as virtuous as they seem'd;
  The spell is broke, their faults are bare,
  And now I see them as they are;
  Truth from each tainted breast has flown,
  And falsehood marks them all her own.
  Incredulous I listen now
  To every tongue, and every vow,
  For still there yawns a gulf between
  Those honeyed words, and what they mean;
  With honest pride elate, I see
  The sons of falsehood shrink from me,
  As from the right line's even way
  The biass'd curves deflecting stray--
  But what avails it to complain?
  With souls like theirs reproof is vain;
  If honor e'er such bosoms share
  The sabre's point must fix it there.
  But why exhaust life's rapid bowl,
  And suck the dregs with sorrow foul,
  When long ere this my youth has drain'd
  Whatever zest the cup contain'd?
  Why should we mount upon the wave,
  And ocean's yawning horrors brave,
  When we may swallow from the flask
  Whatever the wants of mortals ask?

  Contentment's realms no fears invade,
  No cares annoy, no sorrows shade,
  There plac'd secure, in peace we rest,
  Nor aught demand to make us blest.
  While pleasure's gay fantastic bower,
  The splendid pageant of an hour,
  Like yonder meteor in the skies,
  Flits with a breath no more to rise.

  As thro' life's various walks we're led,
  May prudence hover o'er our head!
  May she our words, our actions guide,
  Our faults correct, our secrets hide!

  May she, where'er our footsteps stray,
  Direct our paths, and clear the way!

  Till, every scene of tumult past,
  She bring us to repose at last,
  Teach us to love that peaceful shore,
  And roam thro' folly's wilds no more!

_Mauid Eddin Alhassan Abou Ismael Altograi_.

[38] Abou Ismael was a native of Ispahan. He devoted himself to the
     service of the Seljuk Sultans of Persia, and enjoyed the confidence
     of Malec Shah, and his son and grandson, Mohammed and Massoud, by
     the last of whom he was raised to the dignity of vizir. Massoud,
     however, was not long in a condition to afford Abou Ismael any
     protection, for, being attacked by his brother Mahmoud, he was
     defeated, and driven from Mousel, and upon the fall of his master
     the vizir was seized and thrown into prison, and at length in the
     year 515 sentenced to be put to death.


TO YOUTH

  Yes, youth, thou'rt fled, and I am left,
    Like yonder desolated bower,
  By winter's ruthless hand bereft
    Of every leaf and every flower.

  With heaving heart and streaming eyes
    I woo'd thee to prolong thy stay,
  But vain were all my tears and sighs,
    Thou only fled'st more fast away.

  Yet tho' thou fled'st away so fast,
    I can recall thee if I will;
  For I can talk of what is past,
    And while I talk, enjoy thee still.

_Ebn Alrabia_.


ON LOVE[39]

  I never knew a sprightly fair
    That was not dear to me,
  And freely I my heart could share,
    With every one I see.

  It is not this or that alone
    On whom my choice would fall,
  I do not more incline to one
    Than I incline to all.

  The circle's bounding line are they,
    Its centre is my heart,
  My ready love the equal ray
    That flows to every part.

_Abou Aly_.

[39] Abou Aly flourished in Egypt about the year 530, and was equally
     celebrated as a mathematician and as a poet.


A REMONSTRANCE WITH A DRUNKARD[40]

  As drench'd in wine, the other night,
    Zeid from the banquet sallied,
  Thus I reprov'd his drunken plight,
    Thus he my prudence rallied;

  "In bev'rage so impure and vile,
    How canst thou thus delight?"--
  "My cups," he answer'd with a smile,
    "Are generous and bright."

  "Beware those dang'rous draughts," I cried,
    "With love the goblet flows"--
  "And curst is he," the youth replied,
    "Who hatred only knows."

  "Those cups too soon with sickness fraught
    Thy stomach shall deplore"--
  "Then soon," he cried, "the noxious draught
    And all its ills are o'er."

  "Rash youth, thy guilty joys resign."
    "I will," at length he said,
  "I vow I'll bid adieu to wine
    As soon as I am dead."

_Yahia Ben Salamet_.

[40] This author was a native of Syria, and died at Miafarakir in the
     year of the Hegira 553.


VERSES[41]

  Tho' such unbounded love you swear,
    'Tis only art I see;
  Can I believe that one so fair
    Should ever dote on me?

  Say that you hate, and freely show
    That age displeases youth;
  And I may love you when I know
     That you can tell the truth.

_Caliph Almonklafi Laimrillah_.

[41] Almonklafi was the thirty-first Caliph of the house of Abbas, and
     the only one who possessed any real authority since the reign of
     Radhi. These lines were addressed to a lady who pretended a
     passion for him in his old age.


ON PROCRASTINATION[42]

  Youth is a drunken noisy hour,
    With every folly fraught;
  But man, by age's chast'ning power,
    Is sober'd into thought.

  Then we resolve our faults to shun,
    And shape our course anew;
  But ere the wise reform's begun
    Life closes on our view.

  The travellers thus who wildly roam,
    Or heedlessly delay,
  Are left, when they should reach their home,
    Benighted on the way.

_Hebat Allah Ibn Altalmith_.

[42] Ibn Altalmith died in the 560th year of the Hegira, at the advanced
     age of one hundred.


THE EARLY DEATH OF ABOU ALHASSAN ALY[43]

  Soon hast thou run the race of life,
    Nor could our tears thy speed control--
  Still in the courser's gen'rous strife
    The best will soonest reach the goal.

  As Death upon his hand turns o'er
    The different gems the world displays,
  He seizes first to swell his store
    The brightest jewel he surveys.

  Thy name, by every breath convey'd,
    Stretch'd o'er the globe its boundless flight;
  Alas! in eve the lengthening shade
    But lengthens to be lost in night!

  If gracious Allah bade thee close
    Thy youthful eyes so soon on day,
  'Tis that he readiest welcomes those
    Who love him best and best obey.

_Alnassar Ledin Allah_.

[43] Alnassar Ledin Allah was the thirty-fourth Abasside Caliph, and
     the last excepting three who enjoyed this splendid title, which
     was finally abolished by the Tartars in the year 656.


THE INTERVIEW

_A Song_

  Darkness clos'd around, loud the tempest drove,
  When thro' yonder glen I saw my lover rove,
                                            Dearest youth!
  Soon he reach'd our cot--weary, wet, and cold,
  But warmth, wine, and I, to cheer his spirits strove,
                                            Dearest youth!
  How my love, cried I, durst thou hither stray
  Thro' the gloom, nor fear the ghosts that haunt the grove?
                                            Dearest youth!
  In this heart, said he, fear no seat can find,
  When each thought is fill'd alone with thee and love,
                                            Dearest maid!




ARABIAN NIGHTS

[_Selected tales edited by Andrew Lang_]


THE SEVEN VOYAGES OF SINDBAD

In the times of the Caliph Harun-al-Rashid there lived in Bagdad a poor
porter named Hindbad, who, on a very hot day, was sent to carry a heavy
load from one end of the city to the other. Before he had accomplished
half the distance he was so tired that, finding himself in a quiet
street where the pavement was sprinkled with rose-water, and a cool
breeze was blowing, he set his burden upon the ground, and sat down to
rest in the shade of a grand house. Very soon he decided that he could
not have chosen a pleasanter place; a delicious perfume of aloes-wood
and pastilles came from the open windows and mingled with the scent of
the rose-water which steamed up from the hot pavement. Within the palace
he heard some music, as of many instruments cunningly played, and the
melodious warble of nightingales and other birds, and by this, and the
appetizing smell of many dainty dishes of which he presently became
aware, he judged that feasting and merry-making were going on. He
wondered who lived in this magnificent house which he had never seen
before, the street in which it stood being one which he seldom had
occasion to pass. To satisfy his curiosity he went up to some splendidly
dressed servants who stood at the door, and asked one of them the name
of the master of the mansion.

"What," replied he, "do you live in Bagdad, and not know that here lives
the noble Sindbad the Sailor, that famous traveller who sailed over
every sea upon which the sun shines?"

The porter, who had often heard people speak of the immense wealth of
Sindbad, could not help feeling envious of one whose lot seemed to be as
happy as his own was miserable. Casting his eyes up to the sky he
exclaimed aloud:--

"Consider, Mighty Creator of all things, the difference between
Sindbad's life and mine. Every day I suffer a thousand hardships and
misfortunes, and have hard work to get even enough bad barley bread to
keep myself and my family alive, while the lucky Sindbad spends money
right and left and lives upon the fat of the land! What has he done that
you should give him this pleasant life--what have I done to deserve so
hard a fate?"

So saying he stamped upon the ground like one beside himself with misery
and despair. Just at this moment a servant came out of the palace, and
taking him by the arm said, "Come with me, the noble Sindbad, my master,
wishes to speak to you."

Hindbad was not a little surprised at this summons, and feared that his
unguarded words might have drawn upon him the displeasure of Sindbad, so
he tried to excuse himself upon the pretext that he could not leave the
burden which had been intrusted to him in the street. However the lackey
promised him that it should be taken care of, and urged him to obey the
call so pressingly that at last the porter was obliged to yield.

He followed the servant into a vast room, where a great company was
seated round a table covered with all sorts of delicacies. In the place
of honor sat a tall, grave man, whose long white beard gave him a
venerable air. Behind his chair stood a crowd of attendants eager to
minister to his wants. This was the famous Sindbad himself. The porter,
more than ever alarmed at the sight of so much magnificence, tremblingly
saluted the noble company. Sindbad, making a sign to him to approach,
caused him to be seated at his right hand, and himself heaped choice
morsels upon his plate, and poured out for him a draught of excellent
wine, and presently, when the banquet drew to a close, spoke to him
familiarly, asking his name and occupation.

"My lord," replied the porter, "I am called Hindbad."

"I am glad to see you here," continued Sindbad. "And I will answer for
the rest of the company that they are equally pleased, but I wish you to
tell me what it was that you said just now in the street." For Sindbad,
passing by the open window before the feast began, had heard his
complaint and therefore had sent for him.

At this question Hindbad was covered with confusion, and hanging down
his head, replied, "My lord, I confess that, overcome by weariness and
ill-humor, I uttered indiscreet words, which I pray you to pardon me."

"Oh!" replied Sindbad, "do not imagine that I am so unjust as to blame
you. On the contrary, I understand your situation and can pity you. Only
you appear to be mistaken about me, and I wish to set you right. You
doubtless imagine that I have acquired all the wealth and luxury that
you see me enjoy without difficulty or danger, but this is far indeed
from being the case. I have only reached this happy state after having
for years suffered every possible kind of toil and danger.

"Yes, my noble friends," he continued, addressing the company, "I assure
you that my adventures have been strange enough to deter even the most
avaricious men from seeking wealth by traversing the seas. Since you
have, perhaps, heard but confused accounts of my Seven Voyages, and the
dangers and wonders that I have met with by sea and land, I will now
give you a full and true account of them, which I think you will be well
pleased to hear."

As Sindbad was relating his adventures chiefly on account of the porter,
he ordered, before beginning his tale, that the burden which had been
left in the street should be carried by some of his own servants to the
place for which Hindbad had set out at first, while he remained to
listen to the story.




FIRST VOYAGE

I had inherited considerable wealth from my parents, and being young and
foolish I at first squandered it recklessly upon every kind of pleasure,
but presently, finding that riches speedily take to themselves wings if
managed as badly as I was managing mine, and remembering also that to be
old and poor is misery indeed, I began to bethink me of how I could make
the best of what still remained to me. I sold all my household goods by
public auction, and joined a company of merchants who traded by sea,
embarking with them at Balsora in a ship which we had fitted out between
us.

We set sail and took our course towards the East Indies by the Persian
Gulf, having the coast of Persia upon our left hand and upon our right
the shores of Arabia Felix. I was at first much troubled by the uneasy
motion of the vessel, but speedily recovered my health, and since that
hour have been no more plagued by sea-sickness.

From time to time we landed at various islands, where we sold or
exchanged our merchandise, and one day, when the wind dropped suddenly,
we found ourselves becalmed close to a small island like a green meadow,
which only rose slightly above the surface of the water. Our sails were
furled, and the captain gave permission to all who wished to land for a
while and amuse themselves. I was among the number, but when after
strolling about for some time we lighted a fire and sat down to enjoy
the repast which we had brought with us, we were startled by a sudden
and violent trembling of the island, while at the same moment those left
upon the ship set up an outcry bidding us come on board for our lives,
since what we had taken for an island was nothing but the back of a
sleeping whale. Those who were nearest to the boat threw themselves into
it, others sprang into the sea, but before I could save myself the whale
plunged suddenly into the depths of the ocean, leaving me clinging to a
piece of the wood which we had brought to make our fire. Meanwhile a
breeze had sprung up, and in the confusion that ensued on board our
vessel in hoisting the sails and taking up those who were in the boat
and clinging to its sides, no one missed me and I was left at the mercy
of the waves. All that day I floated up and down, now beaten this way,
now that, and when night fell I despaired for my life; but, weary and
spent as I was, I clung to my frail support, and great was my joy when
the morning light showed me that I had drifted against an island.

The cliffs were high and steep, but luckily for me some tree-roots
protruded in places, and by their aid I climbed up at last, and
stretched myself upon the turf at the top, where I lay, more dead than
alive, till the sun was high in the heavens. By that time I was very
hungry, but after some searching I came upon some eatable herbs, and a
spring of clear water, and much refreshed I set out to explore the
island. Presently I reached a great plain where a grazing horse was
tethered, and as I stood looking at it I heard voices talking apparently
underground, and in a moment a man appeared who asked me how I came upon
the island. I told him my adventures, and heard in return that he was
one of the grooms of Mihrage, the King of the island, and that each year
they came to feed their master's horses in this plain. He took me to a
cave where his companions were assembled, and when I had eaten of the
food they set before me, they bade me think myself fortunate to have
come upon them when I did, since they were going back to their master on
the morrow, and without their aid I could certainly never have found my
way to the inhabited part of the island.

Early the next morning we accordingly set out, and when we reached the
capital I was graciously received by the King, to whom I related my
adventures, upon which he ordered that I should be well cared for and
provided with such things as I needed. Being a merchant I sought out men
of my own profession, and particularly those who came from foreign
countries, as I hoped in this way to hear news from Bagdad, and find out
some means of returning thither, for the capital was situated upon the
sea-shore, and visited by vessels from all parts of the world. In the
meantime I heard many curious things, and answered many questions
concerning my own country, for I talked willingly with all who came to
me. Also to while away the time of waiting I explored a little island
named Cassel, which belonged to King Mihrage, and which was supposed to
be inhabited by a spirit named Deggial. Indeed, the sailors assured me
that often at night the playing of timbals could be heard upon it.
However, I saw nothing strange upon my voyage, saving some fish that
were full two hundred cubits long, but were fortunately more in dread of
us than even we were of them, and fled from us if we did but strike upon
a board to frighten them. Other fishes there were only a cubit long
which had heads like owls.

One day after my return, as I went down to the quay, I saw a ship which
had just cast anchor, and was discharging her cargo, while the merchants
to whom it belonged were busily directing the removal of it to their
warehouses. Drawing nearer I presently noticed that my own name was
marked upon some of the packages, and after having carefully examined
them, I felt sure that they were indeed those which I had put on board
our ship at Balsora. I then recognized the captain of the vessel, but as
I was certain that he believed me to be dead, I went up to him and asked
who owned the packages that I was looking at.

"There was on board my ship," he replied, "a merchant of Bagdad named
Sindbad. One day he and several of my other passengers landed upon what
we supposed to be an island, but which was really an enormous whale
floating asleep upon the waves. No sooner did it feel upon its back the
heat of the fire which had been kindled, than it plunged into the depths
of the sea. Several of the people who were upon it perished in the
waters, and among others this unlucky Sindbad. This merchandise is his,
but I have resolved to dispose of it for the benefit of his family if I
should ever chance to meet with them."

"Captain," said I, "I am that Sindbad whom you believe to be dead, and
these are my possessions!"

When the captain heard these words he cried out in amazement, "Lackaday!
and what is the world coming to? In these days there is not an honest
man to be met with. Did I not with my own eyes see Sindbad drown, and
now you have the audacity to tell me that you are he! I should have
taken you to be a just man, and yet for the sake of obtaining that which
does not belong to you, you are ready to invent this horrible
falsehood."

"Have patience, and do me the favor to hear my story," said I.

"Speak then," replied the captain, "I am all attention."

So I told him of my escape and of my fortunate meeting with the king's
grooms, and how kindly I had been received at the palace. Very soon I
began to see that I had made some impression upon him, and after the
arrival of some of the other merchants, who showed great joy at once
more seeing me alive, he declared that he also recognized me.

Throwing himself upon my neck he exclaimed, "Heaven be praised that you
have escaped from so great a danger. As to your goods, I pray you take
them, and dispose of them as you please." I thanked him, and praised his
honesty, begging him to accept several bales of merchandise in token of
my gratitude, but he would take nothing. Of the choicest of my goods I
prepared a present for King Mihrage, who was at first amazed, having
known that I had lost my all. However, when I had explained to him how
my bales had been miraculously restored to me, he graciously accepted my
gifts, and in return gave me many valuable things. I then took leave of
him, and exchanging my merchandise for sandal and aloes-wood, camphor,
nutmegs, cloves, pepper, and ginger, I embarked upon the same vessel and
traded so successfully upon our homeward voyage that I arrived in
Balsora with about one hundred thousand sequins. My family received me
with as much joy as I felt upon seeing them once more. I bought land and
slaves, and built a great house in which I resolved to live happily, and
in the enjoyment of all the pleasures of life to forget my past
sufferings.

Here Sindbad paused, and commanded the musicians to play again, while
the feasting continued until evening. When the time came for the porter
to depart, Sindbad gave him a purse containing one hundred sequins,
saying, "Take this, Hindbad, and go home, but to-morrow come again and
you shall hear more of my adventures."

The porter retired quite overcome by so much generosity, and you may
imagine that he was well received at home, where his wife and children
thanked their lucky stars that he had found such a benefactor.

The next day Hindbad, dressed in his best, returned to the voyager's
house, and was received with open arms. As soon as all the guests had
arrived the banquet began as before, and when they had feasted long and
merrily, Sindbad addressed them thus:--

"My friends, I beg that you will give me your attention while I relate
the adventures of my second voyage, which you will find even more
astonishing than the first."




SECOND VOYAGE

I had resolved, as you know, on my return from my first voyage, to spend
the rest of my days quietly in Bagdad, but very soon I grew tired of
such an idle life and longed once more to find myself upon the sea.

I procured, therefore, such goods as were suitable for the places I
intended to visit, and embarked for the second time in a good ship with
other merchants whom I knew to be honorable men. We went from island to
island, often making excellent bargains, until one day we landed at a
spot which, though covered with fruit-trees and abounding in springs of
excellent water, appeared to possess neither houses nor people. While my
companions wandered here and there gathering flowers and fruit I sat
down in a shady place, and, having heartily enjoyed the provisions and
the wine I had brought with me, I fell asleep, lulled by the murmur of a
clear brook which flowed close by.

How long I slept I know not, but when I opened my eyes and started to my
feet I perceived with horror that I was alone and that the ship was
gone. I rushed to and fro like one distracted, uttering cries of
despair, and when from the shore I saw the vessel under full sail just
disappearing upon the horizon, I wished bitterly enough that I had been
content to stay at home in safety. But since wishes could do me no good,
I presently took courage and looked about me for a means of escape. When
I had climbed a tall tree I first of all directed my anxious glances
towards the sea; but, finding nothing hopeful there, I turned landward,
and my curiosity was excited by a huge dazzling white object, so far off
that I could not make out what it might be.

Descending from the tree I hastily collected what remained of my
provisions and set off as fast as I could go towards it. As I drew near
it seemed to me to be a white ball of immense size and height, and when
I could touch it, I found it marvellously smooth and soft. As it was
impossible to climb it--for it presented no foothold--I walked round
about it seeking some opening, but there was none. I counted, however,
that it was at least fifty paces round. By this time the sun was near
setting, but quite suddenly it fell dark, something like a huge black
cloud came swiftly over me, and I saw with amazement that it was a bird
of extraordinary size which was hovering near. Then I remembered that I
had often heard the sailors speak of a wonderful bird called a roc, and
it occurred to me that the white object which had so puzzled me must be
its egg.

Sure enough the bird settled slowly down upon it, covering it with its
wings to keep it warm, and I cowered close beside the egg in such a
position that one of the bird's feet, which was as large as the trunk of
a tree, was just in front of me. Taking off my turban I bound myself
securely to it with the linen in the hope that the roc, when it took
flight next morning, would bear me away with it from the desolate
island. And this was precisely what did happen. As soon as the dawn
appeared the bird rose into the air carrying me up and up till I could
no longer see the earth, and then suddenly it descended so swiftly that
I almost lost consciousness. When I became aware that the roc had
settled and that I was once again upon solid ground, I hastily unbound
my turban from its foot and freed myself, and that not a moment too
soon; for the bird, pouncing upon a huge snake, killed it with a few
blows from its powerful beak, and seizing it rose up into the air once
more and soon disappeared from my view. When I had looked about me I
began to doubt if I had gained anything by quitting the desolate island.

The valley in which I found myself was deep and narrow, and surrounded
by mountains which towered into the clouds, and were so steep and rocky
that there was no way of climbing up their sides. As I wandered about,
seeking anxiously for some means of escaping from this trap, I observed
that the ground was strewed with diamonds, some of them of an
astonishing size. This sight gave me great pleasure, but my delight was
speedily dampened when I saw also numbers of horrible snakes so long and
so large that the smallest of them could have swallowed an elephant with
ease. Fortunately for me they seemed to hide in caverns of the rocks by
day, and only came out by night, probably because of their enemy the
roc.

All day long I wandered up and down the valley, and when it grew dusk I
crept into a little cave, and having blocked up the entrance to it with
a stone, I ate part of my little store of food and lay down to sleep,
but all through the night the serpents crawled to and fro, hissing
horribly, so that I could scarcely close my eyes for terror. I was
thankful when the morning light appeared, and when I judged by the
silence that the serpents had retreated to their dens I came tremblingly
out of my cave and wandered up and down the valley once more, kicking
the diamonds contemptuously out of my path, for I felt that they were
indeed vain things to a man in my situation. At last, overcome with
weariness, I sat down upon a rock, but I had hardly closed my eyes when
I was startled by something which fell to the ground with a thud close
beside me.

It was a huge piece of fresh meat, and as I stared at it several more
pieces rolled over the cliffs in different places. I had always thought
that the stories the sailors told of the famous valley of diamonds, and
of the cunning way which some merchants had devised for getting at the
precious stones, were mere travellers' tales invented to give pleasure
to the hearers, but now I perceived that they were surely true. These
merchants came to the valley at the time when the eagles, which keep
their eyries in the rocks, had hatched their young. The merchants then
threw great lumps of meat into the valley. These, falling with so much
force upon the diamonds, were sure to take up some of the precious
stones with them, when the eagles pounced upon the meat and carried it
off to their nests to feed their hungry broods. Then the merchants,
scaring away the parent birds with shouts and outcries, would secure
their treasures. Until this moment I had looked upon the valley as my
grave, for I had seen no possibility of getting out of it alive, but now
I took courage and began to devise a means of escape. I began by picking
up all the largest diamonds I could find and storing them carefully in
the leathern wallet which had held my provisions; this I tied securely
to my belt. I then chose the piece of meat which seemed most suited to
my purpose, and with the aid of my turban bound it firmly to my back;
this done I laid down upon my face and awaited the coming of the eagles.
I soon heard the flapping of their mighty wings above me, and had the
satisfaction of feeling one of them seize upon my piece of meat, and me
with it, and rise slowly towards his nest, into which he presently
dropped me. Luckily for me the merchants were on the watch, and setting
up their usual outcries, they rushed to the nest, scaring away the
eagle. Their amazement was great when they discovered me, and also their
disappointment, and with one accord they fell to abusing me for having
robbed them of their usual profit. Addressing myself to the one who
seemed most aggrieved, I said:--

"I am sure, if you knew all that I have suffered, you would show more
kindness towards me, and as for diamonds, I have enough here of the very
best for you and me and all your company." So saying I showed them to
him. The others all crowded around me, wondering at my adventures and
admiring the device by which I had escaped from the valley, and when
they had led me to their camp and examined my diamonds, they assured me
that in all the years that they had carried on their trade they had seen
no stones to be compared with them for size and beauty.

I found that each merchant chose a particular nest, and took his chance
of what he might find in it. So I begged the one who owned the nest to
which I had been carried to take as much as he would of my treasure, but
he contented himself with one stone, and that by no means the largest,
assuring me that with such a gem his fortune was made, and he need toil
no more. I stayed with the merchants several days, and then as they were
journeying homewards I gladly accompanied them. Our way lay across high
mountains infested with frightful serpents, but we had the good luck to
escape them and came at last to the seashore. Thence we sailed to the
isle of Roha, where the camphor-trees grow to such a size that a hundred
men could shelter under one of them with ease. The sap flows from an
incision made high up in the tree into a vessel hung there to receive
it, and soon hardens into the substance called camphor, but the tree
itself withers up and dies when it has been so treated.

In this same island we saw the rhinoceros, an animal which is smaller
than the elephant and larger than the buffalo. It has one horn about a
cubit long which is solid, but has a furrow from the base to the tip.
Upon it is traced in white lines the figure of a man. The rhinoceros
fights with the elephant, and transfixing him with his horn carries him
off upon his head, but becoming blinded with the blood of his enemy, he
falls helpless to the ground, and then comes the roc, and clutches them
both up in his talons and takes them to feed his young. This doubtless
astonishes you, but if you do not believe my tale go to Roha and see for
yourself. For fear of wearying you I pass over in silence many other
wonderful things which we saw in this island. Before we left I exchanged
one of my diamonds for much goodly merchandise by which I profited
greatly on our homeward way. At last we reached Balsora, whence I
hastened to Bagdad, where my first action was to bestow large sums of
money upon the poor, after which I settled down to enjoy tranquilly the
riches I had gained with so much toil and pain.

Having thus related the adventures of his second voyage, Sindbad again
bestowed a hundred sequins upon Hindbad, inviting him to come again on
the following day and hear how he fared upon his third voyage. The other
guests also departed to their homes, but all returned at the same hour
next day, including the porter, whose former life of hard work and
poverty had already begun to seem to him like a bad dream. Again after
the feast was over did Sindbad claim the attention of his guests and
began the account of his third voyage.




THIRD VOYAGE

After a very short time the pleasant easy life I led made me quite
forget the perils of my two voyages. Moreover, as I was still in the
prime of life, it pleased me better to be up and doing. So once more
providing myself with the rarest and choicest merchandise of Bagdad, I
conveyed it to Balsora, and set sail with other merchants of my
acquaintance for distant lands. We had touched at many ports and made
much profit, when one day upon the open sea we were caught by a terrible
wind which blew us completely out of our reckoning, and lasting for
several days finally drove us into harbor on a strange island.

"I would rather have come to anchor anywhere than here," quoth our
captain. "This island and all adjoining it are inhabited by hairy
savages, who are certain to attack us, and whatever these dwarfs may do
we dare not resist, since they swarm like locusts, and if one of them is
killed the rest will fall upon us, and speedily make an end of us."

These words caused great consternation among all the ship's company, and
only too soon we were to find out that the captain spoke truly. There
appeared a vast multitude of hideous savages, not more than two feet
high and covered with reddish fur. Throwing themselves into the waves
they surrounded our vessel. Chattering meanwhile in a language we could
not understand, and clutching at ropes and gangways, they swarmed up the
ship's side with such speed and agility that they almost seemed to fly.

You may imagine the rage and terror that seized us as we watched them,
neither daring to hinder them nor able to speak a word to deter them
from their purpose, whatever it might be. Of this we were not left long
in doubt. Hoisting the sails, and cutting the cable of the anchor, they
sailed our vessel to an island which lay a little further off, where
they drove us ashore; then taking possession of her, they made off to
the place from which they had come, leaving us helpless upon a shore
avoided with horror by all mariners for a reason which you will soon
learn.

Turning away from the sea we wandered miserably inland, finding as we
went various herbs and fruits which we ate, feeling that we might as
well live as long as possible though we had no hope of escape. Presently
we saw in the far distance what seemed to us to be a splendid palace,
towards which we turned our weary steps, but when we reached it we saw
that it was a castle, lofty, and strongly built. Pushing back the heavy
ebony doors we entered the courtyard, but upon the threshold of the
great hall beyond it we paused, frozen with horror, at the sight which
greeted us. On one side lay a huge pile of bones--human bones; and on
the other numberless spits for roasting! Overcome with despair we sank
trembling to the ground, and lay there without speech or motion. The sun
was setting when a loud noise aroused us, the door of the hall was
violently burst open and a horrible giant entered. He was as tall as a
palm tree, and perfectly black, and had one eye, which flamed like a
burning coal in the middle of his forehead. His teeth were long and
sharp and grinned horribly, while his lower lip hung down upon his
chest, and he had ears like elephant's ears, which covered his
shoulders, and nails like the claws of some fierce bird.

At this terrible sight our senses left us and we lay like dead men. When
at last we came to ourselves the giant sat examining us attentively with
his fearful eye. Presently when he had looked at us enough he came
towards us, and stretching out his hand took me by the back of the neck,
turning me this way and that, but feeling that I was mere skin and bone
he set me down again and went on to the next, whom he treated in the
same fashion; at last he came to the captain, and finding him the
fattest of us all, he took him up in one hand and stuck him upon a spit
and proceeded to kindle a huge fire at which he presently roasted him.
After the giant had supped he lay down to sleep, snoring like the
loudest thunder, while we lay shivering with horror the whole night
through, and when day broke he awoke and went out, leaving us in the
castle.

When we believed him to be really gone we started up bemoaning our
horrible fate, until the hall echoed with our despairing cries. Though
we were many and our enemy was alone it did not occur to us to kill him,
and indeed we should have found that a hard task, even if we had thought
of it, and no plan could we devise to deliver ourselves. So at last,
submitting to our sad fate, we spent the day in wandering up and down
the island eating such fruits as we could find, and when night came we
returned to the castle, having sought in vain for any other place of
shelter. At sunset the giant returned, supped upon one of our unhappy
comrades, slept and snored till dawn, and then left us as before. Our
condition seemed to us so frightful that several of my companions
thought it would be better to leap from the cliffs and perish in the
waves at once, rather than await so miserable an end; but I had a plan
of escape which I now unfolded to them, and which they at once agreed to
attempt.

"Listen, my brothers," I added. "You know that plenty of driftwood lies
along the shore. Let us make several rafts, and carry them to a suitable
place. If our plot succeeds, we can wait patiently for the chance of
some passing ship which would rescue us from this fatal island. If it
fails, we must quickly take to our rafts; frail as they are, we have
more chance of saving our lives with them than we have if we remain
here."

All agreed with me, and we spent the day in building rafts, each capable
of carrying three persons. At nightfall we returned to the castle, and
very soon in came the giant, and one more of our number was sacrificed.
But the time of our vengeance was at hand! As soon as he had finished
his horrible repast he lay down to sleep as before, and when we heard
him begin to snore I, and nine of the boldest of my comrades, rose
softly, and took each a spit, which we made red-hot in the fire, and
then at a given signal we plunged it with one accord into the giant's
eye, completely blinding him. Uttering a terrible cry, he sprang to his
feet clutching in all directions to try to seize one of us, but we had
all fled different ways as soon as the deed was done, and thrown
ourselves flat upon the ground in corners where he was not likely to
touch us with his feet.

After a vain search he fumbled about till he found the door, and fled
out of it howling frightfully. As for us, when he was gone we made haste
to leave the fatal castle, and, stationing ourselves beside our rafts,
we waited to see what would happen. Our idea was that if, when the sun
rose, we saw nothing of the giant, and no longer heard his howls, which
still came faintly through the darkness, growing more and more distant,
we should conclude that he was dead, and that we might safely stay upon
the island and need not risk our lives upon the frail rafts. But alas!
morning light showed us our enemy approaching us, supported on either
hand by two giants nearly as large and fearful as himself, while a crowd
of others followed close upon their heels. Hesitating no longer we
clambered upon our rafts and rowed with all our might out to sea. The
giants, seeing their prey escaping them, seized up huge pieces of rock,
and wading into the water hurled them after us with such good aim that
all the rafts except the one I was upon were swamped, and their luckless
crews drowned, without our being able to do anything to help them.
Indeed I and my two companions had all we could do to keep our own raft
beyond the reach of the giants, but by dint of hard rowing we at last
gained the open sea. Here we were at the mercy of the winds and waves,
which tossed us to and fro all that day and night, but the next morning
we found ourselves near an island, upon which we gladly landed.

There we found delicious fruits, and having satisfied our hunger we
presently lay down to rest upon the shore. Suddenly we were aroused by a
loud rustling noise, and starting up, saw that it was caused by an
immense snake which was gliding towards us over the sand. So swiftly it
came that it had seized one of my comrades before he had time to fly,
and in spite of his cries and struggles speedily crushed the life out of
him in its mighty coils and proceeded to swallow him. By this time my
other companion and I were running for our lives to some place where we
might hope to be safe from this new horror, and seeing a tall tree we
climbed up into it, having first provided ourselves with a store of
fruit off the surrounding bushes. When night came I fell asleep, but
only to be awakened once more by the terrible snake, which after hissing
horribly round the tree at last reared itself up against it, and finding
my sleeping comrade who was perched just below me, it swallowed him
also, and crawled away leaving me half dead with terror.

When the sun rose I crept down from the tree with hardly a hope of
escaping the dreadful fate which had overtaken my comrades; but life is
sweet, and I determined to do all I could to save myself. All day long I
toiled with frantic haste and collected quantities of dry brushwood,
reeds and thorns, which I bound with fagots, and making a circle of them
under my tree I piled them firmly one upon another until I had a kind of
tent in which I crouched like a mouse in a hole when she sees the cat
coming. You may imagine what a fearful night I passed, for the snake
returned eager to devour me, and glided round and round my frail shelter
seeking an entrance. Every moment I feared that it would succeed in
pushing aside some of the fagots, but happily for me they held together,
and when it grew light my enemy retired, baffled and hungry, to his den.
As for me I was more dead than alive! Shaking with fright and half
suffocated by the poisonous breath of the monster, I came out of my tent
and crawled down to the sea, feeling that it would be better to plunge
from the cliffs and end my life at once than pass such another night of
horror. But to my joy and relief I saw a ship sailing by, and by
shouting wildly and waving my turban I managed to attract the attention
of her crew.

A boat was sent to rescue me, and very soon I found myself on board
surrounded by a wondering crowd of sailors and merchants eager to know
by what chance I found myself in that desolate island. After I had told
my story they regaled me with the choicest food the ship afforded, and
the captain, seeing that I was in rags, generously bestowed upon me one
of his own coats. After sailing about for some time and touching at many
ports we came at last to the island of Salahat, where sandal-wood grows
in great abundance. Here we anchored, and as I stood watching the
merchants disembarking their goods and preparing to sell or exchange
them, the captain came up to me and said:--

"I have here, brother, some merchandise belonging to a passenger of mine
who is dead. Will you do me the favor to trade with it, and when I meet
with his heirs I shall be able to give them the money, though it will be
only just that you shall have a portion for your trouble."

I consented gladly, for I did not like standing by idle. Whereupon he
pointed the bales out to me, and sent for the person whose duty it was
to keep a list of the goods that were upon the ship. When this man came
he asked in what name the merchandise was to be registered.

"In the name of Sindbad the Sailor," replied the captain.

At this I was greatly surprised, but looking carefully at him I
recognized him to be the captain of the ship upon which I had made my
second voyage, though he had altered much since that time. As for him,
believing me to be dead it was no wonder that he had not recognized me.

"So, captain," said I, "the merchant who owned those bales was called
Sindbad?"

"Yes," he replied. "He was so named. He belonged to Bagdad, and joined
my ship at Balsora, but by mischance he was left behind upon a desert
island where we had landed to fill up our water-casks, and it was not
until four hours later that he was missed. By that time the wind had
freshened, and it was impossible to put back for him."

"You suppose him to have perished then?" said I.

"Alas! yes," he answered.

"Why, captain!" I cried, "look well at me. I am that Sindbad who fell
asleep upon the island and awoke to find himself abandoned!"

The captain stared at me in amazement, but was presently convinced that
I was indeed speaking the truth, and rejoiced greatly at my escape.

"I am glad to have that piece of carelessness off my conscience at any
rate," said he. "Now take your goods, and the profit I have made for you
upon them, and may you prosper in future."

I took them gratefully, and as we went from one island to another I laid
in stores of cloves, cinnamon, and other spices. In one place I saw a
tortoise which was twenty cubits long and as many broad, also a fish
that was like a cow and had skin so thick that it was used to make
shields. Another I saw that was like a camel in shape and color. So by
degrees we came back to Balsora, and I returned to Bagdad with so much
money that I could not myself count it, besides treasures without end. I
gave largely to the poor, and bought much land to add to what I already
possessed, and thus ended my third voyage.

When Sindbad had finished his story he gave another hundred sequins to
Hindbad, who then departed with the other guests, but next day when they
had all reassembled, and the banquet was ended, their host continued his
adventures.




FOURTH VOYAGE

Rich and happy as I was after my third voyage, I could not make up my
mind to stay at home altogether. My love of trading, and the pleasure I
took in anything that was new and strange, made me set my affairs in
order, and begin my journey through some of the Persian provinces,
having first sent off stores of goods to await my coming in the
different places I intended to visit. I took ship at a distant seaport,
and for some time all went well, but at last, being caught in a violent
hurricane, our vessel became a total wreck in spite of all our worthy
captain could do to save her, and many of our company perished in the
waves. I, with a few others, had the good fortune to be washed ashore
clinging to pieces of the wreck, for the storm had driven us near an
island, and scrambling up beyond the reach of the waves we threw
ourselves down quite exhausted, to wait for morning.

At daylight we wandered inland, and soon saw some huts, to which we
directed our steps. As we drew near their black inhabitants swarmed out
in great numbers and surrounded us, and we were led to their houses, and
as it were divided among our captors. I with five others was taken into
a hut, where we were made to sit upon the ground, and certain herbs were
given to us, which the blacks made signs to us to eat. Observing that
they themselves did not touch them, I was careful only to pretend to
taste my portion; but my companions, being very hungry, rashly ate up
all that was set before them, and very soon I had the horror of seeing
them become perfectly mad. Though they chattered incessantly I could not
understand a word they said, nor did they heed when I spoke to them. The
savages now produced large bowls full of rice prepared with cocoanut
oil, of which my crazy comrades ate eagerly, but I only tasted a few
grains, understanding clearly that the object of our captors was to
fatten us speedily for their own eating, and this was exactly what
happened. My unlucky companions having lost their reason, felt neither
anxiety nor fear, and ate greedily all that was offered them. So they
were soon fat and there was an end of them, but I grew leaner day by
day, for I ate but little, and even that little did me no good by reason
of my fear of what lay before me. However, as I was so far from being a
tempting morsel, I was allowed to wander about freely, and one day, when
all the blacks had gone off upon some expedition leaving only an old man
to guard me, I managed to escape from him and plunged into the forest,
running faster the more he cried to me to come back, until I had
completely distanced him.

For seven days I hurried on, resting only when the darkness stopped me,
and living chiefly upon cocoanuts, which afforded me both meat and
drink, and on the eighth day I reached the sea-shore and saw a party of
white men gathering pepper, which grew abundantly all about. Reassured
by the nature of their occupation, I advanced towards them and they
greeted me in Arabic, asking who I was and whence I came. My delight was
great on hearing this familiar speech, and I willingly satisfied their
curiosity, telling them how I had been shipwrecked, and captured by the
blacks. "But these savages devour men!" said they. "How did you escape?"
I repeated to them what I have just told you, at which they were
mightily astonished. I stayed with them until they had collected as much
pepper as they wished, and then they took me back to their own country
and presented me to their King, by whom I was hospitably received. To
him also I had to relate my adventures, which surprised him much, and
when I had finished he ordered that I should be supplied with food and
raiment and treated with consideration.

The island on which I found myself was full of people, and abounded in
all sorts of desirable things, and a great deal of traffic went on in
the capital, where I soon began to feel at home and contented. Moreover,
the King treated me with special favor, and in consequence of this
everyone, whether at the court or in the town, sought to make life
pleasant to me. One thing I remarked which I thought very strange; this
was that, from the greatest to the least, all men rode their horses
without bridle or stirrups. I one day presumed to ask his Majesty why he
did not use them, to which he replied, "You speak to me of things of
which I have never before heard!" This gave me an idea. I found a clever
workman and made him cut out under my direction the foundation of a
saddle, which I wadded and covered with choice leather, adorning it with
rich gold embroidery. I then got a locksmith to make me a bit and a pair
of spurs after a pattern that I drew for him, and when all these things
were completed I presented them to the King and showed him how to use
them. When I had saddled one of his horses he mounted it and rode about
quite delighted with the novelty, and to show his gratitude he rewarded
me with large gifts. After this I had to make saddles for all the
principal officers of the King's household, and as they all gave me rich
presents I soon became very wealthy and quite an important person in the
city.

One day the King sent for me and said, "Sindbad, I am going to ask a
favor of you. Both I and my subjects esteem you, and wish you to end
your days amongst us. Therefore I desire that you will marry a rich and
beautiful lady whom I will find for you, and think no more of your own
country."

As the King's will was law I accepted the charming bride he presented to
me, and lived happily with her. Nevertheless I had every intention of
escaping at the first opportunity, and going back to Bagdad. Things were
thus going prosperously with me when it happened that the wife of one of
my neighbors, with whom I had struck up quite a friendship, fell ill,
and presently died. I went to his house to offer my consolations, and
found him in the depths of woe.

"Heaven preserve you," said I, "and send you a long life!"

"Alas!" he replied, "what is the good of saying that when I have but an
hour left to live!"

"Come, come!" said I, "surely it is not so bad as all that. I trust that
you may be spared to me for many years."

"I hope," answered he, "that your life may be long, but as for me, all
is finished. I have set my house in order, and to-day I shall be buried
with my wife. This has been the law upon our island from the earliest
ages--the living husband goes to the grave with his dead wife, the
living wife with her dead husband. So did our fathers, and so must we
do. The law changes not, and all must submit to it!"

As he spoke the friends and relations of the unhappy pair began to
assemble. The body, decked in rich robes and sparkling with jewels, was
laid upon an open bier, and the procession started, taking its way to a
high mountain at some distance from the city, the wretched husband,
clothed from head to foot in a black mantle, following mournfully.

When the place of interment was reached the corpse was lowered, just as
it was, into a deep pit. Then the husband, bidding farewell to all his
friends, stretched himself upon another bier, upon which were laid seven
little loaves of bread and a pitcher of water, and he also was let
down-down-down to the depths of the horrible cavern, and then a stone
was laid over the opening, and the melancholy company wended its way
back to the city.

You may imagine that I was no unmoved spectator of these proceedings; to
all the others it was a thing to which they had been accustomed from
their youth up; but I was so horrified that I could not help telling the
King how it struck me.

"Sire," I said, "I am more astonished than I can express to you at the
strange custom which exists in your dominions of burying the living with
the dead. In all my travels I have never before met with so cruel and
horrible a law."

"What would you have, Sindbad?" he replied. "It is the law for
everybody. I myself should be buried with the Queen if she were the
first to die."

"But, your Majesty," said I, "dare I ask if this law applies to
foreigners also?"

"Why, yes," replied the king smiling, in what I could but consider a
very heartless manner: "they are no exception to the rule if they have
married in the country."

When I heard this I went home much cast down, and from that time forward
my mind was never easy. If only my wife's little finger ached I fancied
she was going to die, and sure enough before very long she fell really
ill and in a few days breathed her last. My dismay was great, for it
seemed to me that to be buried alive was even a worse fate than to be
devoured by cannibals, nevertheless there was no escape. The body of my
wife, arrayed in her richest robes and decked with all her jewels, was
laid upon the bier. I followed it, and after me came a great procession,
headed by the king and all his nobles, and in this order we reached the
fatal mountain, which was one of a lofty chain bordering the sea.

Here I made one more frantic effort to excite the pity of the King and
those who stood by, hoping to save myself even at this last moment, but
it was of no avail. No one spoke to me, they even appeared to hasten
over their dreadful task, and I speedily found myself descending into
the gloomy pit, with my seven loaves and pitcher of water beside me.
Almost before I reached the bottom the stone was rolled into its place
above my head, and I was left to my fate. A feeble ray of light shone
into the cavern through some chink, and when I had the courage to look
about me I could see that I was in a vast vault, bestrewn with bones and
bodies of the dead. I even fancied that I heard the expiring sighs of
those who, like myself, had come into this dismal place alive. All in
vain did I shriek aloud with rage and despair, reproaching myself for
the love of gain and adventure which had brought me to such a pass, but
at length, growing calmer, I took up my bread and water, and wrapping my
face in my mantle I groped my way towards the end of the cavern, where
the air was fresher.

Here I lived in darkness and misery until my provisions were exhausted,
but just as I was nearly dead from starvation the rock was rolled away
overhead and I saw that a bier was being lowered into the cavern, and
that the corpse upon it was a man. In a moment my mind was made up, the
woman who followed had nothing to expect but a lingering death; I should
be doing her a service if I shortened her misery. Therefore when she
descended, already insensible from terror, I was ready armed with a huge
bone, one blow from which left her dead, and I secured the bread and
water which gave me a hope of life. Several times did I have recourse to
this desperate expedient, and I know not how long I had been a prisoner
when one day I fancied that I heard something near me, which breathed
loudly. Turning to the place from which the sound came I dimly saw a
shadowy form which fled at my movement, squeezing itself through a
cranny in the wall. I pursued it as fast as I could, and found myself in
a narrow crack among the rocks, along which I was just able to force my
way. I followed it for what seemed to me many miles, and at last saw
before me a glimmer of light which grew clearer every moment until I
emerged upon the sea-shore with a joy which I cannot describe. When I
was sure that I was not dreaming, I realized that it was doubtless some
little animal which had found its way into the cavern from the sea, and
when disturbed had fled, showing me a means of escape which I could
never have discovered for myself. I hastily surveyed my surroundings,
and saw that I was safe from all pursuit from the town.

The mountains sloped sheer down to the sea, and there was no road across
them. Being assured of this I returned to the cavern, and amassed a rich
treasure of diamonds, rubies, emeralds and jewels of all kinds, which
strewed the ground. These I made up into bales, and stored them into a
safe place upon the beach, and then waited hopefully for the passing of
a ship. I had looked out for two days, however, before a single sail
appeared, so it was with much delight that I at last saw a vessel not
very far from the shore, and by waving my arms and uttering loud cries
succeeded in attracting the attention of her crew. A boat was sent off
to me, and in answer to the questions of the sailors as to how I came to
be in such a plight, I replied that I had been shipwrecked two days
before, but had managed to scramble ashore with the bales which I
pointed out to them. Luckily for me they believed my story, and without
even looking at the place where they found me, took up my bundles, and
rowed me back to the ship. Once on board, I soon saw that the captain
was too much occupied with the difficulties of navigation to pay much
heed to me, though he generously made me welcome, and would not even
accept the jewels with which I offered to pay my passage. Our voyage was
prosperous, and after visiting many lands, and collecting in each place
great store of goodly merchandise, I found myself at last in Bagdad once
more with unheard-of riches of every description. Again I gave large
sums of money to the poor, and enriched all the mosques in the city,
after which I gave myself up to my friends and relations, with whom I
passed my time in feasting and merriment.

Here Sindbad paused, and all his hearers declared that the adventures of
his fourth voyage had pleased them better than anything they had heard
before. They then took their leave, followed by Hindbad, who had once
more received a hundred sequins, and with the rest had been bidden to
return next day for the story of the fifth voyage.

When the time came all were in their places, and when they had eaten and
drunk of all that was set before them Sindbad began his tale.




FIFTH VOYAGE

Not even all that I had gone through could make me contented with a
quiet life. I soon wearied of its pleasures, and longed for change and
adventure. Therefore I set out once more, but this time in a ship of my
own, which I built and fitted out at the nearest seaport. I wished to be
able to call at whatever port I chose, taking my own time; but as I did
not intend carrying enough goods for a full cargo, I invited several
merchants of different nations to join me. We set sail with the first
favorable wind, and after a long voyage upon the open seas we landed
upon an unknown island which proved to be uninhabited. We determined,
however, to explore it, but had not gone far when we found a roc's egg,
as large as the one I had seen before and evidently very nearly hatched,
for the beak of the young bird had already pierced the shell. In spite
of all I could say to deter them, the merchants who were with me fell
upon it with their hatchets, breaking the shell, and killing the young
roc. Then lighting a fire upon the ground they hacked morsels from the
bird, and proceeded to roast them while I stood by aghast.

Scarcely had they finished their ill-omened repast, when the air above
us was darkened by two mighty shadows. The captain of my ship, knowing
by experience what this meant, cried out to us that the parent birds
were coming, and urged us to get on board with all speed. This we did,
and the sails were hoisted, but before we had made any way the rocs
reached their despoiled nest and hovered about it, uttering frightful
cries when they discovered the mangled remains of their young one. For a
moment we lost sight of them, and were flattering ourselves that we had
escaped, when they reappeared and soared into the air directly over our
vessel, and we saw that each held in its claws an immense rock ready to
crush us. There was a moment of breathless suspense, then one bird
loosed its hold and the huge block of stone hurtled through the air, but
thanks to the presence of mind of the helmsman, who turned our ship
violently in another direction, it fell into the sea close beside us,
cleaving it asunder till we could nearly see the bottom. We had hardly
time to draw a breath of relief before the other rock fell with a mighty
crash right in the midst of our luckless vessel, smashing it into a
thousand fragments, and crushing, or hurling into the sea, passengers
and crew. I myself went down with the rest, but had the good fortune to
rise unhurt, and by holding on to a piece of driftwood with one hand and
swimming with the other I kept myself afloat and was presently washed up
by the tide on to an island. Its shores were steep and rocky, but I
scrambled up safely and threw myself down to rest upon the green turf.

When I had somewhat recovered I began to examine the spot in which I
found myself, and truly it seemed to me that I had reached a garden of
delights. There were trees everywhere, and they were laden with flowers
and fruit, while a crystal stream wandered in and out under their
shadow. When night came I slept sweetly in a cosey nook, though the
remembrance that I was alone in a strange land made me sometimes start
up and look around me in alarm, and then I wished heartily that I had
stayed at home at ease. However, the morning sunlight restored my
courage, and I once more wandered among the trees, but always with some
anxiety as to what I might see next. I had penetrated some distance into
the island when I saw an old man bent and feeble sitting upon the river
bank, and at first I took him to be some shipwrecked mariner like
myself. Going up to him I greeted him in a friendly way, but he only
nodded his head at me in reply. I then asked what he did there, and he
made signs to me that he wished to get across the river to gather some
fruit, and seemed to beg me to carry him on my back. Pitying his age and
feebleness, I took him up, and wading across the stream I bent down that
he might more easily reach the bank, and bade him get down. But instead
of allowing himself to be set upon his feet (even now it makes me laugh
to think of it!), this creature who had seemed to me so decrepit leaped
nimbly upon my shoulders, and hooking his legs round my neck gripped me
so tightly that I was well-nigh choked, and so overcome with terror that
I fell insensible to the ground. When I recovered my enemy was still in
his place, though he had released his hold enough to allow me breathing
space, and seeing me revive he prodded me adroitly first with one foot
and then with the other, until I was forced to get up and stagger about
with him under the trees while he gathered and ate the choicest fruits.
This went on all day, and even at night, when I threw myself down half
dead with weariness, the terrible old man held on tight to my neck, nor
did he fail to greet the first glimmer of morning light by drumming upon
me with his heels, until I perforce awoke and resumed my dreary march
with rage and bitterness in my heart.

It happened one day that I passed a tree under which lay several dry
gourds, and catching one up I amused myself with scooping out its
contents and pressing into it the juice of several bunches of grapes
which hung from every bush. When it was full I left it propped in the
fork of a tree, and a few days later, carrying the hateful old man that
way, I snatched at my gourd as I passed it and had the satisfaction of a
draught of excellent wine so good and refreshing that I even forgot my
detestable burden, and began to sing and caper.

The old monster was not slow to perceive the effect which my draught had
produced and that I carried him more lightly than usual, so he stretched
out his skinny hand and seizing the gourd first tasted its contents
cautiously, then drained them to the very last drop. The wine was strong
and the gourd capacious, so he also began to sing after a fashion, and
soon I had the delight of feeling the iron grip of his goblin legs
unclasp, and with one vigorous effort I threw him to the ground, from
which he never moved again. I was so rejoiced to have at last got rid of
this uncanny old man that I ran leaping and bounding down to the
sea-shore, where, by the greatest good luck, I met with some mariners
who had anchored off the island to enjoy the delicious fruits, and to
renew their supply of water.

They heard the story of my escape with amazement, saying, "You fell into
the hands of the Old Man of the Sea, and it is a mercy that he did not
strangle you as he has everyone else upon whose shoulders he has managed
to perch himself. This island is well-known as the scene of his evil
deeds, and no merchant or sailor who lands upon it cares to stray far
away from his comrades." After we had talked for awhile they took me
back with them on board their ship, where the captain received me
kindly, and we soon set sail, and after several days reached a large and
prosperous-looking town where all the houses were built of stone. Here
we anchored, and one of the merchants, who had been very friendly to me
on the way, took me ashore with him and showed me a lodging set apart
for strange merchants. He then provided me with a large sack, and
pointed out to me a party of others equipped in like manner.

"Go with them," said he, "and do as they do, but beware of losing sight
of them, for if you strayed your life would be in danger."

With that he supplied me with provisions, and bade me farewell, and I
set out with my new companions. I soon learnt that the object of our
expedition was to fill our sacks with cocoa-nuts, but when at length I
saw the trees and noted their immense height and the slippery smoothness
of their slender trunks, I did not at all understand how we were to do
it. The crowns of the cocoa-palms were all alive with monkeys, big and
little, which skipped from one to the other with surprising agility,
seeming to be curious about us and disturbed at our appearance, and I
was at first surprised when my companions after collecting stones began
to throw them at the lively creatures, which seemed to me quite
harmless. But very soon I saw the reason of it and joined them heartily,
for the monkeys, annoyed and wishing to pay us back in our own coin,
began to tear the nuts from the trees and cast them at us with angry and
spiteful gestures, so that after very little labor our sacks were filled
with the fruit which we could not otherwise have obtained.

As soon as we had as many as we could carry we went back to the town,
where my friend bought my share and advised me to continue the same
occupation until I had earned money enough to carry me to my own
country. This I did, and before long had amassed a considerable sum.
Just then I heard that there was a trading ship ready to sail, and
taking leave of my friend I went on board, carrying with me a goodly
store of cocoanuts; and we sailed first to the islands where pepper
grows, then to Comari where the best aloes-wood is found, and where men
drink no wine by an unalterable law. Here I exchanged my nuts for pepper
and good aloes-wood, and went a-fishing for pearls with some of the
other merchants, and my divers were so lucky that very soon I had an
immense number, and those very large and perfect. With all these
treasures I came joyfully back to Bagdad, where I disposed of them for
large sums of money, of which I did not fail as before to give the tenth
part to the poor, and after that I rested from my labors and comforted
myself with all the pleasures that my riches could give me.

Having thus ended his story, Sindbad ordered that one hundred sequins
should be given to Hindbad, and the guests then withdrew; but after the
next day's feast he began the account of his sixth voyage as follows.




SIXTH VOYAGE

It must be a marvel to you how, after having five times met with
shipwreck and unheard-of perils, I could again tempt fortune and risk
fresh trouble. I am even surprised myself when I look back, but
evidently it was my fate to rove, and after a year of repose I prepared
to make a sixth voyage, regardless of the entreaties of my friends and
relations, who did all they could to keep me at home. Instead of going
by the Persian Gulf, I travelled a considerable way overland, and
finally embarked from a distant Indian port with a captain who meant to
make a long voyage. And truly he did so, for we fell in with stormy
weather which drove us completely out of our course, so that for many
days neither captain nor pilot knew where we were, nor where we were
going. When they did at last discover our position we had small ground
for rejoicing, for the captain, casting his turban upon the deck and
tearing his beard, declared that we were in the most dangerous spot upon
the whole wide sea, and had been caught by a current which was at that
moment sweeping us to destruction. It was too true! In spite of all the
sailors could do we were driven with frightful rapidity towards the foot
of a mountain, which rose sheer out of the sea, and our vessel was
dashed to pieces upon the rocks at its base, not, however, until we had
managed to scramble on shore, carrying with us the most precious of our
possessions. When we had done this the captain said to us:--

"Now we are here we may as well begin to dig our graves at once, since
from this fatal spot no shipwrecked mariner has ever returned."

This speech discouraged us much, and we began to lament over our sad
fate.

The mountain formed the seaward boundary of a large island, and the
narrow strip of rocky shore upon which we stood was strewn with the
wreckage of a thousand gallant ships, while the bones of the luckless
mariners shone white in the sunshine, and we shuddered to think how soon
our own would be added to the heap. All around, too, lay vast quantities
of the costliest merchandise, and treasures were heaped in every cranny
of the rocks, but all these things only added to the desolation of the
scene. It struck me as a very strange thing that a river of clear fresh
water, which gushed out from the mountain not far from where we stood,
instead of flowing into the sea as rivers generally do, turned off
sharply, and flowed out of sight under a natural archway of rock, and
when I went to examine it more closely I found that inside the cave the
walls were thick with diamonds, rubies, and masses of crystal, and the
floor was strewn with ambergris. Here, then, upon this desolate shore we
abandoned ourselves to our fate, for there was no possibility of scaling
the mountain, and if a ship had appeared it could only have shared our
doom. The first thing our captain did was to divide equally amongst us
all the food we possessed, and then the length of each man's life
depended on the time he could make his portion last. I myself could live
upon very little.

Nevertheless, by the time I had buried the last of my companions my
stock of provisions was so small that I hardly thought I should live
long enough to dig my own grave, which I set about doing, while I
regretted bitterly the roving disposition which was always bringing me
into such straits, and thought longingly of all the comfort and luxury
that I had left. But luckily for me the fancy took me to stand once more
beside the river where it plunged out of sight in the depths of the
cavern, and as I did so an idea struck me. This river which hid itself
underground doubtless emerged again at some distant spot. Why should I
not build a raft and trust myself to its swiftly flowing waters? If I
perished before I could reach the light of day once more I should be no
worse off than I was now, for death stared me in the face, while there
was always the possibility that, as I was born under a lucky star, I
might find myself safe and sound in some desirable land. I decided at
any rate to risk it, and speedily built myself a stout raft of
drift-wood with strong cords, of which enough and to spare lay strewn
upon the beach. I then made up many packages of rubies, emeralds, rock
crystal, ambergris, and precious stuffs, and bound them upon my raft,
being careful to preserve the balance, and then I seated myself upon it,
having two small oars that I had fashioned laid ready to my hand, and
loosed the cord which held it to the bank. Once out in the current my
raft flew swiftly under the gloomy archway, and I found myself in total
darkness, carried smoothly forward by the rapid river. On I went as it
seemed to me for many nights and days. Once the channel became so small
that I had a narrow escape of being crushed against the rocky roof, and
after that I took the precaution of lying flat upon my precious bales.
Though I only ate what was absolutely necessary to keep myself alive,
the inevitable moment came when, after swallowing my last morsel of
food, I began to wonder if I must after all die of hunger. Then, worn
out with anxiety and fatigue, I fell into a deep sleep, and when I again
opened my eyes I was once more in the light of day; a beautiful country
lay before me, and my raft, which was tied to the river bank, was
surrounded by friendly looking black men. I rose and saluted them, and
they spoke to me in return, but I could not understand a word of their
language. Feeling perfectly bewildered by my sudden return to life and
light, I murmured to myself in Arabic, "Close thine eyes, and while thou
sleepest Heaven will change thy fortune from evil to good."

One of the natives, who understood this tongue, then came forward
saying:--

"My brother, be not surprised to see us; this is our land, and as we
came to get water from the river we noticed your raft floating down it,
and one of us swam out and brought you to the shore. We have waited for
your awakening; tell us now whence you come and where you were going by
that dangerous way?"

I replied that nothing would please me better than to tell them, but
that I was starving, and would fain eat something first. I was soon
supplied with all I needed, and having satisfied my hunger I told them
faithfully all that had befallen me. They were lost in wonder at my tale
when it was interpreted to them, and said that adventures so surprising
must be related to their King only by the man to whom they had happened.
So, procuring a horse, they mounted me upon it, and we set out, followed
by several strong men carrying my raft just as it was upon their
shoulders. In this order we marched into the city of Serendib, where the
natives presented me to their King, whom I saluted in the Indian
fashion, prostrating myself at his feet and kissing the ground; but the
monarch bade me rise and sit beside him, asking first what was my name.

"I am Sindbad," I replied, "whom men call 'the Sailor,' for I have
voyaged much upon many seas."

"And how came you here?" asked the King.

I told my story, concealing nothing, and his surprise and delight were
so great that he ordered my adventures to be written in letters of gold
and laid up in the archives of his kingdom.

Presently my raft was brought in and the bales opened in his presence,
and the king declared that in all his treasury there were no such rubies
and emeralds as those which lay in great heaps before him. Seeing that
he looked at them with interest, I ventured to say that I myself and all
that I had were at his disposal, but he answered me smiling:--

"Nay, Sindbad. Heaven forbid that I should covet your riches; I will
rather add to them, for I desire that you shall not leave my kingdom
without some tokens of my good-will." He then commanded his officers to
provide me with a suitable lodging at his expense, and sent slaves to
wait upon me and carry my raft and my bales to my new dwelling-place.
You may imagine that I praised his generosity and gave him grateful
thanks, nor did I fail to present myself daily in his audience-chamber,
and for the rest of my time I amused myself in seeing all that was most
worthy of attention in the city. The island of Serendib being situated
on the equinoctial line, the days and nights there are of equal length.
The chief city is placed at the end of a beautiful valley, formed by the
highest mountain in the world, which is in the middle of the island. I
had the curiosity to ascend to its very summit, for this was the place
to which Adam was banished out of Paradise. Here are found rubies and
many precious things, and rare plants grow abundantly, with cedar-trees
and cocoa-palms. On the sea-shore and at the mouths of the rivers the
divers seek for pearls, and in some valleys diamonds are plentiful.
After many days I petitioned the King that I might return to my own
country, to which he graciously consented. Moreover, he loaded me with
rich gifts, and when I went to take leave of him he intrusted me with a
royal present and a letter to the Commander of the Faithful, our
sovereign lord, saying, "I pray you give these to the Caliph
Harun-al-Rashid, and assure him of my friendship."

I accepted the charge respectfully, and soon embarked upon the vessel
which the King himself had chosen for me. The King's letter was written
in blue characters upon a rare and precious skin of yellowish color, and
these were the words of it: "The King of the Indies, before whom walk a
thousand elephants, who lives in a palace, of which the roof blazes with
a hundred thousand rubies, and whose treasure-house contains twenty
thousand diamond crowns, to the Caliph Harun-al-Rashid sends greeting.
Though the offering we present to you is unworthy of your notice, we
pray you to accept it as a mark of the esteem and friendship which we
cherish for you, and of which we gladly send you this token, and we ask
of you a like regard if you deem us worthy of it. Adieu, brother."

The present consisted of a vase carved from a single ruby, six inches
high and as thick as my finger; this was filled with the choicest
pearls, large, and of perfect shape and lustre; secondly, a huge
snake-skin, with scales as large as a sequin, which would preserve from
sickness those who slept upon it. Then quantities of aloes-wood,
camphor, and pistachio-nuts; and lastly, a beautiful slave-girl, whose
robes glittered with precious stones.

After a long and prosperous voyage we landed at Balsora, and I made
haste to reach Bagdad, and taking the King's letter I presented myself
at the palace gate, followed by the beautiful slave, and various members
of my own family, bearing the treasure.

As soon as I had declared my errand I was conducted into the presence of
the Caliph, to whom, after I had made my obeisance, I gave the letter
and the King's gift, and when he had examined them he demanded of me
whether the Prince of Serendib was really as rich and powerful as he
claimed to be.

"Commander of the Faithful," I replied, again bowing humbly before him,
"I can assure your Majesty that he has in no way exaggerated his wealth
and grandeur. Nothing can equal the magnificence of his palace. When he
goes abroad his throne is prepared upon the back of an elephant, and on
either side of him ride his ministers, his favorites, and courtiers. On
his elephant's neck sits an officer, his golden lance in his hand, and
behind him stands another bearing a pillar of gold, at the top of which
is an emerald as long as my hand. A thousand men in cloth of gold,
mounted upon richly caparisoned elephants, go before him, and as the
procession moves onward the officer who guides his elephant cries aloud,
'Behold the mighty monarch, the powerful and valiant Sultan of the
Indies, whose palace is covered with a hundred thousand rubies, who
possesses twenty thousand diamond crowns. Behold a monarch greater than
Solomon and Mihrage in all their glory!'

"Then the one who stands behind the throne answers: 'This king, so great
and powerful, must die, must die, must die!'

"And the first takes up the chant again, 'All praise to Him who lives
for evermore.'

"Further, my lord, in Serendib no judge is needed, for to the King
himself his people come for justice."

The Caliph was well satisfied with my report.

"From the King's letter," said he, "I judged that he was a wise man. It
seems that he is worthy of his people, and his people of him."

So saying he dismissed me with rich presents, and I returned in peace to
my own house.

When Sindbad had done speaking his guests withdrew, Hindbad having first
received a hundred sequins, but all returned next day to hear the story
of the seventh voyage.




SEVENTH AND LAST VOYAGE

After my sixth voyage I was quite determined that I would go to sea no
more. I was now of an age to appreciate a quiet life, and I had run
risks enough. I only wished to end my days in peace. One day, however,
when I was entertaining a number of my friends, I was told that an
officer of the Caliph wished to speak to me, and when he was admitted he
bade me to follow him into the presence of Harun-al-Rashid, which I
accordingly did. After I had saluted him, the Caliph said:--

"I have sent for you, Sindbad, because I need your services. I have
chosen you to bear a letter and a gift to the King of Serendib in return
for his message of friendship."

The Caliph's commandment fell upon me like a thunderbolt.

"Commander of the Faithful," I answered, "I am ready to do all that your
Majesty commands, but I humbly pray you to remember that I am utterly
disheartened by the unheard-of sufferings I have undergone. Indeed, I
have made a vow never again to leave Bagdad."

With this I gave him a long account of some of my strangest adventures,
to which he listened patiently.

"I admit," said he, "that you have indeed had some extraordinary
experiences, but I do not see why they should hinder you from doing as I
wish. You have only to go straight to Serendib and give my message, then
you are free to come back and do as you will. But go you must; my honor
and dignity demand it."

Seeing that there was no help for it, I declared myself willing to obey;
and the Caliph, delighted at having got his own way, gave me a thousand
sequins for the expenses of the voyage. I was soon ready to start, and
taking the letter and the present I embarked at Balsora, and sailed
quickly and safely to Serendib. Here, when I had disclosed my errand, I
was well received, and brought into the presence of the king, who
greeted me with joy.

"Welcome, Sindbad," he cried. "I have thought of you often, and rejoice
to see you once more."

After thanking him for the honor that he did me, I displayed the
Caliph's gifts. First a bed with complete hangings all cloth of gold,
which cost a thousand sequins, and another like to it of crimson stuff.
Fifty robes of rich embroidery, a hundred of the finest white linen from
Cairo, Suez, Cufa, and Alexandria. Then more beds of different fashion,
and an agate vase carved with the figure of a man aiming an arrow at a
lion, and finally a costly table, which had once belonged to King
Solomon. The King of Serendib received with satisfaction the assurance
of the Caliph's friendliness towards him, and now my task being
accomplished I was anxious to depart, but it was some time before the
king would think of letting me go. At last, however, he dismissed me
with many presents, and I lost no time in going on board a ship, which
sailed at once, and for four days all went well. On the fifth day we had
the misfortune to fall in with pirates, who seized our vessel, killing
all who resisted, and making prisoners of those who were prudent enough
to submit at once, of whom I was one. When they had despoiled us of all
we possessed, they forced us to put on vile raiment, and sailing to a
distant island there sold us for slaves. I fell into the hands of a rich
merchant, who took me home with him, and clothed and fed me well, and
after some days sent for me and questioned me as to what I could do.

I answered that I was a rich merchant who had been captured by pirates,
and therefore I knew no trade.

"Tell me," said he, "can you shoot with a bow?"

I replied that this had been one of the pastimes of my youth, and that
doubtless with practice my skill would come back to me.

Upon this he provided me with a bow and arrows, and mounting me with him
upon his own elephant took the way to a vast forest which lay far from
the town. When we had reached the wildest part of it we stopped, and my
master said to me: "This forest swarms with elephants. Hide yourself in
this great tree, and shoot at all that pass you. When you have succeeded
in killing one come and tell me."

So saying he gave me a supply of food, and returned to the town, and I
perched myself high up in the tree and kept watch. That night I saw
nothing, but just after sunrise the next morning a large herd of
elephants came crashing and trampling by. I lost no time in letting fly
several arrows, and at last one of the great animals fell to the ground
dead, and the others retreated, leaving me free to come down from my
hiding-place and run back to tell my master of my success, for which I
was praised and regaled with good things. Then we went back to the
forest together and dug a mighty trench in which we buried the elephant
I had killed, in order that when it became a skeleton my master might
return and secure its tusks.

For two months I hunted thus, and no day passed without my securing an
elephant. Of course I did not always station myself in the same tree,
but sometimes in one place, sometimes in another. One morning as I
watched the coming of the elephants I was surprised to see that, instead
of passing the tree I was in, as they usually did, they paused, and
completely surrounded it, trumpeting horribly, and shaking the very
ground with their heavy tread, and when I saw that their eyes were fixed
upon me I was terrified, and my arrows dropped from my trembling hand. I
had indeed good reason for my terror when, an instant later, the largest
of the animals wound his trunk round the stem of my tree, and with one
mighty effort tore it up by the roots, bringing me to the ground
entangled in its branches. I thought now that my last hour was surely
come, but the huge creature, picking me up gently enough, set me upon
its back, where I clung more dead than alive, and followed by the whole
herd turned and crashed off into the dense forest. It seemed to me a
long time before I was once more set upon my feet by the elephant, and I
stood as if in a dream watching the herd, which turned and trampled off
in another direction, and were soon hidden in the dense underwood. Then,
recovering myself, I looked about me, and found that I was standing upon
the side of a great hill, strewn as far as I could see on either hand
with bones and tusks of elephants. "This then must be the elephants'
burying-place," I said to myself, "and they must have brought me here
that I might cease to persecute them, seeing that I want nothing but
their tusks, and here lie more than I could carry away in a lifetime."

Whereupon I turned and made for the city as fast as I could go, not
seeing a single elephant by the way, which convinced me that they had
retired deeper into the forest to leave the way open to the Ivory Hill,
and I did not know how sufficiently to admire their sagacity. After a
day and a night I reached my master's house, and was received by him
with joyful surprise.

"Ah! poor Sindbad," he cried, "I was wondering what could have become of
you. When I went to the forest I found the tree newly uprooted, and the
arrows lying beside it, and I feared I should never see you again. Pray
tell me how you escaped death."

I soon satisfied his curiosity, and the next day we went together to the
Ivory Hill, and he was overjoyed to find that I had told him nothing but
the truth. When we had loaded our elephant with as many tusks as it
could carry and were on our way back to the city, he said:--

"My brother--since I can no longer treat as a slave one who has enriched
me thus--take your liberty, and may Heaven prosper you. I will no longer
conceal from you that these wild elephants have killed numbers of our
slaves every year. No matter what good advice we gave them, they were
caught sooner or later. You alone have escaped the wiles of these
animals, therefore you must be under the special protection of Heaven.
Now through you the whole town will be enriched without further loss of
life, therefore you shall not only receive your liberty, but I will also
bestow a fortune upon you."

To which I replied, "Master, I thank you, and wish you all prosperity.
For myself I only ask liberty to return to my own country."

"It is well," he answered, "the monsoon will soon bring the ivory ships
hither, then I will send you on your way with somewhat to pay your
passage."

So I stayed with him till the time of the monsoon, and every day we
added to our store of ivory till all his warehouses were overflowing
with it. By this time the other merchants knew the secret, but there was
enough and to spare for all. When the ships at last arrived my master
himself chose the one in which I was to sail, and put on board for me a
great store of choice provisions, also ivory in abundance, and all the
costliest curiosities of the country, for which I could not thank him
enough, and so we parted. I left the ship at the first port we came to,
not feeling at ease upon the sea after all that had happened to me by
reason of it, and having disposed of my ivory for much gold, and bought
many rare and costly presents, I loaded my pack animals, and joined a
caravan of merchants. Our journey was long and tedious, but I bore it
patiently, reflecting that at least I had not to fear tempests, nor
pirates, nor serpents, nor any of the other perils from which I had
suffered before, and at length we reached Bagdad. My first care was to
present myself before the Caliph, and give him an account of my embassy.
He assured me that my long absence had disquieted him much, but he had
nevertheless hoped for the best. As to my adventure among the elephants
he heard it with amazement, declaring that he could not have believed it
had not my truthfulness been well-known to him.

By his orders this story and the others I had told him were written by
his scribes in letters of gold, and laid up among his treasures. I took
my leave of him, well satisfied with the honors and rewards he bestowed
upon me; and since that time I have rested from my labors, and given
myself up wholly to my family and my friends.

Thus Sindbad ended the story of his seventh and last voyage, and turning
to Hindbad he added:--

"Well, my friend, and what do you think now? Have you ever heard of
anyone who has suffered more, or had more narrow escapes than I have? Is
it not just that I should now enjoy a life of ease and tranquillity?"

Hindbad drew near, and kissing his hand respectfully, replied, "Sir, you
have indeed known fearful perils; my troubles have been nothing compared
to yours. Moreover, the generous use you make of your wealth proves that
you deserve it. May you live long and happily in the enjoyment of it."

Sindbad then gave him a hundred sequins, and henceforward counted him
among his friends; also he caused him to give up his profession as a
porter, and to eat daily at his table that he might all his life
remember Sindbad the Sailor.




ALADDIN'S WONDERFUL LAMP

There once lived a poor tailor, who had a son called Aladdin, a
careless, idle boy, who would do nothing but play all day long in the
streets with little idle boys like himself. This so grieved the father
that he died; yet, in spite of his mother's tears and prayers, Aladdin
did not mend his ways. One day, when he was playing in the streets as
usual, a stranger asked him his age, and if he were not the son of
Mustapha the tailor.

"I am, sir," replied Aladdin; "but he died a long while ago."

On this the stranger, who was a famous African magician, fell on his
neck and kissed him, saying: "I am your uncle, and knew you from your
likeness to my brother. Go to your mother and tell her I am coming."

Aladdin ran home, and told his mother of his newly-found uncle.

"Indeed, child," she said, "your father had a brother, but I always
thought he was dead."

However, she prepared supper, and bade Aladdin seek his uncle, who came
laden with wine and fruit. He presently fell down and kissed the place
where Mustapha used to sit, bidding Aladdin's mother not to be surprised
at not having seen him before, as he had been forty years out of the
country. He then turned to Aladdin and asked him his trade, at which the
boy hung his head, while his mother burst into tears. On learning that
Aladdin was idle and would learn no trade, he offered to take a shop for
him and stock it with merchandise. Next day he bought Aladdin a fine
suit of clothes, and took him all over the city, showing him the sights,
and brought him home at nightfall to his mother, who was overjoyed to
see her son so fine.

Next day the magician led Aladdin into some beautiful gardens a long way
outside the city gates. They sat down by a fountain, and the magician
pulled a cake from his girdle, which he divided between them. They then
journeyed onwards till they almost reached the mountains. Aladdin was so
tired that he begged to go back, but the magician beguiled him with
pleasant stories, and led him on in spite of himself.

At last they came to two mountains divided by a narrow valley.

"We will go no farther," said the false uncle. "I will show you
something wonderful; only do you gather up sticks while I kindle a
fire."

When it was lit the magician threw on it a powder he had about him, at
the same time saying some magical words. The earth trembled a little and
opened in front of them, disclosing a square flat stone with a brass
ring in the middle to raise it by. Aladdin tried to run away, but the
magician caught him and gave him a blow that knocked him down.

"What have I done, uncle?" he said piteously; whereupon the magician
said more kindly: "Fear nothing, but obey me. Beneath this stone lies a
treasure which is to be yours, and no one else may touch it, so you must
do exactly as I tell you."

At the word treasure, Aladdin forgot his fears, and grasped the ring as
he was told, saying the names of his father and grandfather. The stone
came up quite easily and some steps appeared.

"Go down," said the magician; "at the foot of those steps you will find
an open door leading into three large halls. Tuck up your gown and go
through them without touching anything, or you will die instantly. These
halls lead into a garden of fine fruit-trees. Walk on till you come to a
niche in a terrace where stands a lighted lamp. Pour out the oil it
contains and bring it to me."

He drew a ring from his finger and gave it to Aladdin, bidding him
prosper.

Aladdin found everything as the magician had said, gathered some fruit
off the trees, and, having got the lamp, arrived at the mouth of the
cave. The magician cried out in a great hurry:--

"Make haste and give me the lamp." This Aladdin refused to do until he
was out of the cave. The magician flew into a terrible passion, and
throwing some more powder on the fire, he said something, and the stone
rolled back into its place.

The magician left Persia forever, which plainly showed that he was no
uncle of Aladdin's, but a cunning magician who had read in his magic
books of a wonderful lamp, which would make him the most powerful man in
the world. Though he alone knew where to find it, he could only receive
it from the hand of another. He had picked out the foolish Aladdin for
this purpose, intending to get the lamp and kill him afterwards.

For two days Aladdin remained in the dark, crying and lamenting. At last
he clasped his hands in prayer, and in so doing rubbed the ring, which
the magician had forgotten to take from him. Immediately an enormous and
frightful genie rose out of the earth, saying:--

"What wouldst thou with me? I am the Slave of the Ring, and will obey
thee in all things."

Aladdin fearlessly replied: "Deliver me from this place!" whereupon the
earth opened, and he found himself outside. As soon as his eyes could
bear the light he went home, but fainted on the threshold. When he came
to himself he told his mother what had passed, and showed her the lamp
and the fruits he had gathered in the garden, which were in reality
precious stones. He then asked for some food.

"Alas! child," she said, "I have nothing in the house, but I have spun a
little cotton and will go and sell it."

Aladdin bade her keep her cotton, for he would sell the lamp instead. As
it was very dirty she began to rub it, that it might fetch a higher
price. Instantly a hideous genie appeared, and asked what she would
have. She fainted away, but Aladdin, snatching the lamp, said boldly:--

"Fetch me something to eat!"

The genie returned with a silver bowl, twelve silver plates containing
rich meats, two silver cups, and two bottles of wine. Aladdin's mother,
when she came to herself, said:--

"Whence comes this splendid feast?"

"Ask not, but eat," replied Aladdin.

So they sat at breakfast till it was dinner-time, and Aladdin told his
mother about the lamp. She begged him to sell it, and have nothing to do
with devils.

"No," said Aladdin, "since chance has made us aware of its virtues, we
will use it and the ring likewise, which I shall always wear on my
finger." When they had eaten all the genie had brought, Aladdin sold one
of the silver plates, and so on till none was left. He then had recourse
to the genie, who gave him another set of plates, and thus they lived
for many years.

One day Aladdin heard an order from the Sultan proclaimed that everyone
was to stay at home and close his shutters while the princess, his
daughter, went to and from the bath. Aladdin was seized by a desire to
see her face, which was very difficult, as she always went veiled. He
hid himself behind the door of the bath, and peeped through a chink. The
princess lifted her veil as she went in, and looked so beautiful that
Aladdin fell in love with her at first sight. He went home so changed
that his mother was frightened. He told her he loved the princess so
deeply that he could not live without her, and meant to ask her in
marriage of her father. His mother, on hearing this, burst out laughing,
but Aladdin at last prevailed upon her to go before the Sultan and carry
his request. She fetched a napkin and laid in it the magic fruits from
the enchanted garden, which sparkled and shone like the most beautiful
jewels. She took these with her to please the Sultan, and set out,
trusting in the lamp. The grand-vizir and the lords of council had just
gone in as she entered the hall and placed herself in front of the
Sultan. He, however, took no notice of her. She went every day for a
week, and stood in the same place.

When the council broke up on the sixth day the Sultan said to his vizir:
"I see a certain woman in the audience-chamber every day carrying
something in a napkin. Call her next time, that I may find out what she
wants."

Next day, at a sign from the vizir, she went up to the foot of the
throne, and remained kneeling till the Sultan said to her: "Rise, good
woman, and tell me what you want."

She hesitated, so the Sultan sent away all but the vizir, and bade her
speak freely, promising to forgive her beforehand for anything she might
say. She then told him of her son's violent love for the princess.

"I prayed him to forget her," she said, "but in vain; he threatened to
do some desperate deed if I refused to go and ask your Majesty for the
hand of the princess. Now I pray you to forgive not me alone, but my son
Aladdin."

The Sultan asked her kindly what she had in the napkin, whereupon she
unfolded the jewels and presented them.

He was thunderstruck, and turning to the vizir said: "What sayest thou?
Ought I not to bestow the princess on one who values her at such a
price?"

The vizir, who wanted her for his own son, begged the Sultan to withhold
her for three months, in the course of which he hoped his son would
contrive to make him a richer present. The Sultan granted this, and told
Aladdin's mother that, though he consented to the marriage, she must not
appear before him again for three months.

Aladdin waited patiently for nearly three months, but after two had
elapsed his mother, going into the city to buy oil, found everyone
rejoicing, and asked what was going on.

"Do you not know," was the answer, "that the son of the grand-vizir is
to marry the Sultan's daughter to-night?"

Breathless, she ran and told Aladdin, who was overwhelmed at first, but
presently bethought him of the lamp. He rubbed it, and the genie
appeared, saying: "What is thy will?"

Aladdin replied: "The Sultan, as thou knowest, has broken his promise to
me, and the vizir's son is to have the princess. My command is that
to-night you bring hither the bride and bridegroom."

"Master, I obey," said the genie.

Aladdin then went to his chamber, where, sure enough at midnight the
genie transported the bed containing the vizir's son and the princess.

"Take this new-married man," he said, "and put him outside in the cold,
and return at daybreak."

Whereupon the genie took the vizir's son out of bed, leaving Aladdin
with the princess.

"Fear nothing," Aladdin said to her; "you are my wife, promised to me by
your unjust father, and no harm shall come to you."

The princess was too frightened to speak, and passed the most miserable
night of her life, while Aladdin lay down beside her and slept soundly.
At the appointed hour the genie fetched in the shivering bridegroom,
laid him in his place, and transported the bed back to the palace.

Presently the Sultan came to wish his daughter good-morning. The unhappy
vizir's son jumped up and hid himself, while the princess would not say
a word, and was very sorrowful.

The Sultan sent her mother to her, who said: "How comes it, child, that
you will not speak to your father? What has happened?"

The princess sighed deeply, and at last told her mother how, during the
night, the bed had been carried into some strange house, and what had
passed there. Her mother did not believe her in the least, but bade her
rise and consider it an idle dream.

The following night exactly the same thing happened, and next morning,
on the princess's refusing to speak, the Sultan threatened to cut off
her head. She then confessed all, bidding him ask the vizir's son if it
were not so. The Sultan told the vizir to ask his son, who owned the
truth, adding that, dearly as he loved the princess, he had rather die
than go through another such fearful night, and wished to be separated
from her. His wish was granted, and there was an end of feasting and
rejoicing.

When the three months were over, Aladdin sent his mother to remind the
Sultan of his promise. She stood in the same place as before, and the
Sultan, who had forgotten Aladdin, at once remembered him, and sent for
her. On seeing her poverty the Sultan felt less inclined than ever to
keep his word, and asked the vizir's advice, who counselled him to set
so high a value on the princess that no man living could come up to it.

The Sultan then turned to Aladdin's mother, saying: "Good woman, a
Sultan must remember his promises, and I will remember mine, but your
son must first send me forty basins of gold brimful of jewels, carried
by forty black slaves, led by as many white ones, splendidly dressed.
Tell him that I await his answer." The mother of Aladdin bowed low and
went home, thinking all was lost.

She gave Aladdin the message, adding: "He may wait long enough for your
answer!"

"Not so long, mother, as you think," her son replied. "I would do a
great deal more than that for the princess." He summoned the genie, and
in a few moments the eighty slaves arrived, and filled up the small
house and garden.

Aladdin made them set out to the palace, two and two, followed by his
mother. They were so richly dressed, with such splendid jewels in their
girdles, that everyone crowded to see them and the basins of gold they
carried on their heads.

They entered the palace, and, after kneeling before the Sultan, stood in
a half-circle round the throne with their arms crossed, while Aladdin's
mother presented them to the Sultan.

He hesitated no longer, but said: "Good woman, return and tell your son
that I wait for him with open arms."

She lost no time in telling Aladdin, bidding him make haste. But Aladdin
first called the genie.

"I want a scented bath," he said, "a richly embroidered habit, a horse
surpassing the Sultan's, and twenty slaves to attend me. Besides this,
six slaves, beautifully dressed, to wait on my mother; and lastly, ten
thousand pieces of gold in ten purses."

No sooner said than done. Aladdin mounted his horse and passed through
the streets, the slaves strewing gold as they went. Those who had played
with him in his childhood knew him not, he had grown so handsome.

When the Sultan saw him he came down from his throne, embraced him, and
led him into a hall where a feast was spread, intending to marry him to
the princess that very day.

But Aladdin refused, saying, "I must build a palace fit for her," and
took his leave.

Once home he said to the genie: "Build me a palace of the finest marble,
set with jasper, agate, and other precious stones. In the middle you
shall build me a large hall with a dome, its four walls of massy gold
and silver, each side having six windows, whose lattices, all except
one, which is to be left unfinished, must be set with diamonds and
rubies. There must be stables and horses and grooms and slaves; go and
see about it!"

The palace was finished by next day, and the genie carried him there and
showed him all his orders faithfully carried out, even to the laying of
a velvet carpet from Aladdin's palace to the Sultan's. Aladdin's mother
then dressed herself carefully, and walked to the palace with her
slaves, while he followed her on horseback. The Sultan sent musicians
with trumpets and cymbals to meet them, so that the air resounded with
music and cheers. She was taken to the princess, who saluted her and
treated her with great honor. At night the princess said good-by to her
father, and set out on the carpet for Aladdin's palace, with his mother
at her side, and followed by the hundred slaves. She was charmed at the
sight of Aladdin, who ran to receive her.

"Princess," he said, "blame your beauty for my boldness if I have
displeased you."

She told him that, having seen him, she willingly obeyed her father in
this matter. After the wedding had taken place Aladdin led her into the
hall, where a feast was spread, and she supped with him, after which
they danced till midnight.

Next day Aladdin invited the Sultan to see the palace. On entering the
hall with the four-and-twenty windows, with their rubies, diamonds, and
emeralds, he cried:--

"It is a world's wonder! There is only one thing that surprises me. Was
it by accident that one window was left unfinished?"

"No, sir, by design," returned Aladdin. "I wished your Majesty to have
the glory of finishing this palace."

The Sultan was pleased, and sent for the best jewellers in the city. He
showed them the unfinished window, and bade them fit it up like the
others.

"Sir," replied their spokesman, "we cannot find jewels enough."

The Sultan had his own fetched, which they soon used, but to no purpose,
for in a month's time the work was not half done. Aladdin, knowing that
their task was vain, bade them undo their work and carry the jewels
back, and the genie finished the window at his command. The Sultan was
surprised to receive his jewels again and visited Aladdin, who showed
him the window finished. The Sultan embraced him, the envious vizir
meanwhile hinting that it was the work of enchantment.

Aladdin had won the hearts of the people by his gentle bearing. He was
made captain of the Sultan's armies, and won several battles for him,
but remained modest and courteous as before, and lived thus in peace and
content for several years.

But far away in Africa the magician remembered Aladdin, and by his magic
arts discovered that Aladdin, instead of perishing miserably in the
cave, had escaped, and had married a princess, with whom he was living
in great honor and wealth. He knew that the poor tailor's son could only
have accomplished this by means of the lamp, and travelled night and day
till he reached the capital of China, bent on Aladdin's ruin. As he
passed through the town he heard people talking everywhere about a
marvellous palace.

"Forgive my ignorance," he asked, "what is this palace you speak of?"

"Have you not heard of Prince Aladdin's palace," was the reply, "the
greatest wonder of the world? I will direct you if you have a mind to
see it."

The magician thanked him who spoke, and having seen the palace knew that
it had been raised by the genie of the lamp, and became half mad with
rage. He determined to get hold of the lamp, and again plunge Aladdin
into the deepest poverty.

Unluckily, Aladdin had gone a-hunting for eight days, which gave the
magician plenty of time. He bought a dozen copper lamps, put them into a
basket, and went to the palace, crying: "New lamps for old!" followed by
a jeering crowd.

The princess, sitting in the hall of four-and-twenty windows, sent a
slave to find out what the noise was about, who came back laughing, so
that the princess scolded her.

"Madam," replied the slave, "who can help laughing to see an old fool
offering to exchange fine new lamps for old ones?"

Another slave, hearing this, said: "There is an old one on the cornice
there which he can have."

Now this was the magic lamp, which Aladdin had left there, as he could
not take it out hunting with him. The princess, not knowing its value,
laughingly bade the slave take it and make the exchange.

She went and said to the magician: "Give me a new lamp for this."

He snatched it and bade the slave take her choice, amid the jeers of the
crowd. Little he cared, but left off crying his lamps, and went out of
the city gates to a lonely place, where he remained till nightfall, when
he pulled out the lamp and rubbed it. The genie appeared, and at the
magician's command carried him, together with the palace and the
princess in it, to a lonely place in Africa.

Next morning the Sultan looked out of the window towards Aladdin's
palace and rubbed his eyes, for it was gone. He sent for the vizir, and
asked what had become of the palace. The vizir looked out too, and was
lost in astonishment. He again put it down to enchantment, and this time
the Sultan believed him, and sent thirty men on horseback to fetch
Aladdin in chains. They met him riding home, bound him, and forced him
to go with them on foot. The people, however, who loved him, followed,
armed, to see that he came to no harm. He was carried before the Sultan,
who ordered the executioner to cut off his head. The executioner made
Aladdin kneel down, bandaged his eyes, and raised his scimitar to
strike. At that instant the vizir, who saw that the crowd had forced
their way into the courtyard and were scaling the walls to rescue
Aladdin, called to the executioner to stay his hand. The people, indeed,
looked so threatening that the Sultan gave way and ordered Aladdin to be
unbound, and pardoned him in the sight of the crowd.

Aladdin now begged to know what he had done.

"False wretch!" said the Sultan, "come hither," and showed him from the
window the place where his palace had stood.

Aladdin was so amazed that he could not say a word.

"Where is my palace and my daughter?" demanded the Sultan. "For the
first I am not so deeply concerned, but my daughter I must have, and you
must find her or lose your head."

Aladdin begged for forty days in which to find her, promising if he
failed, to return and suffer death at the Sultan's pleasure. His prayer
was granted, and he went forth sadly from the Sultan's presence. For
three days he wandered about like a madman, asking everyone what had
become of his palace, but they only laughed and pitied him. He came to
the banks of a river, and knelt down to say his prayers before throwing
himself in. In so doing he rubbed the magic ring he still wore.

The genie he had seen in the cave appeared, and asked his will.

"Save my life, genie," said Aladdin, "and bring my palace back."

"That is not in my power," said the genie; "I am only the Slave of the
Ring; you must ask the Slave of the Lamp."

"Even so," said Aladdin, "but thou canst take me to the palace, and set
me down under my dear wife's window." He at once found himself in
Africa, under the window of the princess, and fell asleep out of sheer
weariness.

He was awakened by the singing of the birds, and his heart was lighter.
He saw plainly that all his misfortunes were owing to the loss of the
lamp, and vainly wondered who had robbed him of it.

That morning the princess rose earlier than she had done since she had
been carried into Africa by the magician, whose company she was forced
to endure once a day. She, however, treated him so harshly that he dared
not live there altogether. As she was dressing, one of her women looked
out and saw Aladdin. The princess ran and opened the window, and at the
noise she made Aladdin looked up. She called to him to come to her, and
great was the joy of these lovers at seeing each other again.

After he had kissed her Aladdin said: "I beg of you, Princess, in God's
name, before we speak of anything else, for your own sake and mine, tell
me what has become of an old lamp I left on the cornice in the hall of
four-and-twenty windows, when I went a-hunting."

"Alas!" she said, "I am the innocent cause of our sorrows," and told him
of the exchange of the lamp.

"Now I know," cried Aladdin, "that we have to thank the African magician
for this! Where is the lamp?"

"He carries it about with him," said the princess, "I know, for he
pulled it out of his breast to show me. He wishes me to break my faith
with you and marry him, saying that you were beheaded by my father's
command. He is forever speaking ill of you, but I only reply by my
tears. If I persist, I doubt not that he will use violence."

Aladdin comforted her, and left her for awhile. He changed clothes with
the first person he met in the town, and having bought a certain powder
returned to the princess, who let him in by a little side door.

"Put on your most beautiful dress," he said to her, "and receive the
magician with smiles, leading him to believe that you have forgotten me.
Invite him to sup with you, and say you wish to taste the wine of his
country. He will go for some, and while he is gone I will tell you what
to do."

She listened carefully to Aladdin, and when he left her arrayed herself
gayly for the first time since she left China. She put on a girdle and
head-dress of diamonds, and seeing in a glass that she looked more
beautiful than ever, received the magician, saying to his great
amazement: "I have made up my mind that Aladdin is dead, and that all my
tears will not bring him back to me, so I am resolved to mourn no more,
and have therefore invited you to sup with me; but I am tired of the
wines of China, and would fain taste those of Africa."

The magician flew to his cellar, and the princess put the powder Aladdin
had given her in her cup. When he returned she asked him to drink her
health in the wine of Africa, handing him her cup in exchange for his as
a sign she was reconciled to him.

Before drinking the magician made her a speech in praise of her beauty,
but the princess cut him short, saying:--

"Let me drink first, and you shall say what you will afterwards." She
set her cup to her lips and kept it there, while the magician drained
his to the dregs and fell back lifeless.

The princess then opened the door to Aladdin, and flung her arms round
his neck, but Aladdin put her away, bidding her to leave him, as he had
more to do. He then went to the dead magician, took the lamp out of his
vest, and bade the genie carry the palace and all in it back to China.
This was done, and the princess in her chamber only felt two little
shocks, and little thought she was at home again.

The Sultan, who was sitting in his closet, mourning for his lost
daughter, happened to look up, and rubbed his eyes, for there stood the
palace as before! He hastened thither, and Aladdin received him in the
hall of the four-and-twenty windows, with the princess at his side.
Aladdin told him what had happened, and showed him the dead body of the
magician, that he might believe. A ten days' feast was proclaimed, and
it seemed as if Aladdin might now live the rest of his life in peace;
but it was not to be.

The African magician had a younger brother, who was, if possible, more
wicked and more cunning than himself. He travelled to China to avenge
his brother's death, and went to visit a pious woman called Fatima,
thinking she might be of use to him. He entered her cell and clapped a
dagger to her breast, telling her to rise and do his bidding on pain of
death. He changed clothes with her, colored his face like hers, put on
her veil and murdered her, so that she might tell no tales. Then he went
towards the palace of Aladdin, and all the people thinking he was the
holy woman, gathered round him, kissing his hands and begging his
blessing. When he got to the palace there was such a noise going on
round him that the princess bade her slave look out of the window and
ask what was the matter. The slave said it was the holy woman, curing
people by her touch of their ailments, whereupon the princess, who had
long desired to see Fatima, sent for her. On coming to the princess the
magician offered up a prayer for her health and prosperity. When he had
done the princess made him sit by her, and begged him to stay with her
always. The false Fatima, who wished for nothing better, consented, but
kept his veil down for fear of discovery. The princess showed him the
hall, and asked him what he thought of it.

"It is truly beautiful," said the false Fatima. "In my mind it wants but
one thing."

"And what is that?" said the princess.

"If only a roc's egg," replied he, "were hung up from the middle of this
dome, it would be the wonder of the world."

After this the princess could think of nothing but a roc's egg, and when
Aladdin returned from hunting he found her in a very ill humor. He
begged to know what was amiss, and she told him that all her pleasure in
the hall was spoilt for the want of a roc's egg hanging from the dome.

"If that is all," replied Aladdin, "you shall soon be happy."

He left her and rubbed the lamp, and when the genie appeared commanded
him to bring a roc's egg. The genie gave such a loud and terrible shriek
that the hall shook.

"Wretch!" he said, "is it not enough that I have done everything for
you, but you must command me to bring my master and hang him up in the
midst of this dome? You and your wife and your palace deserve to be
burnt to ashes; but this request does not come from you, but from the
brother of the African magician whom you destroyed. He is now in your
palace disguised as the holy woman--whom he murdered. He it was who put
that wish into your wife's head. Take care of yourself, for he means to
kill you." So saying the genie disappeared.

Aladdin went back to the princess, saying his head ached, and requesting
that the holy Fatima should be fetched to lay her hands on it. But when
the magician came near, Aladdin, seizing his dagger, pierced him to the
heart.

"What have you done?" cried the princess. "You have killed the holy
woman!"

"Not so," replied Aladdin, "but a wicked magician," and told her of how
she had been deceived.

After this Aladdin and his wife lived in peace. He succeeded the Sultan
when he died, and reigned for many years, leaving behind him a long line
of kings.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Oriental Literature, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ORIENTAL LITERATURE ***

***** This file should be named 10121.txt or 10121.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/1/2/10121/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Beth Trapaga and PG Distributed
Proofreaders


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


