Project Gutenberg's Punchinello, Vol. 2, No. 36, December 3, 1870, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Punchinello, Vol. 2, No. 36, December 3, 1870

Author: Various

Release Date: November 26, 2003 [EBook #10292]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCHINELLO 36 ***




Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Steve Schulze and PG Distributed
Proofreaders







  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                           CONANT'S                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                        PATENT BINDERS                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                             FOR                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                        "PUNCHINELLO,"                        |
  |                                                              |
  |  to preserve the paper for binding, will be sent post-paid,  |
  |                 on receipt of One Dollar, by                 |
  |                                                              |
  |               PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,                |
  |                                                              |
  |               83 Nassau Street, New York City.               |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                      We will Mail Free                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                           A COVER,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |          Lettered and Stamped, with New Title-Page,          |
  |                                                              |
  |                         FOR BINDING                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                        FIRST VOLUME,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                   On Receipt of 50 Cents,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                            OR THE                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                   TITLE-PAGE ALONE, FREE,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                      On application to                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                 PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                      83 Nassau Street.                       |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                  HARRISON, BRADFORD & CO.'S                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                         STEEL PENS.                          |
  |                                                              |
  |     These Pens are of a finer quality, more durable, and     |
  | cheaper than any other Pen in the market. Special attention  |
  |  is called to the following grades, as being better suited   |
  |     for business purposes than any Pen manufactured. The     |
  |                                                              |
  |            "505," "22," and the "Anti-Corrosive,"            |
  |                                                              |
  |            we recommend for Bank and Office use.             |
  |                                                              |
  |                      D. APPLETON & CO.,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                Sole Agents for United States.                |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Vol. II.  No. 36.


PUNCHINELLO


SATURDAY, DECEMBER 3, 1870.


PUBLISHED BY THE

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,

83 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRANG'S LATEST PUBLICATIONS: "Joy of Autumn," "Prairie
Flowers," "Lake George," "West Point," "Beethoven," large
and small.

PRANG'S CHROMOS sold in all Art Stores throughout the
world.

PRANG'S ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE sent free on receipt of
stamp.

L. PRANG & CO., Boston.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: See 15th Page for Extra Premiums.]


  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                     Bound Volume No. 1.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |    The first volume of PUNCHINELLO--the only first-class,    |
  |  original, illustrated, humorous and satirical weekly paper  |
  | published in this country--ending with No. 26, September 24, |
  |                            1870,                             |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Bound In Extra Cloth,                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                  is now ready for delivery,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                         PRICE $2.50.                         |
  |                                                              |
  | Sent postpaid to any part of the United States on receipt of |
  |                            price.                            |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of the paper for one year, from October 1st, No. 27,  |
  |  and the Bound Volume (the latter prepaid), will be sent to  |
  |                  any subscriber for $5.50.                   |
  |                                                              |
  | Three copies for one year, and three Bound Volumes, with an  |
  |  extra copy of Bound Volume, to any person sending us three  |
  |                  subscriptions for $16.50.                   |
  |                                                              |
  | One copy of paper for one year, with a fine chromo premium,  |
  |                          for $4.00                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                Single copies, mailed free .10                |
  |                                                              |
  |     Back numbers can always be supplied, as the paper is     |
  |                        electrotyped.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |           Book canvassers will find this volume a            |
  |                                                              |
  |                      Very Salable Book.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |         Orders supplied at a very liberal discount.          |
  |                                                              |
  |    All remittances should be made in Post-Office orders.     |
  |                                                              |
  |   Canvassers wanted for the paper everywhere. Send for our   |
  |                      Special Circular.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                           Address,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Punchinello Publishing Co.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                     83 NASSAU ST., N.Y.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                      P.O. Box No. 2783.                      |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |               APPLICATIONS FOR ADVERTISING IN                |
  |                                                              |
  |                        "PUNCHINELLO"                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                    SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                       JOHN NICKINSON,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                         ROOM No. 4,                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                  No. 83 Nassau Street, N.Y.                  |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                           NEW YORK                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                       DAILY DEMOCRAT,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                     _AN EVENING PAPER._                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                      JAMES H. LAMBERT,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                    EDITOR AND PROPRIETOR.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |   All the news fifteen hours in advance of Morning Papers.   |
  |                                                              |
  |                       PRICE TWO CENTS.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |              Subscription price by mail, $6.00.              |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                       TO NEWS-DEALERS.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Punchinello's Monthly.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                The Weekly Numbers for October                |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Bound in a Handsome Cover,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                Is now ready. Price 40 cents.                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                          THE TRADE                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                       Supplied by the                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                    AMERICAN NEWS COMPANY,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |           Who are now prepared to receive orders.            |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                 Bowling Green Savings-Bank,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                         33 BROADWAY,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                          NEW YORK.                           |
  |                                                              |
  |            Open Every Day from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.             |
  |                                                              |
  |             _Deposits of any sum, from Ten Cents             |
  |         to Ten Thousand Dollars, will be received._          |
  |                                                              |
  |                   Six Per Cent. Interest,                    |
  |                   Free of Government Tax.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                   INTEREST ON NEW DEPOSITS                   |
  |                                                              |
  |            Commences on the First of every Month.            |
  |                                                              |
  |                  HENRY SMITH, _President._                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                REEVES E. SELMES, _Secretary._                |
  |                                                              |
  |        WALTER ROCHE, EDWARD HOGAN, _Vice-Presidents._        |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                    FACTS FOR THE LADIES.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |  I have a Wheeler & Wilson machine (No. 289), bought of Mr.  |
  |  Gardner in 1853, he having used it a year. I have used it   |
  | constantly, in shirt manufacturing as well as family sewing, |
  | sixteen years. My wife ran it four years, and earned between |
  |   $700 and $800, besides doing her housework. I have never   |
  |  expended fifty cents on it for repairs. It is, to-day, in   |
  |   the best of order, stitching fine linen bosoms nicely. I   |
  | started manufacturing shirts with this machine, and now have |
  | over one hundred of them in use. I have paid at least $3,000 |
  |  for the stitching done by this old machine, and it will do  |
  |              as much now as any machine I have.              |
  |                                                              |
  |                         W.F. TAYLOR.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                         BERLIN, N.Y.                         |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                     500 VOLUMES IN ONE:                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                        AGENTS WANTED                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                             FOR                              |
  |                                                              |
  |               The Library of Poetry and Song.                |
  |                                                              |
  |        _Being Choice Selections from the Best Poets,_        |
  |                                                              |
  |            ENGLISH, SCOTCH, IRISH, AND AMERICAN,             |
  |                                                              |
  |                   With an Introduction by                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                    WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT.                    |
  |                                                              |
  | This volume is the handsomest and cheapest subscription book |
  | extant, and contains in itself more to give it enduring fame |
  |      and make it universally popular than any book ever      |
  |  published. It is something in it, of _the best_, for every  |
  |   one--for the old, the middle aged, and the young. It has   |
  |   intellectual food for every taste and for every mood and   |
  | phase of human feeling, from the merriest humor up, through  |
  |   all the gradations of feeling, to the most touching and    |
  |  tender pathos. Excepting the Bible, this will be the book   |
  |    most loved, and the most frequently referred to in the    |
  |                           family.                            |
  |                                                              |
  | The whole work, page by page, poem by poem, has passed under |
  |  the educated criticism and scholarly eye of WILLIAM CULLEN  |
  |    BRYANT, a man reverenced among men, a poet great among    |
  |                            poets.                            |
  |                                                              |
  | _This is a Library of over_ 500 _Volumes in one book_, whose |
  |   contents, of no ephemeral nature or interest, will never   |
  | grow old or stale. It can be, and will be, read and re-read  |
  | with pleasure as long as its leaves hold together. Over 800  |
  | pages beautifully printed, choicely illustrated, handsomely  |
  |      bound. Sold only through Agents, by subscription.       |
  |                                                              |
  | Teachers, Clergymen, active Men, intelligent Women, can all  |
  | secure good pay with light work by taking an agency for this |
  |                  book. Terms very liberal.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |       Send for Circular containing full particulars to       |
  |                                                              |
  |              J.B. FORD & CO., 39 Park Row, N.Y.              |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                           FOLEY'S                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                          GOLD PENS.                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                    THE BEST AND CHEAPEST.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                         256 BROADWAY                         |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |          The only Journal of its kind in America!!           |
  |                                                              |
  |                    The American Chemist:                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                      A MONTHLY JOURNAL                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                              OF                              |
  |                                                              |
  |       Theoretical, Analytical, and Technical Chemistry       |
  |                                                              |
  |          DEVOTED ESPECIALLY TO AMERICAN INTERESTS.           |
  |                                                              |
  |    EDITED BY Chas. F. Chandler, Ph.D., & W. H. Chandler.     |
  |                                                              |
  |     The columns of THE AMERICAN CHEMIST are open for the     |
  | reception of original articles from any part of the country, |
  | subject to approval of the editor. Letters of inquiry on any |
  |    point of interest within the scope of the Journal will    |
  |                  receive prompt attention.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                     THE AMERICAN CHEMIST                     |
  |                                                              |
  |             Is a Journal of especial interest to             |
  |                                                              |
  |    SCHOOLS AND MEN OF SCIENCE, TO COLLEGES, APOTHECARIES,    |
  |    DRUGGISTS, PHYSICIANS, ASSAYERS, DYERS, PHOTOGRAPHERS,    |
  |                        MANUFACTURERS.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |   And all concerned in scientific pursuits. Subscription,    |
  |  $5.00 per annum. In advance. 50 cts. per number. Specimen   |
  |                       copies, 25 cts.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                Address WILLIAM BALDWIN & CO.,                |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Publishers and Proprietors,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                 434 Broome Street, New York.                 |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1870, by the
PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY, in the Office of the Librarian of
Congress at Washington.

       *       *       *       *       *

MAN AND WIVES.

A TRAVESTY.

By MOSE SKINNER.

CHAPTER SECOND.

LOVE.

The Hon. MICHAEL LADLE and ARCHIBALD BLINKSOP were interrupted in their
conversation by BELINDA, who sent off the former under pretence that the
croquet players were waiting for him, or, as she expressed it, it was
"his turn to mallet."

As soon as he was fairly out of sight, she turned to ARCHIBALD, and
said; "Come with me."

"What for?" said ARCHIBALD, as she seized him by the arm and hurried him
into the shrubbery. "Recollect," he added, "that I am an orphan, with a
constitution never robust."

She made no reply till they were screened from observation.

"You needn't be afraid, you little fool," she said. "Sit down on that
stump."

ARCHIBALD tremblingly obeyed her.

She imprisoned his fluttering hand in hers, and smoothed his hair
reassuringly.

"ARCHIE," she murmured; "_dear_ ARCHIE."

"Oh, don't, _don't_ talk that way," said ARCHIBALD. "You make me afraid
of you."

"Afraid!" she returned. "And of _me_? Oh cruel, cruel ARCHIBALD. Is it
for this that I have passed many a sleepless night, awaking unrefreshed
with haggard orbs? Is it for this that I've pined away and refused meat
victuals?"

She paused. Her heart was beating violently. She took from her pocket a
copy of the _Ledger_, adjusted her eye-glasses, and continued:

"ARCHIBALD BLINKSOP, for weeks I have basked in the sunlight of your
existence. Your celestial smile, shedding a tranquil calm o'er my
perturbed spirit, has been my daily sustenance. Your ethereal form,
beautiful as an houri, has, with its subtle fascination, enthralled and
steeped in bliss my innermost soul, lifting me as it were into a purer,
a holier existence. Your--"

"Oh-h," moaned the wretched ARCHIBALD, "_please_ stop. That's COBB, Jr.
I _know_ it is. When I was sea-sick on the canal, they read a chapter to
me just like that, instead of giving me an emetic, and I was out of my
head all next day."

"But you _do_ love me, don't you, ARCHIBALD?--just a very small
fragment, you know."

She seized him by the ear and kissed him twice.

"Come, own up now," said she, "that from the first moment you saw me,
you have felt a sort of a spooney hankering, and a general looseness,
including a desire to write poetry and use hair-oil, and wear pretty
neckties; a sort of a feeling that your clothes don't fit you, and you
can't bear the sight of gravy, and dote on lavender kids, and want to
part your hair in the middle. _That's_ being in love, ARCHIE. That's--"

At this juncture voices were heard calling for ARCHIBALD.

"Oh, do, _do_ let me go," he pleaded.

BELINDA grasped him firmly by the collar. "Heaven knows," said she
impressively, "that I have wooed you thus far in a spirit of the most
delicate consideration. Now, I mean business, I want a husband, and by
the Sixteenth Amendment, you don't stir from this spot, until you
promise to marry me!"

"But--but--I don't want to get married," said ARCHIBALD; "I--I--ain't
old enough."

She glared at him menacingly.

"Am I to understand then," she shrieked, "that you dare refuse me?" And
she laughed hysterically.

"Oh, no, no. I wouldn't. Of course I wouldn't," groaned the ghastly
youth. "I'll promise _anything_, if you'll only let me go."


Thus it was, mid the hushed repose of that lovely June twilight, while
all Nature seemed to pronounce a sweet benediction, that these loving
hearts commingled. The soft hum of the June-bug seemed to have a sweeter
sound, and the little fly walked unmolested across their foreheads, for
they were betrothed.


CHAPTER THIRD.

WHERE THE WOODBINE TWINETH.

Notwithstanding the thrilling events enacted near by, that modest
production of Nature, the woodbine, still continued to twine in all its
pristine virginity. And meanwhile, JEFFRY MAULBOY is at the appointed
rendezvous, waiting for ANN BRUMMET.

She comes.

But why that glazed expression, and that convulsive twitching of the
lips?

She is chewing gum.

"Hilloa, JEFF," said she. "Mean thing. Been here a whole day, and not a
single word about my new overskirt. How does it hang behind?"

What reply does this cruel, this heartless man make?

He took a chew of tobacco, and said:

"Oh, bother your overskirt. Is that the 'something very particular' you
wanted to see me for?"

"Oh no," she replied; "I forgot." She looked cautiously round, and
added:

"Say, JEFF, folks are talking about us awfully."

"Let 'em talk," was the rejoinder.

"Oh, yes," she replied. "Of course _you_ don't care. The more a man is
talked about the better he likes it, and the more he's thought of. But
it's death to a woman."

"Well, I don't care any way," said JEFFRY.

"Yes you do care too," she replied. S'posen it should get to the ears of
that rich widow you're engaged to. 'Twould be all up with you _there_,
sure, JEFF. She ain't burdened with principle, the Lord knows, but she's
got jealousy enough to break the match short off, and kill you besides,
if she hears of it.

"And she'll hear of it anyhow, if they keep up their infernal clack,"
said he fiercely. "I'd like to choke the whole confounded pack."

"The talk would all die out," said ANN slowly, "if I should go away."

"Any fool can see that," replied he. "What do you mean?"

"I've been thinking of going," she continued, "for six months. I'm a
poor relation, and Mrs. LADLE hates me. And as for BELINDA, she has so
many good clothes, I can't take any comfort seeing her round."

"Where to?" inquired JEFFRY incredulously.

"Oh, anywhere," she replied. "I can dance a jig, you know. I'll go to
New York, and let myself as the 'Eminent and Graceful Queen of
Terpsichore, imported from Paris at a cost of Forty Thousand Dollars in
Gold.' And then I'll make a tour of the New England States. Or I'll
learn to play the banjo and get off slang phrases, and then I'll appear
as 'The Beautiful and Gifted Artist, ANNETTA BRUMMETTA, who has, by her
guileless vivacity, charmed our most Fashionable Circles.' Or I'll go as
Assistant Teacher in a Select Boarding School for Young Ladies. I ain't
proud, you know."

JEFFRY grinned. "Let me advise you," said he, "to go right off
to-morrow. I'll help you pack your trunk inside of an hour, if you say
so."

"That ain't the point," she retorted sharply. "I ain't got rid of so
easily as _that_, I tell you."

"What do you mean by that?" he inquired, with a scowl.

"I mean just this," she returned. "I won't go at all if you don't do
what's right by me. If you'll agree to my terms I'll go, and not
without."

"Your _terms_!" said he, with a sneer. "Well, that _is_ a go. What may
your 'terms' be?" he continued, derisively.

"Marriage," replied she; "private if you say so, and a remittance of
fifty dollars a month for six months."

He laughed in her face. "Marry _you_? Well, I guess not," said he. "Do
you take me for an idiot?"

"You ain't obliged to stick by it," she continued. "We're in Indiana,
ain't we? We'll take a minister and a lawyer along with us. While the
minister is marrying us, the lawyer can be at work on the divorce
papers. When you are JEFFRY MAULBOY again, a single man, and I'm once
more ANN BRUMMET. spinster, I'll go away and never trouble you again.
There's no risk. I go in ANN BRUMMET, and come out ANN BRUMMET, all
inside of two hours, and there's nobody to tell of it. The lawyer and
minister are used to it, you see, and the secret's safe with _them_."

JEFFRY MAULBOY took an unusually large chew of tobacco, and thought it
all over.

"I won't do it," he finally said.

"All right, then," she replied; "I'll write to Mrs. CUPID and tell her
the whole story, and I'll stay here besides. It'll be hard enough on me
for a while if I go, and harder still if I stay; but I'll do it to
_spite you_. I'll break off your match with Mrs. CUPID if I _do_ stay,
now mark my words."

JEFFRY MAULBOY walked back and forth, and emitted the choicest string
of curses that his extensive and valuable collection enabled him to
cull. At last he stopped in front of her, and said savagely:

"I'll do it. But if you ever lisp a word to any living soul till I'm
safely married to CUPID, I'll kill you, dead sure. Do you hear that?"

"When and how is the thing to be done?" he growled again.

"The sooner the better," was ANN'S reply. "If you don't hear from me by
to-morrow noon, go to the Half-way House at Forney's Crag. That's all
_you've_ got to do. I'll have the lawyer and minister both there.
_You'd_ better be there too. That's all I say."

Alone in his room, JEFFRY admitted that ANN had been too smart for him.

"And I'm mighty afraid that, somehow or other, the old she-dragon will
get the best of me yet in this infernal business," he soliloquized.
"Anyhow, I'll sleep on it," and he went to bed.

He got up in the morning, firmly resolved to break his engagement with
ANN.

"She was only bluffing me last night," he said. "She daren't tell
CUPID." But he didn't feel easy for all that.

After breakfast he took his hat and started out.

"Where are you bound, JEFF?" inquired ARCHIBALD.

"Anywhere," was the reply. "Come along."

JEFFRY was awful dull company, so Archibald thought. He took very large
chews of tobacco, and expectorated freely into the eyes of the small
boys whom they chanced to meet, and if he didn't make a good shot, he
swore awfully. Once he went away across a field on purpose to kick a
very small dog, and ARCHIBALD waited for him.

"Why, JEFFRY," said ARCHIBALD, "what ails you? You're awfully down in
the mouth this morning."

"And so you'd be if you was in my boots," was the reply.

And then he up and told ARCHIBALD the whole story.

The latter was so thoroughly dumbfounded that a decently-smart boy could
have blown him over without any apparent effort.

"Why, JEFF," said he, "only to think of it. Ain't it awful? And ANN
BRUMMET, too; ain't I glad it ain't me, though."

"That's no way to console a fellow, you fool," said JEFFRY. "You'd
better offer to help me out of the scrape."

"Why, so I will, of course," said ARCHIBALD. "If I hadn't saved your
life, of course you wouldn't have got into it; and so I feel bound, you
know, to see you out of it. What shall I do?"

"Why, just go over to the Half-way House, and tell ANN I can't come.
Tell her I've got the small-pox, or broke my leg, or my old man's
dying--or anything, so that she understands I can't come."

"You'd better give me a letter," said ARCHIBALD, "and I'll slip it under
her door and run off. I never could remember all that, I should be so
flustered, you know."

"No," replied JEFFRY, "I shan't give you any letter. I ain't fool enough
to commit myself to any woman in black and white."

"Well," replied ARCHIBALD drearily, "just as you say. Oh, what a knowing
man the Hon. MICHAEL is! He said you'd make me pay that debt of saving
your life, sooner or later, and it's turned out sooner. But I'll go,
JEFFRY, if I can get away from BELINDA. She tags me round everywhere,
and wants to court me all the time. Ain't it dreadful? What time shall I
go?"

"Three o'clock," answered JEFFRY. "Tell her I'd come if I could but I
can't _anyhow_. Be sure and tell her _that_, and anything else you've a
mind to."

(To be continued.)

       *       *       *       *       *

PIGEON ENGLISH.

Certainly newspaper writers are given to making very remarkable
statements. In describing General CHANGARNIER, a newspaper lately
informed us that "he stoops his head, which is sprinkled over with a few
gray hairs when walking." Now, if the general's head be sprinkled when
walking, we may fairly infer that the gray hairs, unless brushed off,
remain upon it when it stands still. We are additionally mystified by
the further statement--still with reference to the same officer--that
"he enjoys the personal demeanor of the French people to a remarkable
degree." This we are very much delighted to hear, although we have not
the slightest idea what it means.

       *       *       *       *       *

Corroborative.

A late item of war news states that "the Prussians have advanced to
Dole," while from several other sources we learn that the Prussians have
come to Grief.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUNCHINELLO CORRESPONDENCE

ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.

_Ambergris_.--Can you give me the motto of the City of Strasbourg?

_Answer_.--We cannot at this moment recall the Flemish version of it,
but it means, in English, "We make our own Pies."

_Katrina Shwachenzittern_. We have had some difficulty in deciphering
your manuscript. Your grievance, however, seems to be that one of your
boarders, an Alsatian, keeps a ten-pound brass cannon in his bedroom,
and fires a grand salvo with it whenever a French victory is announced.
This, of course, is very foolish. The best way of putting a stop to it
would be for your German boarders to keep guns of even larger calibre in
their rooms, and fire the Frenchman down. You will then have a perfect
right to charge all your boarders for extra fires.

_Ney_.--Please explain two things about the war. First: How did the
Mobile Guard come to leave Mobile? Second: Is _Francs-Tireurs_ the
French for FRANK BUTLER'S black-and-tan terriers?

_Answer_.--We cannot perceive much difference between NEY and BRAY.

_Artichoke_.--You are mistaken in supposing total deafness to be an
indispensable qualification in a candidate for the position of prompter
to a theatre.

_Flippertygibbet_.--How is the belligerent attitude of the Russian Bear
likely to affect the New York money market?

_Answer_.--Turn a rushin' bear into any market, and see what the result
will be.

_Paterfamilias_.--I am the unhappy father of three brace of twins, and
wish to dispose of one out of each brace. Can you advise me in the
matter?

_Answer_.--If you don't mind being put in the Lockup, perhaps you had
better apply to "Dr." LOOKUP.

_Sad-you-See_.--We cannot sympathize with you in your wail about the
markets being "flat." Wait a while, patiently, and they will come
"round."

_Peter Dole_.--Your questions about cooking turkeys for Thanksgiving Day
are so multitudinous, that we can only reply to them generally. In
Europe it is the usage for Crowned Heads and their families, only, to
eat sausages with their turkey; and, if ever the true story of the Man
with the Iron Mask comes to be unveiled, it is more than likely that the
mystery will be found to hinge upon that fact.

       *       *       *       *       *

A PRESIDENTIAL FLOUT.

According to the Washington special despatches to the _Philadelphia
Inquirer_, the President has tendered a Cabinet appointment to several
distinguished members of the Union League of that city. Either from
excessive modesty, however, or, as is probable, from prudent doubts as
to their ability to fill the position, all of these gentlemen have
declined to accept the offer.

It is surmised that the object of the President's recent visit to
Philadelphia (ostensibly to see his old friend, Mr. BORIE), was to
examine the roll of the League, comprising two thousand members, for the
purpose of selecting one who might serve on a pinch to fill the office
in question.

This was a bitter stroke of satire on the part of Mr. GRANT, since it is
generally understood in Philadelphia, that, outside the ranks of the
Mutual Admiration Society to which we have referred, there are no brains
to be found among the Republicans of Philadelphia.


       *       *       *       *       *

A Bubble of Air.

What is the most favorable sort of weather for ballooning?

_Highly_ favorable weather.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE THREE CENTS.

An Incident both Dramatic and True.

SLINEY, OF SWAMPVILLE, COMES TO THE CITY. AS HE SHAMBLES ALONG THREE
BRIGHT CENTS FALL AT HIS FEET. AMAZEMENT OF SLINEY, WHO GAZES UP AT AN
OPEN WINDOW, BUT, NOT SEEING ANY PERSON THERE, SUPPOSES THAT SHOWERS OF
COPPERS ARE PECULIAR TO THE CLIMATE.

HAVING POCKETED THE COINS, SLINEY PROCEEDS UPON HIS WAY. HARDLY HAS HE
GONE A DOZEN PACES WHEN THREE CENTS AGAIN RING DOWN UPON THE
FLAG-STONES, AND SPARKLE THERE IN THE SUN. DELIGHT OF SLINEY, WHO AGAIN
GAZES UP SMILINGLY AT THIRD-STORY WINDOWS, HOLDING OUT HIS HAT AS IF TO
ASK FOR MORE.

AGAIN SLINEY PROCEEDS TO POCKET THE COINS. BUT, HA!--WHAT IS THIS? HIS
COUNTENANCE CHANGES: HIS LONG BONY FINGERS NOW FOR THE FIRST TIME DETECT
THE FATAL FLAW IN HIS TROUSERS POCKET. 'TWAS HIS ORIGINAL CAPITAL,
BROUGHT BY HIM FROM SWAMPVILLE TO INVEST IN STOCKS, THAT HE HAS BEEN
PICKING UP ALL ALONG. AGONY OF SLINEY, WHICH IS AGGRAVATED BY THE RIBALD
LAUGHTER OF SOME WICKED PERSONS WHO HAVE THROWN THEMSELVES UPON HIS
TRACK.]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LATEST BOSTON NOTION.

The well-earned reputation acquired by Boston for leading the world in
new ideas is so thoroughly established as to need no recapitulation
here. We merely speak of it for the purpose of mentioning that city's
last contribution to mankind, of this kind. They have a hotel there
which advertises through the seductive fly-pages of our magazines in the
following terms: "Courtesy to strangers is a marked feature in the
management of--"

But we remember in time that we have no right to interfere with the
advertising columns. However, it is a fact that there is a hotel in
America where courtesy to guests is a feature, and of course a marked
one. It is a cheering fact, and especially so just now, in this early
fall, when we are all smarting with the fresh memories of our summer's
sufferings at the hands of the hotel proprietors, their head clerks, and
the rest of the rapacious crew. What an attractive picture it presents!
A hotel where guests are treated with courtesy! Really, if anything
could seduce us into making a visit to Boston, the desire to actually
witness this surprising innovation upon our national customs would prove
too strong for the reverential fear which keeps us distant worshippers
of that American Mecca.

       *       *       *       *       *

Odious Comparison.

"She is a gem," remarked Mr. JENKINSOP, speaking of his red-haired wife.

"Yes--a diamond of many carats," was the low rejoinder of JENKINSOP'S
friend, WINKLESOP.

       *       *       *       *       *

ROYAL DEMOCRACY.

It appears to have been decided that one of the royal princesses of
England can be allowed to marry, without being obliged to find some
royal prince for that purpose. Perhaps this course has been discovered
to be possible from the fact that the stock of royal princes is getting
short in Europe. Prussia has gobbled up any number of German ones, and
bids fair to do so with the rest. But we prefer to think that this
innovation is really due to the women's rights movement. Their platform
is broad enough for the entire sex to stand on, and why should a
princess, from the unfortunate accident of her birth, be debarred her
natural right to fall in love with the man of her choice, and to marry
the man she loves. At any rate we commend this change of policy to the
leaders of the women's rights party, as a proof of the success their
movement has gained, and advise them to send a series of congratulatory
resolutions to the princess in question, upon her gaining her
unquestioned right to consult her heart rather than a Lord Chancellor in
the bestowal of her hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

An Anecdote from Salt Lake.

A GYPSY came to BRIGHAM YOUNG with a pony for sale.

"Why, the beast is half-starved," said BRIGHAM, running his hand over
the pony's side. "You can count his ribs."

"That's more'n a chap could do with yours," retorted the gypsy.

BRIGHAM YOUNG did not buy that pony.

       *       *       *       *       *

NATURAL HISTORY IN OUR PARKS.

No greater tribute has yet been paid to the already improved condition
of our city parks under the new _regime_, than the arrival in them of
strange birds by which they had not hitherto been patronized. Within a
few days past several owls have been captured in the solemn pines with
which these delightful retreats have lately been made green, if not
shady. The owl, as is well known, was regarded by the ancients as the
Bird of Wisdom. He fully sustained his right to the title by letting
severely alone the city parks while they were still dreary and
disgusting wastes. The only night-birds by which these were, then
occupied were of the featherless (and apparently motherless) kind, and
were well known to the police. They were quite as watchful, it is true,
as the genuine feathered owl that has just commenced to give its very
extraordinary countenance to the parks, but then it was with other
people's watches, not their own. It is with much concern that we hear
reports of the slaughter of some of these solemn but beautiful owls that
have come to ventilate their wisdom among us. The reports in question
were very definite and unmistakable, most of them proceeding from
revolvers handled by members of the Municipal Police Force, while others
emanated from the barrels of shot-guns wielded by beery Teutons, who
rushed frantically out from their sawdust lairs when they were told that
the game was up--that is, that an owl was up a tree. This was scurvy
treatment for the visitors. To "put a head on" an owl, which is already
provided with one so large and so comical, appears to be a work both
superfluous and inhuman. The only apology for it in this instance is,
that these night-birds of prey were supposed by the police to have been
attracted to the parks by the prospect of succulent suppers on the very
well-fed sparrows by which these resorts are now thickly tenanted. The
owls hooted at this notion; but their hooting was only answered by
shooting, and the poor foolish Birds of Wisdom have been stuffed with
tow instead of sparrows, and set up to form the nucleus of an
ornithological Rogues' Gallery in the City Hall.

On visiting the Battery a few days ago, one of the park-keepers (himself
looking in his bright new uniform somewhat like a blue-jay) expressed
his conviction that, next spring, that time-honored pleasure-garden of
the old Knickerbockers will be a paradise for song-birds such as it has
not been since the original Swedish Nightingale warbled her "woodnotes
wild" there a score of years ago, more or less. The sea-gulls, he
thought (will Judge HILTON have the goodness to provide these park
officers with manuals of ornithology?), would build their nests in the
pine-trees with which the wide esplanade that stretches away to the
water's edge will soon be bristling. Honest, but mistaken young man! As
well might he have said that the sea-wall [a very substantial one, by
the way] would build its nest in the melancholy pines. But it is
reasonable to hope that pine grossbeaks will find their way thither, and
that the German flutes of various finches will provide for the coming
Bavarians and Hessians (should any be left after the siege of Paris and
the _sorties_ of the truculent TROCHU) a welcome such as has not
heretofore been accorded to the strangers who at Castle Garden first set
foot upon our shore.

The Bowling Green--late a nuisance and a pandemonium, now an oasis of
verdure--has not as yet reported its owl, but the public eye is upon it,
and the nocturnal marauder may yet be detected in the forks of the great
willow-trees, which still retain their verdure. The sparrows are almost
disproportionately numerous in this small park, but this may be
accounted for. It has lately been laid down with new grass, the green,
tender blades of which, just now beginning to crop out, are probably
mistaken by the birds for "sparrow-grass" munificently provided for them
by the Commissioners.

In all of these city parks the contrast between past and present is very
striking and agreeable. But a few short months ago they were the
domiciles and dormitories of outcast roughs and vagrants of the worst
description, whose "'owls," as a Cockney explorer observed, "made night
'ideous." The only muss now common to them is the _mus_ tribe,
comprising the _mus ratus_, or ordinary rat (so called from its haunting
ordinaries, we suppose), and the timid mouse, with which the Bird of
Wisdom is contented to put up when the sparrows decline to come to his
claw.

Central Park offers numerous attractions now to all who love to keep up
their animal spirits by studying animal life. There is a fat little
Asiatic pig there, who is the very picture of content. A red pig he is,
and exceedingly well behaved. The best red pig, in fact, that we
remember ever to have seen, beating the learned pig by several trumps
and an ace. When we last saw him he was very busy with his pen, and our
surmise was that his mind was fully occupied with arrangements for
editing the works of BACON, or, possibly, those of HOGG.

The young elephant has increased immensely, since last year, in stature
and girth. He is remarkably neat in his person, wisping himself all over
with hay for hours at a time. Whether he does this for cleanliness or to
obtain a flavor of elephant for the hay is doubtful, however, for he
always eats it after having made use of it as a flesh-brush for a good
while. Notices requesting visitors "not to feed or annoy the animals"
are posted on the compartments. In the case of the elephant, though, it
might be as well also to caution persons against making jokes about his
trunk--a low kind of ribaldry in which every carpet-bagger, who never
had one, seems to think himself bound to indulge.

There is a cinnamon bear in one of the outside cages, whose claws remind
one sharply that cinnamon and cloves go together, and that clove is a
tense of the verb "to cleave." But we do not want such a fellow as that
to cleave to us, since it is evident that a grocer kind of brute than a
cinnamon bear cannot be found in all the ursine family. "Sugar and
spice, and all things nice," are stated in song to be the materials that
"little girls are made of," but if we thought that cinnamon bear figured
upon the list of groceries thus used for modelling young maidens, we
would either fly to the desert with Dr. MARY WALKER or immure ourselves
in a nunnery with SUSAN B. ANTHONY, and all the other females of the
anti-sugar-and-spice persuasion.

Fattest of all the beasts in the Central Park collection is the larger
of the two grizzly bears. From the easy way in which he takes life, he
reminds one of a successful politician, who had worked his way up from
being a slim and impecunious "repeater" to the position of Alderman, or
Custom House official, and President of the Fat Men's Club. There is a
drunken leer in this beast's eye, an inebriate roll in all his
movements, that lead one mechanically to peer into the darkness of his
den with the view of seeing what the Bar fixings are like. It would be a
rare freak to treat the huge fellow to a cask of rum and sugar, and then
stand by with a comic artist, and take down for PUNCHINELLO the traits
of BRUIN the Grizzly on a "bender," and with all his repressed nature
brought out by the strong drink.

"Carnivorium" is the word now properly applied by the Park authorities
to the establishment in which the wild beasts are kept. That is, the
term will be correct when applied only to the particular department
allotted to the fierce flesh-devouring animals. At present camels are
accommodated in the Carnivorium, and so are cows, which is a sort of
slur upon the habits of these poor innocent vegetarians. The new word,
however, is likely to find considerable extension, and if any provider
for the public maw should choose hereafter to call his dining-saloon a
Carnivorium, none would have a right to cavil at him on philological
grounds, at least.

By and by the Park will have a new and sensational attraction. The
antediluvian monsters of that great FRANKENSTEIN of the period, Mr.
WATERHOUSE HAWKINS, will soon be advanced enough to "give fits" to the
nursery-maids and their tender charges. Accipitrine in features as in
name, Mr. HAWKINS is a living illustration of the Darwinian theory.
Certainly his remote ancestors must have been of the falcon family. He
revels in birds; though, when he cannot obtain those, he can put up with
lizards, which he usually prefers manufactured, and of a length not less
than from sixty to one hundred feet. This reminds us that a saurian of a
hundred feet should not be confounded with a centipede.

It will be seen, then, that the landscape-gardens of our great city are
in a fair way of being able to afford some illustrations for students of
Natural History more interesting than the oyster-shells and old boots
with which most of them have hitherto been stocked.

       *       *       *       *       *

FRUIT FOR BALLOONISTS. Currents in the air.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: FASHION CORRESPONDENTS REPORT THAT "NETS ARE TO BE WORN
MUCH LONGER." PUNCHINELLO SUGGESTS, THEN, THAT THEY MIGHT BE PROFITABLY
ADAPTED FOR CATCHING FISH AS WELL AS BEAUX.]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AVERAGE THANKSGIVING.

NINE O'CLOCK A.M.

    I'm thankful I was bright enough, this year,
      To have my turkey bought a week ahead!
    Oh, what a bird it is! 'Twas awful dear,--
      But, thank the Lord! the turkey's been well fed.

TEN O'CLOCK A.M.

    There! I've forgot the oysters. Thank the Lord,
      There's time enough with early church; Old GRIMES,
    I hope, will pity us to-day; he's bored
      A hungry crowd so many, many times.

ELEVEN O'CLOCK A.M.

    Oh, what a crowd! Hallo! Another man!
      Well, thank the Lord, 'twill be a change, at least;
    I s'pose he'll aggravate us all he can:
      And that's _so_ easy just before a feast.

TWELVE O'CLOCK M.

Oh, what a bore! He's worse than Grimes by half;
  So slow!--That turkey will be done to rags!--
I'm famished! I could eat the fatted calf.
  There! Thank the Lord! He's winding up; he fags.

ONE P.M.

    Give me the knife. Be quick, my love, be quick!
      I never was so hungry in my life!
    Well, thank the Lord, that tedious old stick
      _Did_ let us off.--Oh, hang this carving-knife!

TWO P.M.

    I wish I had not eaten quite so much;
      But, really, the mince-pie was _so_ prime!
    You gave it just the real, old, fancy touch.
      There! (Thank the Lord, I got the meat in time.)

THREE P.M.

    My eyes! how sleepy I have grown since noon!
      Some wine or music, now, would make me gay;
    Come, ANNA, let us have a little tune--
      There! thank the Lord, there's no more work to-day.

FOUR P.M.

    What was it, ANNA? I was sound asleep;
      I rather think I had the nightmare, too.
    I feel half sick; cold chills around me creep.
      Well, thank the Lord, Thanksgiving is all through!

       *       *       *       *       *

A Pen and an Inkling.

A certain HERR BISSENGER, of Pforzhelm, has presented BISMARCK with a
golden pen, set with jewels, with which to sign the treaty after the
capture of Paris. Foresight is well enough in its way; but if the treaty
which is to end this war is not a very different one from any BISMARCK
has yet suggested, penning his signature to it will be merely a
preliminary to his repentance for being so short-sighted as not to see
that Sedan, not Paris, was the place at which to make a lasting peace.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Chance for Metaphysicians to be Useful.

The German metaphysicians who have been so long bothering the world with
reports of their searches after the undiscoverable, should now exercise
whatever skill they have gained in this pursuit, in looking for signs of
republican protest in Germany against the growing tyranny of their
Prussian masters. Such a course would do their own country good, and, if
successful, would be most grateful to the rest of the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Twist of the Cable.

Telegrams per cable state that "VON DER TANN is retreating"--also that
"a Prussian bark has been blown up."

Combining these two statements, we obtain an excellent quality of Tan
Bark, which may or may not be suggestive of further "Hidings" of the
Prussians by the French.

       *       *       *       *       *

Grant-ed.

Recent disclosures concerning the President's Cabinet would go to show
that this piece of administrative furniture is a cabinet with Drawers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bad for their Health.

Travel is so impeded by the terrible state of affairs at present
existing in France, that the Prussians cannot take Tours.

       *       *       *       *       *

New Occupation for the President.

A display heading in the _World_ of November 18th has the following
astounding line:--

"GRANT cuts SCHURZ."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: NONE THE BETTER FOR TOO MUCH NURSING.

_Dr. W.G. Bryant._--"MR. KELLEY, THAT POOR CHILD PENNSYLVANIA HAS BEEN
FED TOO EXCLUSIVELY WITH PIG-IRON PAP. SUPPOSE YOU TRY SOME OF MY
FREE-TRADE MIXTURE, AND SEE IF THAT WON'T RESTORE IT TO HEALTH."]

       *       *       *       *       *

HIRAM GREEN SURPRISED.

His Fellow-Citizens Present Him with a Silver Tea Service.

When the Hon. BILL SOOWARD allers gets home from a voyige, the sitezens
of Auburn give him a warm recepshen.

When Goyenor HOFFMAN visits the home of his childhood days, a
spontaneous bust of friendship throws her lovin embrace about him.

When a few sundry other peeple, whose names shall be nameless in this
communication, have arroven to their long home on tother side of the
River Sticks, they will get a recepshen so warm, that, settin on top a
red hot koal stove and sokin their feet in a kittle full of b'iling
water, will be full as cheerin to 'em as a Mint Jewlip is to an
inhabitant of the Equinoxial line.

Recepshens and presentashens bein the order of the day, I took it into
my head, a short time since, to have my feller sitizens of Skeansboro'
give me some of it.

Consekently I hired 1/2 dozen of my nabors, whom I supposed wouldent
make turnal fools of their selves, to call at the Old Green manshon with
a crowd of peeple, at the hour when I was supposed to be to bed, for the
purpuss of presentin me with a silver tea sarvice, which our Joowiler
had lent me for the occasion. I writ up an impromptu speech, and
practiced it for over a week, out in my barn, so as to be reddy for the
cerprise.

My 3 oldest darters had agreed to be dressed up in white, representen
the 3 graces--Faith, Hope, & Charity--and arrangin their selfs in a
tabloo in the back parler, they was to throw open the foldin doors at a
signal from me. I also tride to get my wife to rig up; says she:

"Me rig up? No, sir! I wouldent encourage sich a lot of tom foolery to
save your consarned neck. And I know of a sartin Old Noosants who'l
ketch Hail Columbia if he musses up these ere parlers to freely."

The noosants referred to was no doubt the undersined; I know it was.

Mariar was allers full of pet names, and this was one of them.

When she called me pet names, I dident stop to argue with her. It is no
use; shee'l allers have the last word, if she sets up all nite for a
week for it. You mite just as well try to make Bosting fokes think the
hul United States don't resolve around Masserchussetts Bay and Bosting
Common once every 24 times an hour, as to undertake to stop a womans
clack when she gets on a talkin fit.

The appinted nite came, and I was standin behind the winder curten,
peekin out the upper hall winder, anxiusly awaitin the arrival of the
crowd.

All of a sudden a percession, hove in site, headed by a drum and fife.
Their onsartin way of marchin, by gettin their legs mixed all up
together, made me think that by the time they got up to my house, the
painful duty would devolve on to me of goin down and getten their legs
ontangled.

The fifer was continually mistakin his head for a drum stick, as he fell
over and let it strike vilently agin the sheep skin head of the base
drum. Whilst the drummer, hisself, was mistakin evry bodys head for his
musikle instrument, as he dealt out blows rite and left, to all who come
within hittin distance of his intossicated drum sticks.

Arrivin before my domisil, the leeder sung out and says:

"Now boys (hic!) let's rattle up bald head, (hic!) if old
2-and-ninepence don't (hic!) shell out with his 'freshments, we'll
(hic!) smash this 'ere borrered tea sarvice over his (hic!) figger
head." Sayin which he gives the door bell a yank, which was enuff to
pull the roof off from over our heads.

Slippin on my red nite cap, I poked my head out of my winder, and in
fained cerprise, Bays to 'em:

"My good peeple, what's the meanin of this demon-stration?"

"A lot of fellers, who you hired to come and pay you a visit, has got
here. So come down and let us in, old hoss," says a voice.

I went down stairs, with doubts in my mind as to the way the thing would
turn out.

Unboltin the door, the assemblige filed in. A casual glance convinced me
that I was not receivin into the buzzum of my family manshon a
deputashun from the Skeensboro Lodge of Good Templers, for a skalier lot
of whiskey-soked human beins I never sot eyes on.

There was JOB BIGLER, who useter leed the Skeensboro brick meetin house
quire, tryin to pick his teeth with the corner of a pictur-frame, while
standin before the lookin glass was WILLYAM DUNBAR vainly endevorin to
ascertain if he was the Siameese Twins, or else was the lookin-glass a
double-plated one.

Old JIM SPENCER insisted on standin with his cow-hide butes on top the
mahogony senter table, for the purpuss of presentin me with the tea
sarvice, while his son-in-law had no sorter hesitation, whatsomever, of
planten his muddy feet into my wife's work basket, which was settin on a
stool in the sou'-west corner of the front room. Others had piled
theirselfs in heeps, in various parts of the room, presentin a picter
which JOHN B. GOFF could work up to sich an affectin pitch, that tears
could be got out of the eyes of a perfessional grave-digger.

"SQUIRE GREEN, yer (hic!) feller sitisens, wishin to do the square thing
by you, hereby (hic!) take this opportunity of presentin you with this
(hic!) tea sarvice, which you hired down to GRIZ'LES jooliry (hic!)
store, for this momentous occassion. Take it and be 'appy. Now trot out
yer (hic!) benzeen," says SPENCER. At this pint I give the signle, and
the foldin doors was throde quickly open, revealin my 3 gals in a
classic tabloo. I then said:

"Feller Sitizens: When I say I'me hily pleased at this onexpected
cerprise, I but reiterate the pent up feelins of an overflowin heart."--

"Oh, cork up on that ere spoutin, and sound yer supper bell," said JOE
BIGLER, interuptin me. I again went on.

"As I casts my eyes about me, I see the smillen faces of my feller
sitizens, who have been tride and not found _wantin_--"

"That's a lie! We are _wantin_ some vittles, with a little (hic!)
opedildock to wash her down. When you hired us to do this job, you
(hic!) 'greed to fill up," says a voice.

I pertended as how I dident hear the raskle's insultin remarks, but I
was secretly itchin to be a silent spectator to his funeral, and see his
miserable carciss sunk down under about 6 foot of free sile. I
continnered;

"You see before you, Faith, Hope & Charity, otherwise called the 3
graces," said I, pintin to my darters, who looked as sheepish as if they
was jest let loose from a femail convenshun, or some other loonatick
asylum.

"Yer cant cram that stuff down our gullets, no more'n I can stand on
this sugar bole without mashin it" said a vile youth, ceasin the sugar
bole from the silver tea sarvice and settin his foot onto it. "Them gals
haint no more faith in hoops and charity, than I have that the french
peeple can live under a Republican form of government." Said another
chap: "Oh, no, old GREEN, them tow-headed maidens is your darters,
JOHANNER, BETTY, and MARIAR, Jr."

"Leed us to the bankett halls," says some one else.

"Come, do as yer (hic!) 'greed, and give us some pirotecknicks," some one
else yelled; at this juncture all was hollerin vociferously for vittles
and whiskey.

I assure you, Mr. PUNCHINELLO, it was very _affectin_.

In fact, I don't believe there was a _dry mouth_ in the crowd.

"I blush for every drunken soul of you," said I, wishing to get rid if
em; "and I want you to understand this meetin is adjourned to sober
off."

I noticed that the 3 graces had left the room, while the assemblage was
vainly endeavorin to git hold of the silver tea sarvice.

Suddenly the back parler door was busted open, and Mrs. GREEN and my 3
gals rushed in with pans of hot water and broomsticks, and if ever I
enjoyed seein a lot of people baptized, it was that ere crowd, who was a
yellin "bloody murder," as the hot water made their hides curl up.

"Go It, My Sweet Dears," Said I, "Peel Off Their Skins, And You Shall
All Have A Bran New Caliker Apiece To-Morrer Mornin."

Well, sir, in quicker time than I can write this, the house was cleared
and the front door locked agin em; but my troubles had only just
commenced, for I had, figerately speakin, jumped from the fryin pan into
the fire.

"HIRAM GREEN," said MARIAR, backin me up into a corner, "you old sinner,
you, look at that senter table, all scratched up with heels of a pair of
drunken cow-hide butes. Look at my work basket; it looks as if a
percession of hogs had been marchin into it.--See that nice rag carpet
which took me over 6 months to make; what is it? eh! it's covered with
old tabacker cuds, mud, segar stumps, broken whiskey bottles, and dish
water. Haint you a sweet venerable head of a family? Haint you a saperb
copy bound in calf, of ex-legal jewrisprudence?

"Presented you with a tea sarvice, did they? Oh! yool be the ruination
of this family with your confounded efforts seekin arter fame.
You--you--"

I dident wait to hear no more, but left the house with my feelins in a
hily mixed up state. I have made up my mind to one thing, that if I ever
get up another cerprise, I will hire good moral men, sich as editors,
noosepaper men, and literary folks ginerally, whose conducts is above
suspishon, to conduct the preceedins.

When this you spy,
Remember HI,

Ewers, truly,

HIRAM GREEN, Esq.,

Lait Gustise of the Peece.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: BABY'S PHOTOGRAPH.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SONG OF THE OYSTER.

"PUT ME IN MY LITTLE BED."]

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR PORTFOLIO.

An Exciting Interview with King William.--"Seeing" Thiers and Going him
Better.--The Influence of Monkeys In Diplomacy.

VERSAILLES, EIGHTH WEEK OF THE REPUBLIC, 1870.

"I don't believe a word of it," said the King, with an impatient stamp
of the foot and a deprecatory wave of the hand--"not a word of it."

You see, dear PUNCHINELLO, the situation was thus: I had undertaken, not
indeed without grave misgivings, to propitiate his Majesty, after the
failure of the THIERS-BISMARCK negotiations, and, if possible, procure
such terms as would save Parisians from the galling necessity of
immolating the monkeys of the _Jardin des Plantes_ to the popular demand
for something to eat. I thought, as an American citizen and your
correspondent, my propositions _might_ have some chance of being
favorably entertained, especially as I knew that the English Minister's
presents of Stilton cheese and many dozens of BASS' bottled ale to
BISMARCK had failed to prevent the current of the Chancellor's prejudice
from running strongly in favor of Americans. Thus morally armed, and
bearing in my pocket a _passe-partout_ from Prussian Headquarters, I
approached Versailles on the second evening after the departure of M.
THIERS, and found the King occupying the apartment in the central
pavilion of the palace, which had once been the sleeping-chamber of
Louis XVI. and his unhappy spouse MARIE ANTOINETTE. Many alterations had
taken place since I was last there and saw the wretched Queen from the
balcony endeavoring to assuage the fierce mob that surged beneath. The
room was not like the room in which I once helped Louis to pull off his
boots, and the delicate perfume that usually pervades the apartments of
French royalty had succumbed to the amalgamated odors of _Schweitzer
Kase_ and _Saur Kraut_.

"It is apparent, sire," said I to WILLIAM, who was sitting there "that
Count BISMARCK has wholly misunderstood the situation in Paris."

"Not a bit of it," said the King; "don't I know well enough they've got
down to two ounces a day for each man, and horse meat at that?

"You forget, sire, their vast supply of asses."

"Do I, indeed? when they've done nothing but develop an unlimited number
of them ever since the war began."

I had an idea then that his majesty must have meant this for sarcasm
though my own experience told me that it was only too true; and it also
occurred to me that I was not in my true station as the representative
of a government of "asses." Nothing but a stern sense of duty prevented
me from clearing out at once under this last harrowing reflection.
Accordingly, I returned to the charge with diminished vigor, assuring
the King that if his army kept on blockading Paris in this cruel sort of
way, the population would soon be dying by thousands. It was very
strange why he wouldn't draw off his troops. What did _he_ want with
Paris? What had Paris done to _him_? Weren't there plenty of other
cities in this world that didn't care a cent how much he bombarded them?
(I began to think that possibly I might be growing childish in my method
of stating the case, but it was only a momentary weakness that made me
think so.) Where was Tyre? Let him go and bombard Tyre. Nobody cares for
Tyre now. Where was Sidon? If he wanted to throw away his ammunition,
let him "go" for Sidon. Where was Tuckahoo, New Jersey? Would New York
care if Tuckahoo was reduced to the level of its original swamp?
Moreover, there were lots of cities away off in China, yearning to have
the rays of modern civilization let into them. Would it be anything out
of his way to travel in that direction with a few big KRUPP guns, and
give civilization a fair opening to get in at? Wasn't it cowardly to be
punching all the time at one poor, miserable little town like Paris,
that ain't big enough to help itself, and wouldn't have done the same by
him no matter if it got ever so many high old chances? "Think of it, oh!
think of it, my royal brother," I said, laying a hand on each of his
royal shoulders. He took my hands off, and told BISMARCK to bring him a
wisp-broom. It was a cruel insult, but I stood unmoved in the midst of
it. "Perhaps at some future hour and place, Your Majesty, we may meet
under different circumstances." That was a proposition he exhibited no
disposition to deny. At this juncture a courier arrived from the front,
breathless with excitement, and speechless too. The King seized him by
the back of the neck and shook him violently, but the poor fellow
couldn't articulate a word, I suggested that cold keys be put down his
back, and his feet thrust into the fire. That brought him to so fast
that I got behind an arm-chair for protection. In a few seconds he
gathered voice enough to say:

"S-S-Sire, P-P-P-Paris is e-eatin' u-u-up the m-m-mon-monkeys."

Fatal news! It was all up with my museum.

Paris reduced to monkeys, and no treaty signed!

Horrible catastrophe!

I offered myself to Satan for a good lie--anything, I didn't care what,
to clinch matters, and bring the King to terms. The Old Boy served me.

"Your Majesty, I forebore to tell you the worst; but it can be kept back
no longer. You must fly from here; fly from Paris. Your worthy queen,
the great, the good, the patriotic AUGUSTA, is now lying at the point
of--"

"Liar!" shouted the King, as he seized a boot-jack from the hands of
BISMARCK and hurled it at me with all his strength. I burst the back of
my coat dodging the missile, which did not, however, interrupt the rapid
utterance of my dreadful communication.

"Spare one moment more to hear what I have just received by telegraph
from Berlin, which is to say that your grandmother--"

"I never had a grandmother!" roared the King, upon the verge of madness,
as the Crown Prince, at the head of six Army Corps surrounded the
building and captured me without firing a shot.

P.S.--It is scarcely necessary in my present exhausted state to say that
my liberation is once more entirely due to the intercession of that man
of all men, the defender of injured innocence, and the champion of all
unfortunates, the most honorable Mr. WASHBURNE, American Minister, &c.
He told them that he had known me from boyhood; that my father died in
the lunatic asylum, and dying, bequeathed his intellectual
characteristics to his son, which was all he had to bequeath. The King
said it was more than likely, and so I got off.

DICK TINTO.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wonderful Sagacity.

Newspapers mention that an Irish crow has lately arrived as a passenger
on board the steamship _Colorado._ It is stated that the bird has
positively declined to quit the ship, and the inference is that its
unwillingness to do so arises from fear lest it might be mistaken for a
Thanksgiving Turkey.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Wintry Reflection.

The only Weather Profits that never fail are the gains of the coal
dealers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nautical.

When does a ship display a propensity for climbing?

When she runs up her flag.


       *       *       *       *       *
 THE PLAYS AND SHOWS

Latest of Mr. BOUCICAULT'S mixtures is another Irish dramatic stew. He
calls it the _Rapparee_, and it contains the usual proportion of fire,
patriots, whiskey, traitors, pretty girls, and red-coat officers. It has
a Tragic Heroine and a Cheerful Heroine, a French Officer who speaks
with an Irish brogue, and a Dutch General who speaks the Fechterian
dialect. It has FRANK MAYO in picturesque attitudes on the stage, and
HARRY PALMER in gorgeous vestments in the lobby. But here it is--as long
as the original and nearly as tedious. Read it and decide for yourselves
whether this sort of thing is worthy of the clever mechanic who
constructed _Arrah-na-Pogue_?

THE RAPPAREE. ACT I.

SCENE I.--_A retired spot in the public highway. [Enter an army of
fifteen Irish patriots, armed with pikes of great scythes.]_

1st PATRIOT.--"Hurroo for KING JAMES, we'll dhrive the Orange-men into
the say. Here comes O'MALLEY, and the FRINCH OFFICIR. May they niver
want a bottle, or a frind to stale it from." _[Enter O'Malley and
Duquesne,]_

O'MALLEY.--"All is lost. ULICK has betrayed us."

DUQUESNE.--"All is lost. ULICK has followed the national custom."

PATRIOTS.--"All is lost. Hurroo. What'll we do now, boys?"

O'MALLEY.--"Come with me to France. We'll fight somebody there."

PATRIOTS.--"We will go this minute." _[They go. Enter Tragic Heroine.]_

O'MALLEY.--"Can I belave the eyes of me. Is it you, darlint, or some
other ghost?"

TRAGIC HEROINE.--"'Tis I. Fly, O'MALLEY. ULICK insists upon marrying me,
and hanging you."

O'MALLEY.--"I will fly to-morrow night, and you shall fly with me. I
would go this minute, were it not that Mr. BOUCICAULT'S play would be
spoiled if I did not stay long enough to get into difficulties. I will
hide in the cellar of my ruined castle, and will give ULICK the worst
'hiding' he ever had if I have a convenient chance at him."

SCENE II--_The front parlor in O'Hara's castle. Enter the Dutch General
and O'Hara._

DUTCH GENERAL.--"O'HARA, I dinks you pe ein repel. ULICK is searging
your bapers. If he finds something you shall be hanged." _[Enter
Ulick.]_

ULICK.--"I have searched O'HARA's trunk, and the drawer where he keeps
his other stocking. I have found nothing."

DUTCH GENERAL.--"I still pelieve him a traitor, but I gannot brove it."
_[Exit.]_

ULICK.--"O'HARA, listen. I have lied. I hold here in my left coat-tail
pocket the proofs of your treachery. Give me your daughter and help me
hang O'MALLEY, or I will ruin you."

O'HARA.--"I am in your power. Do as you please." _[Enter Tragic
Heroine.]_

TRAGIC HEROINE.--"Never. ULICK shall neither marry me nor hang
O'MALLEY."

ULICK.--"Young woman, I will lock you in this room for a year or two,
until O'MALLEY is thoroughly hung. Come, O'HARA." _[Exeunt.]_

TRAGIC HEROINE.--"I must escape and warn O'MALLEY. But how? I have it. I
can leap out of the window into the sea: I can then swim in full
ball-dress to O'MALLEY'S castle, which is only twenty leagues from here.
I will warn him, and fly with him. Courage. I will remove my back-hair
and make the hazardous leap." _[She leaps.]_

SCENE III.--_The vaults below O'Malley's castle. Enter Dutch General,
O'Hara, Ulick, and the "Doctor," a rebel prisoner._

DOCTOR.--"I brought you here to show you O'MALLEY'S hiding-place. Now
I've got you. The tide rose the moment we entered, and cut off your
retreat; we'll all be drowned like rats in a hole. Hurroo." _[O'Malley
descends into the vaults by an iron door.]_

O'MALLEY.--"Come up-stairs out of the wet. We'll have some whiskey."
_[They come up.]_

ACT II.

SCENE I.--_O'Malley's ancestral back-garret. Enter Tragic Heroine in
ball-dress, having swum across the bay._

TRAGIC HEROINE.--"Ha! also Ho! I am a little out of breath. I think I
had better faint." _(Faints.) [Enter O'Malley and his rescued enemies.]_

O'MALLEY.--"Sit down, while I go for the whiskey." _[He goes.]_

O'HARA.--"What do I see? My daughter! Take her up-stairs before O'MALLEY
returns." _(They take her up.) [Re-enter O'Malley.]_

O'MALLEY.--"Gentlemen, here is the whiskey. It is Gen. GRANT'S favorite
brand, and you'll find it all right." _[To his servant]_ "CONNER, these
men mean to arrest me. Go and set fire to the castle." _[Connor goes,
and O'Malley, locking the door, throws the key out of the window.]_

EVERYBODY.--"What do you mean by throwing away the key? Do you mean to
surround us, and, making us prisoners, drink up the whiskey yourself?"

O'MALLEY,--"'Tis a custom of our house, intended originally to give
employment to meritorious locksmiths on the eve of election. Listen
while I tell you how one of my ancestors played a nice little trick on
some officers who had come to arrest him for shooting his landlord. He
locked them up as I have locked you up. He then ordered his servant to
set the castle on fire as I have just done, and was baked with them as
we are about to be baked."

DUTCH GENERAL.--"Donner und blitzen!"

EVERYBODY ELSE.--"Tare an ounds!"

TRAGIC HEROINE, _[in the loft above]_.--"S c r r r e e e c h."

O'MALLEY.--"Heavings! That shriek. 'Tis my Grace! TRAGIC DARLING, I come
to die with you." _[Rushes up the chimney, while the Dutch General,
blowing off the lock off the door with his pistol, escapes together with
his friends. The Castle is carefully taken to pieces in sections by the
stage carpenters, while torches are flashed at intervals. Finally a
Roman candle is set off, and the O'Malley Castle falls a prey to a
carefully managed conflagration.--Curtain.]_

ACT III.

SCENE I.--_A quiet place in midst of the turnpike. Enter Cheerful
Heroine and French Officer._

FRENCH OFFICER.--"Fly with me at once."

CHEERFUL HEROINE.--"Why on earth should I fly? I have never seen you but
once."

FRENCH OFFICER.--"'Tis true; but you'll have to settle that with
BOUCICAULT. I'm sure I don't want you to fly, especially with no
property but a low-necked dress and short sleeves; but BOUCICAULT has
arranged it to suit himself."

CHEERFUL HEROINE--"In that case I will fly." _[Enter the_ DOCTOR _and a
band of patriots.]_

DOCTOR.--"O'MALLEY is a prisoner in the fort. We are going to have him
out, dead or alive."

FRENCH OFFICER.--"These are the counsels of madness. Why don't you get
an injunction, or something of that kind, and so get him out peaceably."

DOCTOR.--"It's too late. Besides, Mr. BOUCICAULT wants to end the play
with a fight."

CHEERFUL HEROINE.--"I will manage it all. I will let down a rope from
the fort. You shall all be drawn up and rescue O'MALLEY. Nothing could
be more simple. Come and be drawn up." _[They come.]_

SCENE. II.--_Interior of the O'Malley's cell. Enter Tragic Heroine._

TRAGIC HEROINE.--"'Tis he!'tis he! Though how he managed to change his
clothes and put on such a nice coat, I can't imagine. Dearest, awake!"

O'MALLEY.--"Who calls? Is it the boy with the beer? Ha! my own darling.
Come to this embroidered waistcoat."

TRAGIC HEROINE.--"I have agreed to marry ULICK on condition he permits
you to escape."

O'MALLEY.--"Ha! base girl. Would ye onconvenience yourself to save me?
Never! I will not consent to your marrying ULICK. Try some other little
game, darlint"

TRAGIC HEROINE.--"I will." _[Exit.]_

SCENE III.--_The castle moat. O'Malley in the ditch standing in a
picturesque attitude. The Dutch General stands on the summit of a wall
three feet high, and leaning over the battlements--which tower to the
height of three inches--hands O'Malley a pardon. Enter Tragic Heroine
and everybody else._

TRAGIC HEROINE.--"O'MALLEY. I have saved you. Now save me. I have just
married ULICK. Kill him for me."

ULICK _and_ O'MALLEY _accordingly slash each other across the legs with
their rapiers._ O'MALLEY _kills_ ULICK _and embraces the TRAGIC HEROINE.
Everybody shouts "Hurroo!" and the curtain falls._

MATADOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: EFFECT OF THE PRESIDENT'S PROCLAMATION UPON CERTAIN
PARTIES INTERESTED.]

       *       *       *       *       *

SARSFIELD YOUNG'S PANORAMA.

PART II.

THE ALPS.

These mountains, which are permanently located in Switzerland, and
favorably mentioned in all the geographies, are justly admired by
tourists for their grandeur, natural beauty, and good hotel
accommodations.

This is a view at sunrise, by one of the early painters. Everything is
up, but Mont Blanc is up more than his neighbors. The whole landscape is
bathed in the golden glories of the orb of day. A bath in the morning is
invigorating indeed.

These Peaks are clustered around in silent majesty. It looks as though
the entire PEAK family had come here and settled. These snow-capped
summits, wild ravines, mountain torrents, and the series of crags which
WILLIAM TELL was in the habit of addressing, are truly soul-inspiring.

Here is a guide with his party. These guides are well-trained men, who
never bolt, but always go with their party--the ultramontane. They are
of high birth, and descended from the best Alpen Stock.

No one should pass the season in Switzerland without seeing these
mountains. They will repay a perusal.

While the prices may not be extravagant enough for Americans, still,
those who have scaled these noble elevations may well account the
prospect as one of the most striking features of a foreign climb.

A SCENE IN THE TROPICS.

This gorgeous painting brings before you all the luxuriance of tropical
vegetation. Magnolias and palm trees wave their heads proudly, while
bananas, oranges, and bread fruit abound in rank profusion. Here the
cane brake stretches away as far as the eye can reach (and to those who
are not near-sighted still farther), recalling those beautiful lines of
the poet:--

    "Break, break, break!"

The broad river in the foreground, mountains melting away on the horizon
(that's because they're volcanic), and the sun broiling and sizzling
high up in the heavens, are deliciously blended together. Our artist,
full of perspiration (he can blend better than any man we ever ployed),
has seized upon a moment when all Nature seems to say: ("Steady there,
what makes that canvas wriggle so?")

Notice the warmth of coloring; and see to what a high degree of art the
general effect is carried-about 90 deg. Fahrenheit in the shade. This
picturesque object is an alligator basking in the sun. Our advice to
inexperienced travellers is: "Let him bask!"

These cotton fields, rice plantations, and the colored member of
Congress addressing his constituents on the right, all stamp this scene
as unmistakably Southern.

We will cancel the stamp and move on.

In our next we shall find that our artist has given himself more
latitude, say about eighty degrees North.

WINTER IN SPITSBERGEN.

Behold these regions of eternal ice and snow--miles upon miles of frozen
real estate. There is a great ice monopoly here. All, all is blank;
except the ship over in this corner. She is a prize. This is the place
to buy thermometers; you'll generally find them going very low. The
weather in this region is mostly day and night, but rather irregularly
divided between the two.

You see these people with rough beards and red shirts, looking like New
York firemen? You take one to be MOSE? You are right--they are
Esquimaux. They are a tough, and hardy race. Though not precisely
students, they yet consume the midnight oil--chiefly as a beverage.

This great work is the combined production of thirteen artists; twelve
of them, perishing in the attempt, were handsomely buried at our
expense; and the survivor is now keeping a bar, for his own consumption,
at St. Paul, Minnesota. He was compelled to lay aside the brush, which
accounts for the water in this corner not being frozen, as the contract
stipulated. But this allows the ship to which I referred to float
comfortably.

These small buildings are settlements. They are not so frequent here as
in New York or Chicago, where business men inform me they occur about as
often as--once in two years.

"Ice cream for sale," on this sign, has a flavor of civilization in it.

Woman does not go to the poles here, although one of them is only a few
miles distant in a northerly direction, with excellent sleighing.

I would make a passing allusion to this figure, introduced by artist
number nine, to please the young people. It represents a Spitsbergen
lover. He is clad in fur, and has a catarrh. He is just now oh his
sneeze, warbling hoarsely: "Rein deer in this bosom!"

_(Sentimental strains from the melodeon.)_

THE GRAND CANAL.

This is not the Erie Canal, but the Grand Canal of Venice. It does not
own so many mules, or forward so much corn and flour, as the New York
concern, but is more airy and picturesque. It is surrounded by palaces;
but what is a palace without a mother?

These swan-like men-of-war are gondolas. Our skipper is called a
gondolier. Every other skipper is called something worse than that if he
gets in our skipper's way. I respect a man's calling; that is, if he
follows it up energetically.

The Rialto, with its busy throngs.

The Bridge of Sighs, where Lord Byron is said to have stood on either
hand.

A group of native beggars. This man is blind. With this Venetian blind
we beg leave to close this scene.

SARSFIELD YOUNG.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Flesh-pots or Paris.

A late newspaper item states as follows:--

"The Archbishop of Paris has given permission to use horse-flesh on fast
days."

It is lucky for Mr. BONNER'S crack horses, then, that they are not
stabled in Paris just now, since they are all considered first-rate for
Fast days.

       *       *       *       *       *

"SOAP"-STONES.--Wall street "rocks."

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                     A. T. STEWART & CO.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                       ARE NOW OFFERING                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                         SHAWL SUITS,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                   ALPACA AND WINCEY SUITS                    |
  |                        IN ALL COLORS,                        |
  |                      $8; FORMERLY $12.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                 POPLIN SUITS IN ALL COLORS,                  |
  |                    $15 EACH AND UPWARDS.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                      BLACK SILK SUITS,                       |
  |                    $50 EACH AND UPWARDS.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                   An Elegant Assortment of                   |
  |                FRENCH AND IRISH POPLIN SUITS,                |
  |                                                              |
  |                      IN EVERY VARIETY,                       |
  |                      AT POPULAR PRICES.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                 SPECIAL ATTENTION IS PAID TO                 |
  |                       MOURNING ORDERS.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                       CHOICE STYLES IN                       |
  |                  BOMBAZINES, BLACK EMPRESS,                  |
  |                       PARIS CLOTH and                        |
  |                        CASHMERE SUITS                        |
  |                     CONSTANTLY ON HAND.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                    BROADWAY, fourth Ave.,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                    9th and 10th Streets.                     |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                     A. T. STEWART & CO.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                         HAVE ON HAND                         |
  |                                                              |
  |               A MOST MAGNIFICENT ASSORTMENT OF               |
  |                       REAL LACE GOODS,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                        CONSISTING OF                         |
  |                                                              |
  |          POINTE LACE COLLARS, SETTS, HANDKERCHIEFS,          |
  |                      BARBES, COIFFURES,                      |
  |                  CAPES, PELLERINES, JACKETS                  |
  |                         AND SHAWLS.                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                            -ALSO-                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                       A SUPERB LINE OF                       |
  |                      REAL BLACK THREAD                       |
  |                         LACE SHAWLS,                         |
  |                      JACKETS AND CAPES,                      |
  |                 BLACK THREAD, BLACK GUIPURE,                 |
  |                 POINTE GAZE, POINTE APPLIQUE                 |
  |                       AND VALENCIENNES                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                       TRIMMING LACES,                        |
  |                         FORMING THE                          |
  |                      LARGEST ASSORTMENT                      |
  |                         EVER OFFERED                         |
  |                       IN THIS COUNTRY.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |          These Goods having been purchased at PANIC          |
  |          PRICES in Europe, will be offered, in many          |
  |                          instances,                          |
  |                                                              |
  |              Fifty Per Cent. Below Former Cost,              |
  |                                                              |
  |                    BROADWAY, Fourth Ave.,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                    9th and 10th streets.                     |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                      VELVETS, PLUSHES,                       |
  |                       Velveteens, Etc.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                     A. T. STEWART & CO.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                        ARE RECEIVING                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                  BY EACH AND EVERY STEAMER,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                   A FULL SUPPLY OF CHOICE                    |
  |                            COLORS                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                  OF THE ABOVE-NAMED GOODS,                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                FORMING THE LARGEST ASSORTMENT                |
  |                 EVER EXHIBITED IN THIS CITY,                 |
  |                                                              |
  |            WHICH THEY OFFER AT RETAIL AND TO THE             |
  |                            TRADE,                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                         AT EXTREMELY                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                      ATTRACTIVE PRICES,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                    BROADWAY, Fourth Ave.,                    |
  |                      9th and 10th Sts.                       |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                         PUNCHINELLO.                         |
  |                                                              |
  | The first number of this Illustrated Humorous and Satirical  |
  |   Weekly Paper was issued under date of April 2, 1870. The   |
  |   Press and the Public in every State and Territory of the   |
  |     Union endorse it as the best paper of the kind ever      |
  |                    published in America.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                  CONTENTS ENTIRELY ORIGINAL                  |
  |                                                              |
  | Subscription for one year, (with $2.00 premium,)  . .  $4.00 |
  |   "         "  six months, (without premium,) . . .     2.00 |
  |   "         "  three months,  . . . . . . . . . . .     1.00 |
  | Single copies mailed free, for  . . . . . . . . . . . .  .10 |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  | "We offer the following elegant premiums of L. PRANG & CO'S  |
  |            CHROMOS for subscriptions as follows:             |
  |                                                              |
  |              A copy of paper for one year, and               |
  |                                                              |
  |     "The Awakening," (a Litter of Puppies.) Half chromo.     |
  | Size 8-3/8 by 11-1/8 ($2.00 picture,)--for. . . . . .  $4.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |        A copy of paper for one year and either of the        |
  |                   following $3.00 chromos:                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                  _Wild Roses._ 12-1/8 x 9.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Dead Game. 11-1/8 x 8-5/8.                  |
  |                                                              |
  | Easter Morning. 6-3/5 x 10-1/4--for. . . . . . . . .   $5.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |        A copy of paper for one year and either of the        |
  |                   following $5.00 chromos                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                      Group of Chickens;                      |
  |                     Group of Ducklings;                      |
  |                       Group of Quails.                       |
  |                      Each 10 x 12-1/8.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                The Poultry Yard. 10-1/8 x 14                 |
  |                                                              |
  |        The Barefoot Boy; Wild Fruit. Each 9-3/4 x 13.        |
  |                                                              |
  | Pointer and Quail; Spaniel and Woodcock. 10 x 12 for   $6.50 |
  |                                                              |
  |        A copy of paper for one year and either of the        |
  |                   following $6.00 chromos                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                     The Baby in Trouble;                     |
  |                   The Unconscious Sleeper;                   |
  |      The Two Friends. (Dog and Child.) Each 13 x 16-3/4      |
  |                                                              |
  |           Spring; Summer; Autumn 12-1/8 x 16-1/2.            |
  |                                                              |
  | The Kid's Play Ground. 11 x 17-1/2--for . . . . .  .   $7.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |        A copy of paper for one year and either of the        |
  |                   following $7.50 chromos                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Strawberries and Baskets.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Cherries and Baskets.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                   Currants. Each 13 x 18.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |              Horses in a Storm. 22-1/4 x 15-1/4              |
  |                                                              |
  | Six Central Park Views. (A set.) 9-1/8 x 4-1/2--for .  $8.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |               A copy of paper for one year and               |
  |                                                              |
  |         Six American Landscapes. (A set.) 4-3/8 x 9,         |
  | price $9.00--for  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   $9.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |        A copy of paper for one year and either of the        |
  |                    following $10 chromos:                    |
  |                                                              |
  |        Sunset in California. (Bierstadt) 18-1/8 x 12         |
  |                                                              |
  |                   Easter Morning. 14 x 21.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |             Corregio's Magdalen. 12-1/2 x 16-1/8             |
  |                                                              |
  |       Summer Fruit, and Autumn Fruit. (Half chromes.)        |
  |   15-1/2 x 10-1/2, (companions, price $10.00 for the two),   |
  |                                                   for $10.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |  Remittances should be made in P.O. Orders, Drafts, or Bank  |
  | Checks on New York, or Registered letters. The paper will be |
  |    sent from the first number, (April 2d, 1870,) when not    |
  |                      otherwise ordered.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |  Postage of paper is payable at the office where received,   |
  |     twenty cents per year, or five cents per quarter, in     |
  |    advance; the CHROMOS will be mailed free on receipt of    |
  |                            money.                            |
  |                                                              |
  |    CANVASSERS WANTED, to whom liberal commissions will be    |
  |        given. For special terms address the Company.         |
  |                                                              |
  |  The first ten numbers will be sent to any one desirous of   |
  |   seeing the paper before subscribing, for SIXTY CENTS. A    |
  |   specimen copy sent to any one desirous of canvassing or    |
  |       getting up a club, on receipt of postage stamp.        |
  |                                                              |
  |                           Address,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                 PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |        P.O. Box 2783. No. 83 Nassau Street. New York.        |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

[Illustration: EXERCISE IS A GOOD THING FOR BOYS; BUT IT IS RATHER "TOO
MUCH OF A GOOD THING" WHEN PUSHED TO THE EXTENT OF MAKING YOUR
ENTRANCE-GATE A JUDGE'S STAND FOR A FOOT-RACE BETWEEN BOYS.]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |          "THE PRINTING HOUSE OF THE UNITED STATES"           |
  |                             AND                              |
  |          "THE UNITED STATES ENVELOPE MANUFACTORY."           |
  |                                                              |
  |                    GEORGE F. NESBITT & CO                    |
  |                                                              |
  | 163,165,167,169 Pearl St., & 73,75,77,79 Pine St., New-York. |
  |                                                              |
  |                     Execute all kinds of                     |
  |                          PRINTING,                           |
  |                     Furnish all kinds of                     |
  |                         STATIONERY,                          |
  |                      Make all kinds of                       |
  |                         BLANK BOOKS,                         |
  |                 Execute the finest styles of                 |
  |                         LITHOGRAPHY                          |
  |                 Makes the Best and Cheapest                  |
  |                          ENVELOPES                           |
  |                 Ever offered to the Public.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |   They have made all the pre-paid Envelopes for the United   |
  |States Post-Office Department for the past 16 years, and have |
  |  INVARIABLY BEEN THE LOWEST BIDDERS. Their Machinery is the  |
  |   most complete, rapid and economical known in the trade.    |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                Travelers West and South-West                 |
  |                 Should bear in mind that the                 |
  |                         ERIE RAILWAY                         |
  |          IS BY FAR THE CHEAPEST, QUICKEST, AND MOST          |
  |                      COMFORTABLE ROUTE,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  |       Making Direct and Sure Connection at CINCINNATI,       |
  |                        with all Lines                        |
  |                       By Rail or River                       |
  |            For NEW ORLEANS, LOUISVILLE,  MEMPHIS,            |
  |                    ST. LOUIS, VICKSBURG,                     |
  |                      NASHVILLE, MOBILE,                      |
  |             And All Points South and South-west.             |
  |                                                              |
  | Its DRAWING-ROOM and SLEEPING COACHES on all Express Trains, |
  |  running through to Cincinnati without change, are the most  |
  |   elegant and spacious used upon any Road in this country,   |
  |   being fitted up in the most elaborate manner, and having   |
  |  every modern improvement introduced for the comfort of its  |
  |   patrons; running upon the BROAD GAUGE; revealing scenery   |
  | along the Line unequalled upon this Continent, and rendering |
  |   a trip over the ERIE, one of the delights and pleasures    |
  |              of this life not to be forgotten.               |
  |                                                              |
  |   By applying at the Offices of the Erie Railway Co., Nos.   |
  |  241, 529 and 957 Broadway; 205 Chambers St.; 38 Greenwich   |
  |   St.; cor. 125th St. and Third Avenue, Harlem; 338 Fulton   |
  |  St., Brooklyn: Depots foot of Chambers Street, and foot of  |
  |  23d St., New York; and the Agents at the principal hotels,  |
  | travelers can obtain just the Ticket they desire, as well as |
  |                all the necessary information.                |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                         PUNCHINELLO,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                   VOL. I, ENDING SEPT. 24,                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                    BOUND IN EXTRA CLOTH,                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                        IS NOW READY.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                        PRICE $2. 50.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |    Sent free by any Publisher on receipt of price, or by     |
  |                                                              |
  |               PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,                |
  |                                                              |
  |                 83 Nassau Street, New York.                  |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                  PROFESSOR JAMES DE MILLE,                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                          Author of                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                   "THE DODGE CLUB ABROAD"                    |
  |                  AND OTHER HUMOROUS WORKS,                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Will Commence a New Serial                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                       IN THE NUMBER OF                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                        "PUNCHINELLO"                         |
  |                             FOR                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                      January 7th, 1871,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |              Written expressly for this paper.               |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                       FREEMAN & BURR'S                       |
  |                     CLOTHING WAREHOUSES.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                          138 & 140                           |
  |                        FULTON STREET,                        |
  |                          NEW YORK.                           |
  |                                                              |
  |     FREEMAN & BURR'S Stock is of unparalleled extent and     |
  | variety. It embraces Suits, Overcoats, and Clothing of every |
  |  description, for all ages, and all classes and occasions.   |
  |                                                              |
  |     ORDERS BY LETTER.--The easy and accurate system for      |
  | SELF-MEASURE, introduced by FREEMAN & BURR, enables parties  |
  |   in any part of the country to order CLOTHING direct from   |
  |  them, with the certainty of receiving the most PERFECT FIT  |
  |                         attainable.                          |
  |                                                              |
  |  RULES FOR SELF-MEASURE, Samples of Goods, Price-list, and   |
  |           Fashion Sheet, sent FREE on application.           |
  |                                                              |
  |             Overcoats, $6.   Winter Suits, $12.              |
  |             Overcoats, $8.   Winter Suits, $15.              |
  |             Overcoats, $10.  Winter Suits, $20.              |
  |             Overcoats, $15.  Winter Suits, $30.              |
  |             Overcoats, $20.  Winter Suits, $40.              |
  |             Overcoats, $25.  Winter Suits, $50.              |
  |             Overcoats, $30.   Boys' Suits, $6.               |
  |             Overcoats, $35.   Boys' Suits, $8.               |
  |             Overcoats, $40.   Boys' Suits, $12.              |
  |             Overcoats, $45.   Boys' Suits, $18.              |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                      A CHRISTMAS STORY,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |              Written expressly for this Paper,               |
  |                                                              |
  |                    By FRANK R. STOCKTON,                     |
  |                                                              |
  |             Author of "Ting-a-ling," etc., etc.,             |
  |                                                              |
  |     WILL BE COMMENCED IN No. 38, FOR DECEMBER 17TH, AND      |
  |                 CONCLUDED IN THREE NUMBERS.                  |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punchinello, Vol. 2, No. 36, December
3, 1870, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCHINELLO 36 ***

***** This file should be named 10292.txt or 10292.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/9/10292/

Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Steve Schulze and PG Distributed
Proofreaders


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


