The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Prose Marmion, by Sara D. Jenkins

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Prose Marmion
       A Tale of the Scottish Border

Author: Sara D. Jenkins

Release Date: January 22, 2004 [EBook #10778]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PROSE MARMION ***




Produced by PG Distributed Proofreaders




THE PROSE MARMION

A TALE OF THE SCOTTISH BORDER

ADAPTED FROM

SCOTT'S "MARMION"

BY

SARA D. JENKINS

ITHACA, N.Y.

_Author of the Prose "Lady of the Lake," etc._

1903




[Illustration: SIR WALTER SCOTT. (Bust.)]

[Illustration: SIR WALTER SCOTT. (From painting by _Wm. Nicholson_.)]




INTRODUCTION.


Sir Walter Scott, poet and novelist, was born in Edinburgh, Scotland,
five years before the Declaration of Independence in America. Unlike
most little Scotch boys, he was not sturdy and robust, and in his second
year, a lameness appeared that never entirely left him. Being frail and
delicate, he received the most tender care from parents and
grandparents. Five consecutive years of his life, from the age of three
to the age of eight, were spent on his grandfather's farm at Sandyknow.
At the end of this period, he returned to Edinburgh greatly improved in
health, and soon after, entered the high school, where he remained four
years. A course at the university followed the high school, but Scott
never gained distinction as a scholar. He loved romances, old plays,
travels, and poetry too well, ever to become distinguished in
philosophy, mathematics, or the dry study of dead languages.

In his early years, he had formed a taste for ballad literature, which
very significantly influenced, if it did not wholly determine, the
character of his writings. The historical incidents upon which the
ballads were founded, their traditional legends, affected him
profoundly, and he wished to become at once a poet of chivalry, a writer
of romance. His father, however, had other plans for his son, and the
lad was made a lawyer's apprentice in the father's office. Continuing,
as recreation, his reading, he gave six years to the study of law, being
admitted to the bar when only twenty-one. For years, he cultivated
literature as a relaxation from business.

At the age of twenty-six he married, and about this time accepted the
office of deputy sheriff of Selkirkshire, largely moved to do so by his
unwillingness to rely upon his pen for support. Nine years later, 1806,
through family influence he was appointed, at a good salary, to one of
the chief clerkships in the Scottish court of sessions. The fulfillment
of his long-cherished desire of abandoning his labors as an advocate, in
order to devote himself to literature, was now at hand. He had already
delighted the public by various early literary efforts, the most
important being the "Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border," parts of which
had occupied him since childhood. This was followed by "Sir Tristrem"
and the "Lay of the Last Minstrel." Scott was now enrolled among the
poets of the day, and while never neglecting the duties of office, he
entered upon his literary career with unflagging industry. "Marmion,"
"The Lady of the Lake," "Don Roderick," and "Rokeby" reflected his
romantic fervor.

Lord Byron now had entered the field of letters, and Scott, conscious of
the power of his rival, determined to seek fame in other than poetic
paths. This determination produced "Waverly," whose success gave birth
to Scott's desire to be numbered among the landed gentry of the country.
Under the influence of this passion, the novels now associated with his
name followed with startling rapidity, and their growth developed in the
author an unwillingness to be known as a penman writing for fortune.
Literary fame was less dear to him than the upbuilding of a family name.
The novels went for a time fatherless, but the baronial mansion, still
one of the most famous shrines of the curious, grew into the stately
proportions of Abbotsford.

In 1820. George IV. conferred upon Scott the baronetcy, dearer than all
the plaudits of the public. But

    "Giddy chance never bears,
     That mortal bliss shall last for years,"

and the failure of banker and of publisher disclosed that the landed
baronet had been a silent partner in the house of his printer for a
quarter of a century, for whose debts Scott was liable to the extent of
one hundred thousand pounds and to his bankers for enough more to make
the entire debt one hundred fifty thousand pounds. Unappalled by the
loss, Scott refused all offers of release from his creditors, and began
to pay the debt by means of his pen, determined to preserve Abbotsford
to his children's children. At a dinner given in 1827, he threw off all
disguise, and acknowledged the authorship of the Waverly novels.

His great exertions brought on paralysis. A visit to Italy failed to
improve his condition, and he returned to die on the banks of the Tweed,
and to be laid at rest in Dreyburg Abbey. He had paid one hundred
thousand pounds of the debt, and the publishers of his works had
sufficient confidence in their sale to advance the remaining fifty
thousand pounds, the estate thus being left free of encumbrance.

Of his four children, two sons and two daughters, none left male issue.
A grandchild, the wife of Robert Hope, was permitted by Parliament to
assume the name of Scott, and her son Walter, at the age of twenty-one,
was knighted by Queen Victoria.

Edinburgh has erected to his memory a most graceful monument, and
Westminster Abbey a memorial. Visitors, under certain limitations, are
permitted to visit the mansion, to see the enchanted library, and the
famous study, to stray about the grounds where the famous writer spent
the happiest, as well as the saddest, years of his life.

[Illustration: ABBOTSFORD.]




THE PROSE MARMION.



CHAPTER I.


In all the border country that lies between England and Scotland, no
castle stands more fair than Norham. Fast by its rock-ribbed walls flows
the noble Tweed, and on its battled towers frown the hills of Cheviot.

Day was dying, St. George's banner, broad and gay, hung in the evening
breeze that scarce had power to wave it o'er the keep. Warriors on the
turrets were moving across the sky like giants, their armor flashing
back the gleam of the setting sun, when a horseman dashed forward,
spurred on his proud steed, and blew his bugle before the dark archway
of the castle. The warder, knowing well the horn he heard, hastened from
the wall and warned the captain of the guard. At once was given the
command, "Make the entrance free! Let every minstrel, every herald,
every squire, prepare to receive Lord Marmion, who waits below!" The
iron-studded gate was unbarred, the portcullis raised, the drawbridge
dropped, and proudly across it, stepped a red roan charger, bearing the
noble guest.

Lord Marmion was a stalwart knight, whose visage told of many a battle.
The scar on his brown cheek spoke of Bosworth Field, and the fire that
burned in his eye showed a spirit still proud. The lines of care on his
brow, and the threads of silver in his black curling hair, spoke less of
age than of toil. The square-turned joints, the evident strength of body
and limb, bespoke not a carpet-knight, but a grim champion. From head to
foot, he was clad in mail of Milan steel. His helmet of embossed gold
hung at the saddle-bow. A falcon hovered in the crest, and soared on the
azure field of the noble lord's shield, above the motto, "Who checks at
me, to death is dight!"

The horse was as richly clad as its rider. The reins were embroidered in
blue, and ribbons of the same color decked the arched neck and mane. The
housings were of blue trapped with gold.

Behind the leader, rode gallant squires of noble name. Though still a
squire, each had well earned knighthood. Each could tame a war horse,
draw a bow, wield a sword, dance in the hall, carve at the board, frame
love ditties, and sing them to fair ladies.

Next in the train, came four men-at-arms: two carried halbert, bill,
axe, and lance; a third led the sumpter mules and the ambling palfrey,
which served to bear Lord Marmion when he wished to relieve his battle
steed; the most trusty of the four held on high the pennon, furled in
its glossy blue streamers. Last were twenty yeomen, two and two, in blue
jerkins, black hose, and wearing falcons embroidered on each breast. At
their belts hung quivers, and in their hands were boar-spears, tough and
strong. They knew the art of hunting by lake or in wood, could bend a
six-foot bow, or, at the behest of their lord, send far the cloth-yard
spear.

To welcome Marmion, the Flower of English Chivalry, the soldiers of the
guard of Norham stood in the castle yard, with reversed pike and spear.
Minstrels and trumpeters were there, the welcome was prepared, and as
the train entered, a clang sounded through turret and tower, such as the
old castle had seldom heard.

Trumpets flourished, the martial airs rang out as Marmion crossed the
court, scattering angels among the ranks. Loud rose the cry:

    "Welcome to Norham, Marmion!
     Stout heart and open hand!
     Thou flower of English land!"

Two pursuivants stood at the entrance to the donjon, and hailed the
guest as Lord of Fontenaye, of Lutterward, Scrivelbaye, of "Tamworth
tower and town." To requite their courtesy, Marmion, as he alighted,
hung about the neck of each a chain of twelve marks.

"Largesse, largesse, knight of the crest of gold!" cried the heralds, in
acknowledgment of the bounty received;

    "'A blazon'd shield in battle won,
       Ne'er guarded heart so bold.'"

As they marshalled him to the castle hall, the guests stood aside, and
again the trumpets flourished, and the heralds cried:

    "'Room, lordlings, room for Lord Marmion,
        With the crest and helm of gold!
      Full well we know the trophies won
        In the lists at Cottiswold:
      There, vainly Ralph de Wilton strove
        'Gainst Marmion's force to stand;
      To him he lost his lady-love,
        And to the King his land.
      Ourselves beheld the listed field,
        A sight both sad and fair;
      We saw Lord Marmion pierce the shield,
        And saw the saddle bare;
      We saw the victor win the crest
        He wears with worthy pride;
      And on the gibbet-tree, reversed,
        His foeman's scutcheon tied.
      Place, nobles, for the Falcon-Knight!
        Room, room, ye gentles gay,
      For him who conquered in the right,
        Marmion of Fontenaye!'"

As the welcome died away, forth stepped Sir Hugh, lord of the castle. He
led his visitor to the raised dais and placed him in the seat of honor,
while a northern harper chanted a rude hymn. The ear of Marmion could
scarcely brook the barbarous sound, yet much he praised, well knowing
that,

    "Lady's suit, and minstrel's strain,
     By knight should ne'er be heard in vain."

As the weird strains died away, the host pressed the English lord to
bide long as a guest, promising rest for horse, and refreshment and
pleasure for man, with many a joust, or feat at arms, for those who
wished to learn northern ways.

At this the brow of Marmion grew dark and stern. Sir Hugh marked the
changed look, and pouring out a bowl of sparkling wine, said:

    "'Now pledge me here, Lord Marmion:
        But first I pray thee fair,
      Where hast thou left that page of thine,
        Whose beauty was so rare?
      When last in Raby towers we met,
        The boy I closely eyed,
      And often marked his cheeks were wet
        With tears he fain would hide.'"

Lord Marmion ill concealed his rising anger, yet he made a calm reply.

"The lad was too frail to endure the northern climate, and I have left
him at Lindisfarne. May I ask, Lord Heron, why the lady of the castle
disdains to grace the hall to-day? Is it because Marmion of Fontenaye is
present?"

The Knight replied:

"Norham Castle is a grim, dull cage for a bird so beautiful as the lady
of Heron, and with my consent she sits with the noble and fair Queen
Margaret, the bride of royal James."

"Ah!" replied the Heron's noble guest, "if this be so, I will gladly
bear to her your tender messages. I am now, by the request of our good
English King, on my way to the court of Scotland, to learn why James is
gathering troops, why making warlike preparations, and, if it be
possible, I am to persuade him to maintain the peace. From your great
goodness, I make bold to ask for myself and for my train a trusty guide.
I have not ridden in Scotland since James backed Richard, Duke of York,
in his pretensions to the throne of England. Then, as you remember, I
marched with Surrey's forces, and razed to the ground the tower of
Aytoun."

"For such need, my lord, trust old Norham gray. Here are guides who have
spurred far on Scottish ground, who have tasted the ale of St. Bothan,
driven off the beeves of Lauderdale, and fired homes that the inmates
might have light by which to dress themselves."

"In good sooth," replied Lord Marmion, "were I bent on war, a better
guard I could not wish, but I go in form of peace, a friendly messenger
to a foreign King. A plundering border spear might arouse suspicious
fears, and the deadly feud, the thirst for blood, break out in unseemly
broil. More fitting as guide, would be a friar, a pardoner, traveling
priest, or strolling pilgrim."

Sir Hugh musingly passed his hand over his brow, and then replied: "Fain
would I find the guide you need, but, though a bishop built this castle,
few holy brethren resort here. If the priest of Shoreswood were here, he
could rein your wildest horse, but no spearsman in the hall will sooner
strike or join in fray. Friar John of Tilmouth is the very man! He is a
blithesome brother, a welcome guest in hall and hut. He knows each
castle, town and tower in which the ale and wine are good. He now seldom
leaves these walls, but, perchance, in your guard he will go."

In the pause that followed, young Selby, nephew of the Earl of Norham,
respectfully said, "Kind uncle, unhappy we, if harm came to Friar John.
When time hangs heavy in the hall, and the snow lies deep at Christmas
tide, when we can neither hunt nor joust, who will sing the carols, and
sweep away the stake at bowls? Who will lead the games and gambols? Let
Friar John in safety fill his chimney corner, roast hissing crabs, or
empty the flagons. Last night, there came to Norham Castle a fitter
guide for Lord Marmion."

"Nephew," said Sir Hugh, "well hast thou spoke. Say on."

"There came here, direct from Rome, one who hath visited the blessed
tomb, and worshipped in each holy spot of Arabia and Palestine. He hath
been on the hills where rested Noah's Ark; he hath walked by the Red
Sea; in Sinai's Wilderness, he saw the mount where Moses received the
law. He knows the passes of the North, and is on his way to distant
shrines beyond the Forth. Little he eats, and drinks only of stream or
lake. He is a fit guide for moor and fell."

"Gramercy!" exclaimed Lord Marmion. "Loth would I be to take Friar John,
if this Palmer will lead us as far as Holy-Rood. I'll pay him not in
beads and cockle shells, but in 'angels' fair and good. I love such holy
ramblers. They know how to charm each weary hill with song or romance.

    "'Some jovial tale, or glee, or jest,
     They bring to cheer the way.'"

"Ah! sire," said young Selby, as he laid his finger on his lip in token
of silence, "this man knows more than he has ever learned from holy
lore. Last night, we listened at his cell, and strange things we heard.
He muttered on till dawn. No conscience clear and void of evil intent
remains so long awake to pray."

"Let it pass," cried Marmion. "This man and he only shall guide me on my
way, though he and the arch fiend were sworn friends. So, please you,
gentle youth, call this Palmer to the castle hall."

Little did Marmion dream that the Palmer was Ralph de Wilton, his
deadliest foe, in disguise--Ralph de Wilton, his rival in love, whom
Marmion had accused of treason, had caused to be sent into exile, and
whom he supposed dead.

A moment later the Palmer appeared, clad in a black mantle and cowl, and
wearing on his shoulders the keys of St. Peter cut in cloth of red. His
cap, bordered with scallop shells, fitted close to his head, and over
all was drawn the cowl. His sandals were travel-worn. In his hands he
bore a staff and palm branch, emblems of the pilgrim from the holy land.
No lord or knight was there in the hall who had a more stately step,
none who looked more proud. He waited not for salutation, but strode
across the hall of state, and fronted Marmion, as peer meets peer.
Beneath the cowl was a face so wan, so worn, a cheek so sunken, and an
eye so wild, that the mother would not have known her child, much less
Marmion, his rival.

Danger, travel, want, and woe soon change the form. Deadly fear can
outstrip time; toil quenches the fire of youth; and despair traces
wrinkles deeper than old age.

    "Happy whom none of these befall;
     But this poor Palmer knew them all."

Lord Marmion made known his request, and the Palmer took upon himself
the task of guide, on condition that they set out without delay, saying:

    "'But I have solemn vows to pay
      And may not linger by the way;
      Saint Mary grant that cave or spring
      May back to peace my bosom bring,
      Or bid it throb no more!'"

Then the page, on bended knee, presented to each guest in turn the
massive silver bowl of wassail, "the midnight draught of sleep," rich
with wine and spices. Lord Marmion drank, "Sound sleep to all"; the earl
pledged his noble guest; all drained it merrily except the Palmer. He
alone refused, although Selby urged him most courteously. The feast was
over, the sound of minstrel hushed. Nought was heard in the castle but
the slow footsteps of the guard.

At dawn the chapel doors unclosed, and after a hasty mass from Friar
John, a rich repast was served to knight and squire.

    "Lord Marmion's bugles blew to horse:
     Then came the stirrup-cup in course;
     Between the Baron and his host
     No point of courtesy was lost;
     Till, filing from the gate, had passed
     That noble train, their Lord the last.
     Then loudly rang the trumpet call;
     Thundered the cannon from the wall,
       And shook the Scottish shore;
     Around the castle eddied slow,
     Volumes of smoke as white as snow,
       And hid its turrets hoar;
     Till they rolled forth upon the air,
    And met the river breezes there."

[Illustration: THE LIBRARY, ABBOTSFORD.]



CHAPTER II.


The breeze which swept away the rolling smoke from Norham, curled not
the Tweed alone. Far upon Northumbrian waters, it blew fresh and strong,
bearing on its wings a barque from the Abbey of Whitby on the coast of
Yorkshire, sailing to St. Cuthbert's at Lindisfarne, on Holy Isle.

    "The merry seamen laugh'd to see
     Their gallant ship so lustily
       Furrow the green sea-foam.
     Much joy'd they in their honor'd freight;
     For, on the deck, in chair of state,
     The Abbess of Saint Hilda placed,
     With five fair nuns, the galley graced.

    "'T was sweet to see these holy maids,
     Like birds escaped to green-wood shades,
       Their first flight from the cage;
     How timid, and how curious, too,
     For all to them was strange and new,
     And all the common sights they view,
       Their wonderment engage."

Light-hearted were they all, except the Abbess and the novice Clare.
Fair, kind, and noble, the Abbess had early taken the veil. Her hopes,
her fears, her joys, were bounded by the cloister walls; her highest
ambition being to raise St. Hilda's fame. For this she gave her ample
fortune--to build its bowers, to adorn its chapels with rare and quaint
carvings, and to deck the relic shrine with ivory and costly gems. The
poor and the pilgrim blessed her bounty and shelter.

Her pale cheek and spare form were made more striking by the black
Benedictine garb. Vigils and penitence had dimmed the luster of her
eyes. Though proud of her religious sway and its severity, she loved her
maidens and was loved by them in return.

The purpose of the present voyage was most unhappy, and to the Abbess
most painful. She came to Lindisfarne upon the summons of St. Cuthbert's
Abbot, to hold with him and the Prioress of Tynemouth an inquisition on
two apostates from the faith, if need were, to condemn them to death.

On the galley's prow sat the unhappy sister Clare, young and beautiful,
lovely and guileless, as yet a nun unprofessed. She had been betrothed
to Ralph de Wilton, whom she supposed now dead, or worse, a dishonored
fugitive. After the disgrace brought upon her lover, Clare had been
commanded by her guardians to give her hand to Lord Marmion, who loved
her for her lands alone. Heartbroken at the fate of her true-love, and
to escape this hateful marriage, she was about to take the vestal vow,
and in the gloom of St. Hilda hide her blasted hopes, her youth and
beauty.

As the vessel glided over the waters, she gazed into their depths,
seeing only a sun-scorched desert, waste and bare, where no wave
murmured, no breeze sighed. Again she saw a loved form on the burning
sands: the dear dead, denied even the simplest rites of burial.

Now the vessel skirted the coast of mountainous Northumberland. Towns,
towers, and halls, successive rose before the delighted group of
maidens. Tynemouth's Priory appeared, and as they passed, the fair nuns
told their beads. At length the Holy Island was reached. The tide was at
its flood. Twice each day, pilgrims dry-shod might find their way to the
island; and twice each day the waves beat high between the island and
the shore, effacing all marks of pilgrim's staff and sandalled foot.

As the galley flew to the port, higher and higher, the castle and its
battled towers rose to view, a huge, solemn, dark-red pile. In Saxon
strength the massive arches broad and round, row on row, supported by
short, ponderous columns, frowned upon the approaching visitor. It stood
at the very water's edge, and had been built long before the birth of
Gothic architecture. On its walls the tempestuous sea and heathen Dane
alike had vainly poured their impious rage. For more than a thousand
years, wind, wave, and warrior had been held at bay. The deep walls of
the old abbey still stood worn but unsubdued.

As they drew near, the maidens raised St. Hilda's song. Borne on the
wind over the wave, their voices met a response of welcome in the chorus
which arose upon the shore. Soon, bearing banner, cross, and relic,
monks and nuns filed in order from the grim cloister down to the harbor,
echoing back the hymn. Among her maidens, conspicuous in veil and hood,
stood the Abbess, even then engaged in holy devotion.

When the reception at harbor and hall was over, and the evening banquet
ended, the vestal maidens and their visitors, secure from unhallowed
eyes, roamed at will through each holy cloister, aisle, gallery, and
dome. Though it was a summer night, the evening fell damp and chill, the
sea breeze blowing cold, and the pure-minded girls closed around the
blazing hearth, each in turn to paint the glory of her favorite saint.

While, round the fire, legends were rehearsed by the happy group, a very
different scene was taking place in a secret underground aisle, where a
council of life and death was being held. The spot was more dark and
lone than a dungeon cell. Light and air were excluded, as it was a
burial place for those who, dying in sin, might not be laid within the
Church. It was also a place of punishment, whence if a cry pierced the
upper air, the hearer offered a prayer, thinking he heard the moaning of
spirits in torment.

Few save the Abbot knew the place, and fewer still, the devious way by
which it was approached. When taken there, victims and judge were led
blindfold. The walls were rude rocks, the pavement, gravestones sunken
and worn. The noxious vapor, chilled into drops, fell tinkling on the
floor. An antique lamp, hanging from an iron chain, gave a dim light,
which strove with darkness and damp to show the horrors of the scene.
Here the three judges were met to pronounce the sentence of doom.

In the pale light sat the Abbess of St. Hilda. Closely she drew her veil
to hide the teardrops of pity. Near her was the Prioress of Tynemouth,
proud and haughty, yet white with awe. Next was the aged Abbot of St.
Cuthbert, or, as he was called, the "Saint of Lindisfarne." Before them,
under sentence, stood the guilty pair. One was a maiden who, disguised
in the dress of a page, had been taken from Marmion's train. The cloak
and hood could not conceal or mar her beauty. On the breast of her
doublet was Lord Marmion's badge, a falcon crest, which she vainly
attempted to conceal.

At the command of the Prioress, the silken band that fastened the young
girl's long, fair hair was undone, and down over her slender form fell
the rich golden ringlets. Before them stood Constance de Beverley, a
professed nun of Fontevraud. Lured by the love of Marmion, she had
broken her vow, and fled from the convent. She now stood so beautiful,
so calm, so pale, that but for the heaving breast and heavy breathing,
she might have been a form of wax wrought to the very life.

Her companion in misery was a sorry sight. This wretch, wearing frock
and cowl, was not ashamed to moan, to shrink, to grovel on the floor, to
crouch like a hound, while the accused frail girl waited her doom
without a sound, without a tear.

Well might she grow pale! In the dark wall were two niches narrow and
high. In each was laid a slender meal of roots, bread, and water. Close
to each cell, motionless, stood two haggard monks holding a blazing
torch, and displaying the cement, stones, and implements with which the
culprits were to be immured.

Now the blind old Abbot rose to speak the doom of those to be enclosed
in the new made tombs. Twice he stopped, as the woeful maiden, gathering
her powers, tried to make audible the words which died in murmurs on her
quivering lips. At length, by superhuman effort, she sent the blood,
curdled at her heart, coursing through every vein. Light came to her
eye, color to her cheek, and when the silence was broken, she gathered
strength at every word. It was a strange sight to see resolution so high
in a form so weak, so soft, so fair.

"I speak," she said, "not to implore mercy, for full well I know it
would be vain. Neither do I speak to gain your prayers, for a lingering,
living death within these walls will be a penance fit to cleanse my soul
of every sin. I speak not for myself, but for one whom I have wronged
though he never did me wrong; one who, if living, is now an exile under
the ban of the King. I speak to clear the fair name of Ralph de Wilton,
and to accuse Lord Marmion of Fontenaye, the traitor, to whose false
words of love I listened when I left my veil and convent dear.

"Long, weary days, I bowed my pride, and humbled my honor, to ride as
squire to this false knight, who daily promised me marriage. To be his
slave, hoping to be his wife, I forfeited all peace on earth, all hope
beyond the grave; but when he met the betrothed of Ralph de Wilton, the
Lady Clare, when he learned of her vast wealth and broad lands, when he
saw her face more fair than mine, he foreswore his faith. I, Constance,
was beloved no more. It is an old story, often told.

"The King approved the scheme of Marmion. Vainly de Wilton pleaded his
right to the hand of Clare, and when all fair means were exhausted,
Ralph was accused of treason. By my woman's unworthy hand, at the
command of Marmion, was forged the papers which sealed de Wilton's fate.
The two men fought in mortal combat.

    "'Their prayers are prayed,
      Their lances in the rest are laid.'

"The result was told by the loud cry, 'Marmion! Marmion! De Wilton to
the block!' Justice seemed dead, for he, ever loyal in love and in
faith, was overthrown by the falsehearted. This packet will prove de
Wilton innocent of treason, how innocent, these letters alone can tell,
and I now give them to the sacred care of the Abbess of St. Hilda. Guard
them with your life, till they rest in the hands of the King."

She paused, gathered voice and strength and proceeded:

"The Lady Clare hated the name of Marmion, mourned her dishonored lover,
and fled to the convent of Whitby. The King, incensed at her action,
declared she should be his favorite's bride even though she were a nun
confessed. Marmion was sent to Scotland and I, cast off, determined to
plan a sure escape for Clare and for myself. This false monk, whom you
are about to condemn with me, promised to carry to Clare the drugs by
means of which she would soon have been the bride of heaven. His
cowardice has undone us both, and I now reveal the story of the crime,
that none may wed with Marmion, that his perfidy may be made known to
the King, who, when he reads these letters, will see his favorite
deserves the headsman's axe. Now, men of death, do your worst. I can
suffer and be still.

    "'And come he slow, or come he fast,
      It is but death who comes at last.'"

The old Abbot raised his sightless eyes to heaven and said:

    "'Sister, let thy sorrows cease;
      Sinful brother, part in peace!'"

Up from the direful place of doom, to the light of day and to the fresh
air, passed those who had held this awful trial. Shrieks and groans
followed the winding steps. The peasant who heard the unearthly cries
bowed his head, the hermit told his beads, the brother crossed himself,
even the stag on Cheviot hills bounded to his feet, listened and then
trembling lay down to hide among the mountain ferns.

[Illustration: THE STUDY, ABBOTSFORD.]



CHAPTER III.


We now return to Lord Marmion, who, led by the Palmer, was hastening on
to Holyrood. When the heights of Lammermoor were reached, noon had long
passed, and at early nightfall, old Gifford's towers lay before them.
Here they had expected hospitality, but the lord of the Castle had gone
to Scotland's camp, where were gathered the noblest and bravest of her
sons. No friendly summons called them to the hall, for in her lord's
absence, the lady refused admittance alike to friend and foe.

On through the hamlet rode the train until it drew rein at the inn. Now
down from their seats sprang the horsemen. The courtyard rang with
jingling spurs, horses were led to the stalls, and the bustling host
gave double the orders that could be obeyed. The building was large, and
though rudely built, its cheerful fire and savory food were most welcome
to the weary men. Soon by the wide chimney's roaring blaze, and in the
place of state, sat Marmion. He watched his followers as they mixed the
brown ale, and enjoyed the bountiful repast. Oft the lordly warrior
mingled in the mirth they made.

    "For though, with men of high degree,
     The proudest of the proud was he,
     Yet, trained in camp, he knew the art
     To win the soldier's hardy heart.
     Boisterous as March, yet fresh as May,
     With open hand and brow as free,
     Lover of wine and minstrelsy."

Directly opposite, resting on his staff, stood the Palmer, the thin,
dark visage half seen, half hidden by his hood. Steadily he gazed on
Marmion, who by frown and gesture gave evidence that he could ill bear
so close a scrutiny.

As squire and archer looked at the stern, dark face of the Pilgrim,
their bursts of laughter grew less loud, less frequent, and gradually
their mirth declined. They whispered one to another: "Sawest thou ever
such a face? How pale his cheek! How bright his eye! His heart must be
set only on his soul's salvation."

To chase away the gloom gradually stealing over the company, and to draw
from himself the sullen scowl of the Palmer, Marmion called upon his
favorite squire:

    "'Fitz-Eustace, knows't thou not some lay
      To speed the lingering night away?'"

The youth made an unhappy choice. He had a rich, mellow voice, and chose
the wild, sad ballad often sung to Marmion by the unfortunate Constance
de Beverley. When all was quiet, quiveringly the notes fell upon the
air:

SONG.

    "Where shall the lover rest,
       Whom the fates sever
     From his true maiden's breast,
       Parted forever?
     Where early violets die
       Under the willow.

    "There through the summer day,
       Cool streams are laving
     There while the tempests sway,
       Scarce are boughs waving;
     There thy rest shalt thou take,
     Never again to awake,
       Never, O never!

    "Where shall the traitor rove,
       He, the deceiver,
     Who could win maiden's love,
       Win and then leave her?
     In the lost battle,
       Borne down by the flying,
     Where mingles war's rattle
       With groans of the dying.

    "His warm blood the wolf shall lap,
       Ere life be parted.
     Shame and dishonor sit
       By his grave ever;
     Blessing shall hallow it--
       Never, O never!"

The melancholy sound ceased. The song was sad, and bitterly it fell on
the false-hearted Marmion. Well he knew that at his request the faithful
but misguided Constance had been taken to Lindisfarne to be punished for
crime committed through her mistaken love for him. As if he already saw
disgrace for himself and death for her, he drew his mantle before his
face, and bent his head upon his hands. Constance de Beverley at that
moment was dying in her cell.

The meanest groom in all the train could scarce have wished to exchange
places with the proud Marmion, could his thoughts have been known.
Controlling himself, and raising his head, he said:

"As you sang, it seemed that I heard a death knell rung in mine ear.
What is the meaning of this weird sound?"

Then for the first time the Palmer broke his silence, and said in reply:
"It foretells the death of a loved friend."

Utterance, for once, failed the haughty Marmion, whose pride heretofore
could scarcely brook a word even from his King. His glance fell, his
brow flushed, for something familiar in the tone or look of the speaker
so struck the false heart that he was speechless.

Before his troubled imagination rose a vision of the lovely Constance,
beautiful and pure as when, trusting his treacherous words, she left the
peaceful walls of her convent. He knew she was now a captive in convent
cell, and the strange words of the Palmer, added to the song of the
squire, had made him unhappy. "Alas!" he thought, "would that I had left
her in purity to live, in holiness to die." Twice he was ready to order,
"To horse," that he might fly to Lindisfarne and command that not one
golden ringlet of her fair head be harmed, and twice he thought, "They
dare not. I gave orders that she should be safe, though not at large."

While thus love and repentance strove in the breast of the lord, the
landlord began a weird tale, suggested by the speech of the Palmer. As
Marmion listened, he gathered from the legend that not far from where
they sat, a knight might learn of future weal or woe. He might,
perchance, meet "in the charmed ring" his deadliest foe, in the form of
a spectre, and with it engage in mortal combat. If victorious over this
supernatural antagonist, the omen was victory in all future
undertakings.

    "Marmion longed to prove his chance;
     In charmed ring to break a lance."

The yeomen had drunk deep; the ale was strong, and at a sign from their
master, all sought rest on the hostel floor before the now dying embers.
For pillow, under each head, was quiver or targe. The flickering fire
threw fitful shadows on the strange group. Marmion and his squires
retired to other quarters. Where the Palmer had disappeared, none knew
or cared.

Alone, folded in his green mantle and nestling in the hay of a waste
loft, lay Fitz-Eustace, the pale moonlight falling upon his youthful
face and form. He was dreaming happy dreams of hawk and hound, of ring
and glove, of lady's eyes, when suddenly he woke. A tall form, half in
the moonbeams, half in the gloom, stood beside him; but before he could
draw his dagger, he recognized the voice of Marmion, who said:

"Fitz-Eustace, rise, and saddle Bevis! I cannot rest. The air must cool
my brow. I fain would ride to view the elfin scene of chivalry of which
we heard to-night. Rouse none from their slumbers, for I would not have
those prating knaves know that I could credit so wild a tale as our
landlord has told."

Softly down the steps they stole. Eustace led forth the steed arrayed
for the ride, and Marmion, armed to meet the elfin foe, sprang into the
saddle. The young squire listened to the resounding hoof-beats as they
grew more and more faint, and wondered as he fell asleep that one held
to be so wary, so wise, so incredulous, should ride forth at midnight to
meet a ghost in mail and plate.

The moon was bright, and as Marmion reached the elfin camp, halting, he
fearlessly blew his bugle. An answer came, so faint and hollow, that it
might have been an echo; but suddenly he saw a distinct form appear, a
mounted champion. The sight of the unexpected foe made to tremble with
horror him who never had feared knight or noble. His hand so shook, he
could scarce couch spear aright. The combat began; the two horsemen ran
their course; and in the third attack Marmion's steed could not resist
the unearthly shock--he fell, and the flower of England's chivalry
rolled in the dust.

High over the head of the fallen foe, the supposed spectre shook his
sword. Full on his face fell the moonlight, a face never to be mistaken.
It was the wraith of Ralph de Wilton, who had been sent by Marmion to
exile and to death. Thrice over his victim did the grim, ghast spectre
shake his blade, but when Marmion, white with terror, prayed for life,
the seeming vision dashed his sword into its sheath, sprang lightly to
his saddle, and vanished as he came. The moon sank from sight, and the
poor, shivering, wretched English knight lay groveling on the plain.
Could it be his mortal enemy had left the grave to strike down a living
foe, and to stare in derisive hatred from a raised visor? Whether dead
or alive, the elfin foe had little reason to spare the life of so
dastardly an enemy!

Sweetly sleeping, or patiently listening, Eustace waited for the return
of his knight, waited till he heard a horse coming, spurred to its
utmost speed. The rider hastily threw the rein to his squire, but spoke
not a word. In the dim light the youth plainly saw that the armor and
the falcon crest on his lord's helmet were covered with clay, that the
knees and sides of the noble charger were in sad plight. It was evident
the beast and his rider had been overthrown. To broken and brief rest
Eustace returned and never did he more gladly welcome the light of day.

    "Eustace did ne'er so blithely mark
     The first notes of the morning lark."



CHAPTER IV.


    "The lark sang shrill, the cock he crew,
     And loudly Marmion's bugles blew,
     And with their light and lively call,
     Brought groom and yeoman to the stall."

Light of heart they came, but soon their mood was changed. Complaint was
heard on every side. One declared his armor had been used, another that
his spear had been taken. Young Blount, Marmion's second squire, found
his steed covered with foam, though the stable boy swore he had left the
beautiful creature well groomed on the previous evening.

While the impatient squire raged and fumed, old Hubert cried:

"Ho, comrades, help! Bevis lies dying in his stall! To our lord this
will bring sorrow indeed. Who will dare tell him of the horse he loved
so well?"

Fitz-Eustace, who knew of the midnight ride, of the condition of horse
and rider on their return, offered to bear the unwelcome message.
Marmion, sitting plunged in deep thought, received the tidings unmoved,
gave little attention, passed the matter as if it were a mere accident
and ordered the clarions sound "To horse."

Young Blount was less easily dealt with. He declared he would pay no fee
for food or care. Man or demon, he said, had ridden his steed all night
and left him in sorry condition for the day's journey. Marmion gave the
signal to set forth, and led by the calm, gloomy Palmer, they journeyed
all the morning.

Who can picture the thoughts of Palmer and of knight? Could one have
looked beneath the Palmer's cowl there might have been seen a smile
almost sardonic playing upon his features. In passing Blount's horse the
pious man's thin brown hand stole from beneath the long gown and
lovingly caressed the animal, while were muttered the words, "Noble,
noble beast!"

On rode the train through the lovely country, over the smooth
greensward, and under the vaulted screen of branches.

    "'A pleasant path,' Fitz-Eustace said,
     'Such as where errant-knights might see
     Adventures of high chivalry;
     Might meet some damsel flying fast,
     With hair unbound, and looks aghast;
     And smooth and level course were here,
     In her defence to break a spear."

He spoke to cheer Lord Marmion's mind, but spoke in vain, for no reply
was given.

Suddenly distant trumpets were heard in prolonged notes over hill and
dale. Each ready archer seized his bow, and Marmion ordered all to spur
on to more open ground. Scarce a furlong had they ridden, when, from an
opposite woodland, they saw approaching a gallant train.

First on prancing steeds came the trumpeters,
    "With scarlet mantle, azure vest;
     Each at his trump a banner wore,
     Which Scotland's royal scutcheon bore:
     Heralds and pursuivants, by name
     Bute, Islay, Marchmount, Rothsay, came,
     In painted tabards, proudly showing
     Gules argent, or, and azure glowing,
       Attendant on a king-at-arms,
     Whose hand the armorial truncheon held,
     That feudal strife had often quelled,
       When wildest its alarms."

The king-at-arms was of grave, wise, and manly appearance, as became him
who bore a king's welcome, but his expression was keen, sly, and
penetrating.

    "On milk-white palfrey forth he paced;
     His cap of maintenance was graced
       With the proud heron-plume.
     From his steed's shoulder, loin, and breast,
       Silk housings swept the ground,
     With Scotland's arms, device, and crest,
       Embroidered round and round.
     The double treasure might you see,
       First by Achaius borne,
     The thistle and the fleur-de-lis,
       And gallant unicorn.
     So bright the King's amorial coat,
     That scarce the dazzled eye could note.
     In living colors, blazoned brave,
     The Lion, which his title gave;
     A train, which well beseemed his state,
     But all unarmed, around him wait.
       Sir David Lindesay of the Mount,
       Lord Lion, King-at-arms!"

Marmion sprang from his horse, and as soon as their mutual greetings had
been made, Sir David delivered his message:

"As King-at-arms, I have been sent by James's command to meet you, Lord
Marmion, and to provide fit lodging, until the King himself shall find
time to see the famed, the honored Lord of Fontenaye, the flower of
English chivalry."

Though angry at this reception, Marmion disguised his feelings. The
Palmer, seeing his place as guide taken by the King's messenger, begged
to be permitted to leave the service. But orders had been strictly given
that no one following Marmion should be permitted to separate from the
English band. They therefore set forth together and at length halted
before a noble castle on the side of the valley of the Tyne. It was
Crichtoun Hall, near the city of Edinburgh, and was a lodging meet for
one of highest rank. Tower after tower rose to view, each built in a
different age and each displaying a different style of architecture.

    "A mighty mass that could oppose,
     When deadliest hatred fired its foes."

Through the gate rode the English ambassador, but met by none of the
rank and file usual on such occasions. Only women, old men, and children
occupied the castle. The sorrowing mistress of the hall gave welcome,
and a stripling of twelve years offered his best service. Every man that
could draw a sword had marched that morning to conquer or to die on
Flodden Field. Long would the lady look in vain to see her husband and
his gallant band return.

Here Marmion and his men rested for two days, attended as became a
King's guest, yet practically a prisoner. This was by the royal command.
James did not choose that English eyes should look upon Scotland's
gathering forces until they were ready to march against the foe. When
Marmion was moody Lindesay's wit cheered; policies of war and of peace
were discussed, and the lore of Rome and Greece was reviewed.

The second night, as they walked by the fading light on the battlements
of Crichtoun Castle, Lindesay carelessly remarked that the journey of
Marmion, the toil of travel, might as well have been spared, for no
power on earth or from heaven could dissuade James from war. A holy
messenger sent by divine command had appeared in spirit, and vainly
counselled the King against the impending conflict.

More closely questioned, Sir David told the following tale:

"When the King was but a lad, a thoughtless prince, traitors had set the
boy in the army hostile to his royal father. The King, seeing his own
banner displayed against him, and his son in the opposing faction, lost
courage, fled from the field, and in fleeing fell and was slain. After
the battle, James returned to Stirling Castle, seized with deep remorse.
Ever after, he inflicted upon himself most severe penance.

"While engaged one day in self-imposed penitential devotions, there
appeared to him, in the chapel of Linlithgow, a vision. At the time,
around him in their stalls, sat the Knights of the Thistle, chanters
sung, and bells tolled. The monarch in sackcloth, and wearing the
painful iron belt which constantly reminded him of his father's death,
was kneeling in prayer, when there appeared the loved disciple, John,
who in these words warned the King against warfare:

    "'Sir King, to warn thee not to war--
        Woe waits on thine array;
      James Stuart, doubly warn'd, beware,
        God keep thee as he may!'

"When the King raised his head, the monitor had vanished.

    "'The Marshal and myself had cast
      To stop him as he outward pass'd;
      But, lighter than the whirlwind's blast,
        He vanish'd from our eyes,
      Like sunbeam on the billow cast
      That glances but, and dies.'"

While telling the strange story, Sir David had not marked in the dim
twilight the pallor that had overspread the countenance of Marmion, who,
after a pause, said:

"Three days ago, I had judged your tale a myth, but since crossing the
Tweed, I have seen that which makes me credit the miracle you relate."

He hesitated, and evidently wished his remark unmade, but pressed by the
strong impulse that prompts man to reveal a secret to some listening
ear, he told of the midnight ride and the tilt with the elfin knight at
Gifford's Court. The same sly expression crept over the face of the
King-at-arms as he asked, "Where lodged the Palmer on that fateful
night?"

Here their conversation was interrupted. By the King's command, each
train on the following day was to proceed by its own way to Scotland's
camp, near Edinburgh. Early they set out for the moor surrounding the
city, where lay the Scotch hosts.

From the crown of Blackford, Marmion gazed on the martial scene. It was
a Kingdom's vast array. Thousands on thousands of pavilions, white as
snow, dotted the upland, dale, and down, and checkered the heath between
town and forest. The relics of the old oaks softened the glaring white
with a background of restful green.

From north, from south, from east, from west, had gathered Scotland's
warriors. All between the ages of sixteen and sixty, from king to
vassal, stood ready to fight for the beloved land. Marmion heard the
mingled hum of myriads of voices float up the mountain side. He saw the
shifting lines, and marked the flashing of shield and lance. Nor did he
mark less that in the air,

    "A thousand streamers flaunted fair,
       Various in shape, device and hue,
       Green, sanguine, purple, red, and blue,
     Broad, narrow, swallow-tailed, and square,
     Scroll, pennon, pensil, bandrol, there
       O'er the pavilions flew.
     Highest and midmost, was descried
     The royal banner floating wide;
       The staff, a pine-tree, strong and straight,
     Pitch'd deeply in a massive stone,
       Yet bent beneath the standard's weight
       Whene'er the western wind unroll'd,
       With toil, the huge and cumbrous fold,
     And gave to view the dazzling field,
     Where, in proud Scotland's royal shield,
       The ruddy lion ramped in gold.

    "Lord Marmion view'd the landscape bright,--
     He viewed it with a chief's delight,--
       Until within him burn'd his heart,
         As on the battle-day;
       Such glance did falcon never dart,
       When stooping on his prey.
     'Oh! well, Lord Lion, hast thou said,
     Thy King from warfare to dissuade
       Were but a vain essay;
     For, by St. George, were that host mine,
     Nor power infernal, nor divine,
     Should once to peace my soul incline,
     Till I had dimmed their armor's shine
       In glorious battle-fray!'"

A bard near at hand replied:

    "'Tis better to sit still, than rise, perchance to fall."

From this scene of preparation for battle, their eyes wandered to the
fairest scene of peace. The distant city glowed in gloomy splendor. The
sun's morning beams tinged turret and tower. The wreaths of rising smoke
turned to clouds of red and gold. Dusky grandeur clothed the height
where the huge castle stood in state. Far to the north, ridge on ridge,
rose the mountains, the rosy morning light bathing their sides in floods
of sunshine, and turning each heather bell at their feet into an
amethyst. Yonder could be seen the shores of Fife, nearer Preston Bay
and Berwick. Between them rolled the broad Firth, islands floating on
its bosom like emeralds on a chain of gold.

    "Fitz-Eustace' heart felt closely pent;
     As if to give his rapture vent,
     The spur he to his charger lent,
       And raised his bridle hand,
     And making demivolte in air,
     Cried, 'Where's the coward that would not dare
       To fight for such a land!'"

While they gazed the time arrived for King James to take his way to a
solemn mass. The distant bells chimed the hour, the fife, the sackbut,
the psaltery, the cymbal, the war-pipe, in discordant cry took up the
note, and together the sounds rolled up the hillside.

Sir David sighed as he listened.

"I look," he said, "upon this city, Empress of the North, her palaces,
her castles, her stately halls, her holy towers, and think what war's
mischance may bring. These silvery bells may toll the knell of our
gallant King. We must not dream that conquest is sure or easily bought.
God is ruler of the battlefield, but when yon host begins the combat,
wives, mothers, and maids may weep, and priests prepare the death
service, for when such a power is led out by such a King, not all will
return."

[Illustration: THE GRAVE OF SIR WALTER SCOTT, DRYBURGH ABBEY.]



CHAPTER V.


Lindesay now bade the guard open the palisade that closed the tented
field, and as into its ample bounds Marmion passed, the warders' men
drew back. The Scottish warriors stared at the strangers, and envy arose
at seeing them so well appointed. Such length of shaft, bows so mighty,
had never been seen by northern eyes. Little did the Highlanders then
think to feel these shafts through links of Scotch mail on Flodden
Field.

No less did Marmion and his men marvel that one small country could
marshal forth such hosts. Men-at-arms were heavily sheathed in mail.
They were like iron towers on Flemish steeds. Young squires and knights
practiced their chargers on the plain to pass, to wheel, to curvet, that
the swords of their riders might not descend amiss on foeman's casque.
Hardy burghers were there, marching on foot. No waving plume, no crest
they wore, but corselet, gorget, and brigantine, brightly burnished. The
yeomen, too, were on foot, yet dressed in steel. Each at his back
carried forty days' provisions. His arms were the halbert, axe, or
spear, a crossbow, a dagger, or a sword. Each seemed almost sad at
leaving the dear cottage, the simple pleasures and duties of home, to
march into a foreign land. It was not cowardice, not terror, for the
more they loved Scotland the more fiercely would they fight.

Quite another class was the Borderer, bred to war. He joyed to hear the
roar of battle. No harp, no lute, could please his ear as did the loud
slogan. Nobles might fight for fame, vassals might follow, burghers
might guard their townships, but to a battle the Borderer joyfully took
his way as to a game, scarce caring who might win the day.

Marmion next viewed the Celtic race. Each tribe had its own chief, its
belted plaid, its warpipes varying with the clan. Their legs were bare;
the undressed hide of the deer gave them buskins, a plaid covered the
shoulders, and a broadsword, a dagger, a studded targe, completed the
outfit.

Through the Scottish camp, the English train had now passed, and the
city gates were reached. The streets were alive with martial show. The
Lion King led to lodgings that overlooked the town. Here Marmion, by the
King's command, was to remain until the vesper hour and then to ride to
Holy-Rood. Meanwhile Sir David ordered a banquet rich and rare.

At the hour appointed, Marmion, attended by the Lion-Lord, arrived at
the palace hall, at Holy-Rood. In this princely abode James was feasting
the chiefs of Scotland. The historic halls rang with mirth, for well the
monarch loved song and banquet. By day the tourney was held, at night
the mazy dance was trod by quaint maskers. The scene of this night
outshone all others. The dazzling lights hanging from the galleries,
displayed the grace of lords and ladies of the court. The "motley fool"
retailed his jest, the juggler performed his feat, the minstrel plied
his harp, and the lady touched a softer string.

All made room as through this throng the King came to greet his guest.
And now, his courtesy to show,

    "He doff'd to Marmion, bending low,
       His broider'd cap and plume.
     For royal was his garb and mien,
       His cloak, of crimson velvet piled,
       Trimm'd with the fur of martin wild;
     His gorgeous collar hung adown,
     Wrought with the badge of Scotland's crown,
     The thistle brave, of old renown:
     His trusty blade, Toledo right,
     Descended from a baldric bright;
     White were his buskins, on the heel,
     His spurs inlaid of gold and steel:
     His bonnet, all of crimson fair,
     Was buttoned with a ruby rare:
     And Marmion deemed he ne'er had seen
     A prince of such a noble mien."

His splendid form, his eagle eyes, his light footstep, his merry laugh
and speaking glance made him envied of men and adored of women. He joyed
to linger in banquet bower, but often in the midst of wildest glee, a
shadow and an expression of pain flitted across the handsome face. His
hands instinctively clasped as he felt the pain of the penance belt,
worn in memory of his slain father. In a moment the pang was past, and
forward, with redoubled zest, he rushed into the stream of revelry.

Courtiers said that Lady Heron, wife of Sir Hugh of Norham, held sway
over the heart of the King. To Scotland's court she had come to be a
hostage, and to reconcile the offended King to her husband. The fair
Queen of France also held the king in thrall. She had sent him a
turquoise ring and a glove, and charged him as her knight in English
fray, to break for her a lance. For love of the French Queen, as much as
for the rights of Scotland, he clothed himself in mail and put his
country's noblest, dearest, and best in arms, to die on Flodden Field.
For Love of Lady Heron, he admitted English spies to his inmost
counsels.

    "And thus, for both, he madly planned
     The ruin of himself and land."

For these two artful women he sacrificed the true happiness of his home.

    "Nor England's fair, nor France's Queen,
     Were worth one pearl-drop bright and sheen,
       From Margaret's eyes that fell,--
     His own Queen Margaret, who, in Lithgow's bower
     All lonely sat, and wept the weary hour."

In gay Holy-Rood, Dame Heron, Lady of Norham, smiled at the King,
glanced archly at the courtiers, and ably played the coquette. When
asked to draw from the harp music to charm the ring of admirers, she
laughed, blushed, and with pretty oaths, by yea and nay, declared she
could not, would not, dare not! At length, however, she seated herself
at Scotland's loved instrument, touched and tuned the strings, laid
aside hood and wimple, the better to display her charms, and with a
borrowed simplicity well assumed, sang a lively air, Lochinvar.

    "Oh, young Lochinvar is come out of the west,
     Through all the wild border his steed was the best;
     And, save his good broadsword, he weapon had none,
     He rode all unarm'd, and he rode all alone;
     So faithful in love, and so dauntless in war,
     There never was knight like the young Lochinvar.

    "He stayed not for brake, and he stopped not for stone;
     He swam the Esk river, where ford there was none;
     But ere he alighted at Netherby gate,
     The bride had consented, the gallant came late;
     For a laggard in love, and a dastard in war,
     Was to wed the fair Ellen of brave Lochinvar.

    "So boldly he entered the Netherby Hall,
     Among bride's-men, and kinsmen, and brothers, and all:
     Then spoke the bride's father, his hand on his sword,
     For the poor craven bridegroom said never a word,
     'O come ye in peace here, or come ye in war,
     Or to dance at our bridal, young Lord Lochinvar?'

    "'I long woo'd your daughter, my suit you denied;
     Love swells like the Solway, but ebbs like its tide--
     And now am I come, with this lost love of mine,
     To lead but one measure, drink one cup of wine.
     There are maidens in Scotland more lovely by far,
     That would gladly be bride to the young Lochinvar.'

    "The bride kiss'd the goblet: the knight took it up,
     He quaff'd off the wine, and threw down the cup,
     She look'd down to blush, and she look'd up to sigh,
     With a smile on her lip, and a tear in her eye,
     He took her soft hand, ere her mother could bar,--
     'Now tread we a measure!' said young Lochinvar.

    "So stately his form, and so lovely her face,
     That never a hall such a galliard did grace;
     While her mother did fret, and her father did fume,
     And the bridegroom stood dangling his bonnet and plume;
     And the bride's-maidens whisper'd, ''Twere better by far
     To have match'd our fair cousin with young Lochinvar.'

    "One touch to her hand, and one word in her ear,
     When they reach'd the hall door, and the charger stood near;
     So light to the croupe the fair lady he swung,
     So light to the saddle before her he sprung!
     'She is won! we are gone, over bank, bush, and scaur;
     They'll have fleet steeds that follow,' quoth young Lochinvar.

    "There was mounting 'mong Graemes of the Netherby clan;
     Forsters, Fenwicks, and Musgraves, they rode and they ran;
     There was racing and chasing on Cannobie Lee,
     But the lost bride of Netherby ne'er did they see.
     So daring in love, and so dauntless in war,
     Have ye e'er heard of gallant like young Lochinvar?"

The monarch hung over the wily singer, and beat the measure as she sang.
He pressed closer, and whispered praises in her ear. The courtiers broke
in applause, the ladies whispered, and looked wise. The witching dame,
not satisfied to win a King, threw her glances at Lord Marmion. The
glances were significant, familiar, and told of confidences long and old
between the English lord and his countrywoman, guests of a Scotch King,
on the eve of a great conflict between the two countries.

The King saw their meeting eyes, saw himself treated almost with
disdain, and darkest anger shook his frame, for sovereigns illy bear
rivals in word, or smile, or look. He drew forth the parchment on which
was written Marmion's commission, and strode to the side of brave
Douglas, the sixth who had worn the coronet of Angus. The King stood
side by side with this brave Scotsman, who had been madly watching the
pageant, the fire flashing from his stern eye. This very day he had
besought his King to withdraw from the coming war, only to call forth
the reproaches of his ungrateful ruler. Yet at this moment, James felt a
pride in standing by the side of Bothwell's Lord, and placing in his
custody Marmion, the flower of English chivalry.

    "The Douglas' form, like ruin'd tower,
     Seem'd o'er the gaudy scene to lower:
     His locks and beard in silver grew;
     His eyebrows kept their sable hue.
     Near Douglas, where the monarch stood,
     His bitter speech he thus pursued:
     'Lord Marmion, since these letters say
     That in the North you needs must stay
       While slightest hopes of peace remain,
     Uncourteous speech it were, and stern,
     To say--Return to Lindisfarne--
     Then rest you in Tantallon Hold;
     Your host shall be the Douglas bold,
     A chief unlike his sires of old.
     He wears their motto on his blade,
     Their blazon o'er his towers display'd;
     Yet loves his sovereign to oppose,
     More than to face his country's foes.
       And, I bethink me, by St. Stephen,
     But e'en this morn to me was given
     A prize, the first fruits of the war,
     Ta'en by a galley from Dunbar,
       A bevy of the maids of Heaven.
     Under your guard these holy maids
     Shall safe return to cloister shades.'"

The proud heart of Douglas felt the keen thrust. It was true, he would
not, even for the King he devotedly loved, draw sword in an unholy
cause. As a burning tear stole down his scarred cheek, he turned aside
to conceal what might seem weakness. This sight the king could not bear,
and seizing the hand of Angus, exclaimed:

    "'Now, by the Bruce's soul,
      Angus, my hasty speech forgive!
        I well may say of you,--
      That never king did subject hold,
      In speech more free, in war more bold,
      More tender and more true:
      Forgive me, Douglas, once again!'"

While monarch and man embraced, while the aged noble's tears fell like
rain, Marmion seized the moment to restore himself to favor with both,
and whispered half aloud to the King:

    "'Oh! let such tears unwonted plead
      For respite short from dubious deed!
      A child will weep a bramble's smart,
      A maid to see her sparrow part,
      A stripling for a woman's heart:
      But woe awaits a country when
      She sees the tears of bearded men.
      Then, oh! what omen, dark and high,
      When Douglas wets his manly eye!'"

That a stranger should see his changing moods, and above all, should
presume to tamper therewith, aroused in James the fierce spirit of
revenge. Said the fiery monarch:

    "'Laugh those that can, weep those that may,
      Southward I march by break of day;
      And if within Tantallon strong
      The good Lord Marmion tarries long,
      Perchance our meeting next may fall
      At Tamworth, in his castle-hall.'"

Marmion felt the taunt, and answered gravely: "My humble home would be
much honored if King James should visit its halls, but Nottingham has as
true archers as e'er drew bow, and Yorkshire men are stern and brave.

    "'And many a banner will be torn,
      And many a knight to earth be borne,
      And many a sheaf of arrows spent,
      Ere Scotland's King shall cross the Trent.'"

Scornfully the Monarch turned away, and commanded the gayeties to
proceed. He flung aside cloak and sword, and gallantly led Dame Heron in
the dance, as the minstrels, at the King's command, struck up "Blue
Bonnets o'er the Border."

[Illustration: SCOTT'S MONUMENT, EDINBURGH.]



CHAPTER VI.


Now we leave the royal revels, and return to Saint Hilda and her maids.
As they sailed back to Whitby, their galley was captured on the high
seas by the Scotch, and the ladies were held at Edinburgh until James
should decide their fate.

Soon, however, they were informed that they must prepare to journey to
England, under the escort of Lord Marmion. At this, terror seized the
heart of the Abbess and of Clara. The aged, saintly lady knew the fate
of Constance, and for this, feared Lord Marmion's wrath. She told her
beads, she implored heaven!

The Lady Clara knew the sword that hung from Marmion's belt had drawn
the blood of her lover, Ralph De Wilton! Unwittingly the King had given
these defenceless women into the care of the man they most dreaded. To
protest was hopeless. In the bustle of war, who would listen to the tale
of a woman and a nun?

The maids and the Abbess were assigned lodgings joining those of
Marmion, their guardian. While there, the unhappy, but alert, holy woman
caught sight of the Palmer. His dress made her feel that she would here
find a friend. Secretly she conveyed to him a message, saying she had a
secret to reveal immediately concerning the welfare of the church, and
of a sinner's soul.

With great secrecy she named as a meeting place, an open balcony, that
hung high above the street.

Night fell; the moon rose high among the clouds; the busy hum of the
city ceased; the din of war and warriors' roar was hushed. The music of
the cricket, the whirr of the owlets, might easily have been heard, when
the holy Dame and the Palmer met. The Abbess had chosen a solemn hour,
to disclose a solemn secret.

"O holy Palmer!" she began,--"for surely he must be holy whose feet have
trod the ground made sacred by a Redeemer's tomb,--I come here in this
dread hour, for the dear sake of our Holy Church. Yet I must first
speak, in explanation of a worldly love." Here was related by unwilling
lips, the story of Constance's fall, of De Wilton's death or exile after
being proved a traitor, of Lady Clara's faithfulness to the memory of De
Wilton, and of her desire to enter the convent of the Abbess.

    "'A purer heart, a lovelier maid,
      Ne'er shelter'd her in Whitby's shade.'

"Yet, King Henry declares she shall be torn from us, and given to this
false Lord Marmion. I am helpless, a prisoner, with these innocent
maidens, and I fear we have been betrayed by Henry, that Clara may fall
into the hands of his favorite. I claim thine aid.

    "'By every step that thou hast trod
      To holy shrine and grotto dim,
      By every saint and seraphim,
        And by the Church of God!
      For mark: When Wilton was betrayed,'

"it was by means of forged letters,--letters written by Constance de
Beverley, at the command of Marmion, and placed, by De Wilton's squire,
where they could be used against that noble knight.

"I have in my possession letters proving all this and more. I must not
keep them. Who knows what may happen to me on my homeward journey? I now
give this packet to thy care, O saintly Palmer! Bring them safe to the
hands of Wolsey, that he may give them to the King, and for this deed
there will be prayers offered for thee while I live. Why! What ailest
thou? Speak!"

As he took the packet, he was shaken by strong emotion, but before he
could reply, the Abbess shrieked, "What is here? Look at yon City
Cross!"

    "Then on its battlements they saw
     A vision, passing Nature's law."

Figures seemed to rise and die, to advance and to flee, and from the
midst of the spectre throng this awful summons came:--"Prince, prelate,
potentate and peer, I summon one and all to answer at my tribunal."

    "Then thunder'd forth a roll of names:
     The first was thine, unhappy James!
       Then all thy nobles came;
     Crawford, Glencairn, Montrose, Argyle,
     Ross, Bothwell, Forbes, Lennox, Lyle,
     Why should I tell their separate style?
       Each chief of birth and fame,
     Of Lowland, Highland, Border, Isle,
     Foredoomed to Flodden's carnage pile,
       Was cited there by name;
     And Marmion, Lord of Fontenaye.

    "Prone on her face the Abbess fell,
     And fast, and fast, her beads did tell;
     She mark'd not, at the scene aghast,
     What time, or how, the Palmer pass'd."

The following day, Marmion and the brave Douglas journeyed to fair
Tantallon. The Palmer still was with the band, as Angus commanded that
no one should roam at large. A wondrous change had come to the holy
Palmer. He freely spoke of war; he looked so high, and rode so fast,
that old Hubert said he never saw but one who could sit so proud, and
rein so well.

A half hour's march behind, came Fitz-Eustace, escorting the Abbess, the
fair Lady Clare, and all the nuns.

Marmion had sought no audience, fearing to increase Clara's hatred. He
preferred to wait until she was removed from the convent and in her
uncle's care. He hoped then, with the influence of her kinsman and her
King, to gain her consent to be the Lady Marmion. He longed to command,

    "O'er luckless Clara's ample land,"

yet he hated himself when he thought of the meanness to which he stooped
for conquest, when he remembered his own lost honor; for,

    "If e'er he lov'd, 'twas her alone,
     Who died within that vault of stone."

Near Berwick town they came upon a venerable convent pile, and halted at
its gate. In answer to the bell, a door opened, and an aged dame
appeared to ask St. Hilda's Abbess to rest here with her nuns until a
barque was provided to bear her back to Whitby.

The courtesy of the Scottish Prioress was most joyfully received, and
the delighted maidens gladly left their palfreys; but when Lady Clara
attempted to dismount, Fitz-Eustace gently refused, saying:

"I grieve, fair lady, to separate you from your friends. Think it no
discourtesy of mine, but lords' commands must be obeyed, and Marmion and
Douglas order that you shall return directly to your kinsman,
Lord Fitz-Clare."

The startled Abbess loud exclaimed, but Clara was speechless and deadly
pale.

"Cheer thee, my child!" the Abbess cried; "they dare not tear thee from
my care, to ride alone among soldiers."

"Nay, nay, holy mother," interrupted Fitz-Eustace, "the lovely lady,
while in Scotland, will be the immediate ward of Lady Angus Douglas, and
when she rides to England, female attendance will be provided befitting
the heir of Gloster. My Lord Marmion will not address Lady Clare by word
or look."

He blushed as he spoke, but truth and honor were painted in his face,
and the maiden's fear was relieved. The Abbess entreated, threatened,
wept, prayed to saint and to martyr, then called upon the Prioress for
aid. The grave Cistercian replied:

"The King and Douglas shall be obeyed. Dream not that harm can come to
woman, however helpless, who falls to the care of Douglas of Tantallon
Hall."

The Abbess, seeing strife was vain, assumed her wonted state, composed
her veil, raised her head, and began again,--but Blount now broke in:

    "'Fitz-Eustace, we must march our band;
      St. Anton fire thee! wilt thou stand
      All day, with bonnet in thy hand,
        To hear the lady preach?
      By this good light! if thus we stay,
      Lord Marmion, for our fond delay,
        Will sharper sermon teach.
      Come, don thy cap, and mount thy horse;
      The dame must patience take perforce."

"Dear, holy Abbess," said Clare, "we must submit to the separation for
the present,

    "'But let this barbarous lord despair
      His purposed aim to win;
      Let him take living, land, and life;
      But to be Marmion's wedded wife
        In me were deadly sin.'

"Mother, your blessing and your prayers are all I ask. Remember your
unhappy child! If it be the decree of the King that I return not to the
sanctuary with thee to dwell, yet one asylum remains--low, silent, and
lone, where kings have little power. One victim of Lord Marmion is
already there."

Weeping and wailing arose round patient Clare. Eustace hid his tears,
and even the rude Blount could scarce bear the sight. Gently the squire
took the rein and led the way, striving to cheer the poor fainting girl,
by courteous word and deed.

They had passed but a few miles, when from a height, they saw the vast
towers of Tantallon. The noble castle was enclosed on three sides by the
ocean, and on the fourth by walled battlements,

    "And double mound and fosse,
     By narrow drawbridge, outworks strong,
     Through studded gates, and entrance long,
       To the main court they cross.
     It was a wide and stately square:
     Around were lodgings, fit and fair,
       And towers of various form."

Here they rested, receiving from the host cold, but princely attention.
By hurrying posts, daily there came varying tidings of war. At first
they heard of the victories of James at Wark, at Etall, and at Ford; and
then, that Norham castle had been taken; but later, news was whispered
that while King James was dallying the time away with the wily Lady
Heron, the army lay inactive. At length they heard the army had made
post on the ridge that frowns over the Millfield Plain, and that brave
Surrey, with a force from the South, had marched into Northumberland and
taken camp.

At this, Marmion exclaimed:

    "'A sorry thing to hide my head
      In castle, like a fearful maid,
        When such a field is near!
      Needs must I see this battle-day:
      Death to my fame if such a fray
      Were fought, and Marmion away!
      The Douglas, too, I wot not why,
      Hath 'bated of his courtesy:
      No longer in his halls I'll stay."



CHAPTER VII.


Each hour brought a different tale. Marmion fretted like the impatient
charger that "snuffs the battle from afar." It was true that Douglas had
changed in his demeanor, had grown cold and silent. The dejected Clare
sought retirement. Courteous she was to Lady Angus, shared in ceaseless
prayers for the safe return of Scotch liege and lord, but borne down
with sorrow, she loved best to find some lonely spot, turret, tower, or
parapet, where she might retire alone to listen to the wailing waters,
to hear the sea-bird's cry, to recall her life at the Convent of Whitby,
and to regret the loss of the loved garb of the nun. At the command of
her kinsman, the Benedictine dress, the hood and veil, so much in
harmony with her life, had been denied her, and she had been made to
assume the costume of the world.

Her sunny locks were again unbound, and rich garments were provided,
suited to her rank. Of the holy dress, the cross alone she was permitted
to wear,--a golden cross set with rubies; but in her hand she always
bore the loved breviary.

Pacing back and forth at evening, sick with sorrow, she came suddenly
upon a full suit of armor. It lay directly in her path--the targe, the
corselet, the helm, the pierced breastplate. She raised her eyes in
alarm, and before her stood De Wilton, but so changed it might have been
his ghost. The Palmer's dress was thrown aside, the dress of the knight
not resumed. He was neither king's noble, nor priest. Not until he had
been proven innocent of treason, and redubbed knight, could he honorably
wear his spurs.

Long was the interview held between the astonished, delighted Clare, and
the undisguised De Wilton. He began the story of his exile and travels,
taking up the tale from the moment when he lay senseless in the lists at
Cottiswold. The kind care of Austin, the beadsman, had restored him to
health and strength. He described the long journeys in Palmer's dress,
his return to Scotland, meeting Marmion at Norham Castle, the tilt on
Gifford moor, and the interview with the Abbess, when he received from
her the letters proving his innocence.

Already, at Tantallon, he had told his story to Douglas, who had known
De Wilton's family of old. That night, Douglas was to make him again a
belted knight, and at dawn, he would haste to Surrey's camp to fight
again for king and for country. The story heard from De Wilton, the
letters showing the treachery of Marmion, accounted for the cold disdain
shown by Douglas to his guest.

The noble baron of Tantallon had promised to bring to the chapel at
midnight the now happy, yet unhappy Clare, that she might bind on the
spurs, buckle on the belt, and hear the magic words uttered which made
her lover a noble knight. She was unhappy to think that so soon they
must part, perhaps never to meet.

Sweetly, tearfully she pleaded:

    "'O Wilton! must we then
      Risk new-found happiness again,
        Trust fate of arms once more?
      And is there not a humble glen,
        Where we content and poor,
      Might build a cottage in the shade,
      A shepherd thou, and I to aid
        Thy task on dale and moor?--
      That reddening brow!--too well I know,
      Not even thy Clare can peace bestow,
        While falsehood stains thy name:
      Go then to fight! Clare bids thee go!
      Clare can a warrior's feelings know,
        And weep a warrior's shame;
      Buckle the spurs upon thy heel,
      And belt thee with thy brand of steel,
        And send thee forth to fame!'"

At midnight, the slumbering moon-beams lay on rock and wave. Silvery
light fell through every loop-hole and embrasure. In the witching hour
two priests, the Lady Clare, Ralph de Wilton, and Douglas, Lord of
Tantallon, stood before the altar of the chapel. De Wilton knelt, and
when Clare had bound on sword and belt, Douglas laid on the blow,
exclaiming as it fell:

    "'I dub thee knight.
      Arise, Sir Ralph, De Wilton's heir!
      For King, for Church, for Lady fair,
        See that thou fight.'"

De Wilton knelt again before the giant warrior, and grasping his hand,
exclaimed:

"Where'er I meet a Douglas, that Douglas will be to me as a brother."

"Nay, nay," the Lord of Tantallon replied, "not so; I have two sons in
the field armed against your king. They fight for James of Scotland; you
for Henry of England.

    "'And, if thou meet'st them under shield,
      Upon them bravely,--do thy worst;
      And foul fall him that blenches first!"

They parted; De Wilton to Surrey's camp, the Douglas to his castle to
ponder on the strange events of the past few days, and Clare to weep in
loneliness.

It was yet early when Marmion ordered his train to be ready for the
southward march. He had safe pass-ports for all, given under the royal
seal of James. Douglas provided a guide as far as Surrey's camp. The
ancient earl, with stately grace, placed the Lady Clare on her palfrey
and whispered in her ear, "The falcon's prey has flown."

As adieus were about to be said, Lord Marmion began:

"In the treatment received, I, your guest, by your king's command, might
well complain of coldness, indifference, and disrespect; but I let it
pass, hoping that,

    "'Part we in friendship from your land;
      And, noble Earl, receive my hand.'--
      But Douglas round him drew his cloak,
      Folded his arms, and thus he spoke:--
     'My manors, halls, and bowers, shall still
      Be open, at my sovereign's will,
      To each one who he lists, howe'er
      Unmeet to be the owner's peer.
      My castles are my King's alone,
      From turret to foundation-stone--
      The hand of Douglas is his own;
      And never shall in friendly grasp,
      The hand of such as Marmion clasp.'"--

     "Burn'd Marmion's swarthy cheek like fire,
      And shook his very frame for ire,
        And,--'This to me!' he said,--
     'An 'twere not for thy hoary beard,
      Such hand as Marmion's had not spared
        To cleave the Douglas' head!
      And, first, I tell thee, haughty peer,
      He, who does England's message here,
      Although the meanest in her state,
      May well, proud Angus, be thy mate:
        Even in thy pitch of pride,
      Here in thy hold, thy vassals near--
        I tell thee, thou'rt defied!
      And if thou said'st, I am not peer
      To any lord in Scotland here,
        Lord Angus, thou hast lied!'
      On the Earl's cheek, a flush of rage
      O'ercame the ashen hue of age:
      Fierce he broke forth,--And dare'st thou then
      To beard the lion in his den,
        The Douglas in his hall?
      And hop'st thou thence unscathed to go?--Up
      drawbridge, grooms--what, Warder, ho!
        Let the portcullis fall.'
      Lord Marmion turned--well was his need,
      And dash'd the rowels in his steed."

A swallow does not more lightly skim the air, than Marmion's steed flew
along the drawbridge. The man drew rein when he had reached the train,
turned, clenched his fists, shouted defiance, and shook his gauntlet at
the towers where so lately he had been a guest.

"To horse! to horse!" cried Douglas. "Let the chase be up." Then
relenting, he smiled bitterly, saying, "He came a royal messenger. Bold
can he talk and fairly ride, and I doubt not he will fight well."

Slowly the Earl sought the castle walls, that frowned still more
gloomily, no longer brightened by the young and beautiful Lady Clare.

As the day wore on, Marmion's passion wore off, and scanning his little
band, he missed the Palmer. From young Blount he demanded an explanation
of the guide's absence.

"The Palmer, in good sooth, parted from Douglas at dawn of day. If a
Palmer he is, he set out in strange guise," replied the youth.

"What mean you?" quickly demanded Marmion.

"My Lord, I can ill interpret what I say. All night I was disturbed in
my sleep, as if by workmen forging armor. At dawn, hearing the
drawbridge fall, I looked from a loophole and saw old Bell-the-Cat,
wrapped in sables, come from Tantallon keep. The wind blew aside the fur
mantle, and I beheld beneath it, a suit of rusty mail, which I am sure
must have done bloody work against Saracen and Turk. Last night that
armor did not hang in Tantallon hall. Next, I saw Old Cheviot, Douglas's
matchless steed, led forth, sheathed in bright armor. The Palmer sprang
to the saddle, Lord Angus wished him speed, and as he bowed and bent in
graceful farewells, I could but think how strongly that Palmer resembled
the young knight you overthrew at Cottiswold."

A sudden light broke upon Marmion. "Dastard! fool! I, to reason lost,
when I rode to meet a fay, a ghost, on Gifford's moor. It was this
Palmer fiend, De Wilton in disguise, I met. Had I but fought as is my
wont, one thrust had placed him where he would never cross my path
again. Now he has told my tale to Douglas. This is why I was treated
with scorn. I almost fear to meet my Lord Surrey. I must avoid the Lady
Clare, and separate Constance from the nuns.

    "O, what a tangled web we weave,
     When first we practice to deceive!
     A Palmer too!--no wonder why
     I felt rebuked beneath his eye:
     I might have known there was but one
     Whose look could quell Lord Marmion!"

Stung with these thoughts, he urged on his troop, and at nightfall
reached the Tweed, closing the march of the day at Lennel convent. Here
Marmion, his train, and Lady Clare, were given entertainment for the
night.

    "'Next morn, the baron climb'd the tower,
      To view afar the Scottish power,
        Encamped on Flodden edge:
      The white pavilions made a show,
      Like remnants of the winter snow,
        Along the dusky ridge.
      Lord Marmion look'd:--at length his eye
      Unusual movement might descry.
      Their ranks inclining, wheeling, bending,
      Now drawing back, and now descending,
      The skilful Marmion well could know,
      They watched the motions of some foe."

Even so it was. The Scots from Flodden ridge saw the English host leave
Barmore-wood and cross the river Till. Why did Scotland's hosts stand
idle? What checked the fiery James, that he sat inactive on his steed
and saw Surrey place the English army between Scotland and Scotland's
army? O Douglas! O Wallace! O Bruce! for one hour of thy leadership to
rule the fight! The precious hour passed,--the hour when in crossing the
river, the English might have been destroyed.

    "From fate's dark book a leaf been torn,
     And Flodden had been Bannockbourne!"

Fitz-Eustace called to Blount, and both to Marmion,

    "'Lord Surrey's o'er the Till!'"

The spirit of war flowed in every vein. Marmion flung himself into the
saddle, scarce bade adieu to the good Abbot, commanded the young knight
to escort the Lady Clare, and dashed on to the Tweed. The river must be
crossed. Down to the deep and dangerous ford, he ventured desperately.
Foremost of all, he gallantly entered and stemmed the tide. Eustace held
Clare upon her saddle, and old Hubert reined her horse. Stoutly they
braved the current, and though carried far down the stream, they gained
the opposite bank.

The train followed. Each held his bow high over his head, and well he
might. Every string that day needed to be unharmed by moisture, that it
might ring sharply in the coming combat.

Marmion rested a moment, only to bathe his horse, then halted not until
Surrey's rear guard was reached. Here on a hillock, by a cross of stone,
they could survey the field.

    "The hillock gain'd, Lord Marmion stayed:
    'Here, by this cross,' he gently said,
    'You well may view the scene.
     Here shalt thou tarry, lovely Clare:
     Oh! think of Marmion in thy prayer!
     Thou wilt not? well,--no less my care
     Shall, watchful, for thy weal prepare.
     You, Blount and Eustace, are her guard,
       With ten picked archers of my train;
     With England if the day go hard,
       To Berwick speed amain.
     But if we conquer, cruel maid,
     My spoils shall at your feet be laid,
       When here we meet again."

He waited for no answer, but dashed over the plain to Lord Surrey, who
met him with delight.

"Welcome, good Lord Marmion; brief greeting must serve in time of need.
With Stanley, I myself, have charge of the central division of the army,
Tunstall, stainless knight, directs the rearward, and the vanguard alone
needs your gallant command."

"Thanks, noble Surrey," Marmion said, and darted forward like a
thunderbolt. At the van, arose cheer on cheer, "Marmion! Marmion!" so
shrill, so high, as to startle the Scottish foe.

Eustace and Blount sadly thought,

    "'Unworthy office here to stay!
      No hope of gilded spurs to-day.'"

When King James saw that the English army by its skilful countermarch
had separated him from his base of supplies, and from his own country,
he resolved upon battle at once. Setting fire to his tents, he
descended, and the two armies, one facing north, the other south, met
almost without seeing each other.

    "From the sharp ridges of the hill,
     All downward to the banks of Till,
       Was wreathed in sable smoke.
     Volumed and fast, and rolling far,
     The cloud enveloped Scotland's war,
       As down the hill they broke;
     Nor mortal shout, nor minstrel tone,
     Announced their march; their tread alone
     Told England, from his mountain-throne
       King James did rushing come.
     Scarce could they hear or see their foes,
       Until at weapon-point they close.
     They close, in clouds of smoke and dust,
     With sword-sway, and with lance's thrust;
       And such a yell was there,
     Of sudden and portentous birth,
     As if men fought upon the earth,
       And fiends in upper air;
     Oh, life and death were in the shout,
     Recoil and rally, charge and rout,
       And triumph and despair.
     Long look'd the anxious squires; their eye
     Could in the darkness naught descry."

At length the breeze threw aside the shroud of battle, and there might
be seen ridge after ridge of spears. Pennon and plume floated like foam
on the crest of the wave. Spears shook; falchions flashed; arrows fell
like rain; crests rose, and stooped, and rose again.

    "Yet still Lord Marmion's falcon flew
     With wavering flight, while fiercer grew
       Around the battle-yell.
     The Border slogan rent the sky!
     A Home! a Gordon! was the cry:
     Loud were the clanging blows;
     Advanced--forced back--now low, now high,
       The pennon sunk and rose;
     As bends the barque's mast in the gale,
     When rent are rigging, shrouds, and sail,
       It waver'd 'mid the foes.
     No longer Blount the view could bear:
    'By heaven and all its saints! I swear,
       I will not see it lost;
     Fitz-Eustace, you with Lady Clare
     May bid your beads, and patter prayer,--
       I gallop to the host.'"

To the fray he rode, followed by the archers. At the next moment, fleet
as the wind, Marmion's steed riderless flew by, the housings and saddle
dyed crimson. Eustace mounted and plunged into the fight, resolved to
rescue the body of his fallen lord.

Alone, in that dreadful hour, a courage not her own armed the gentle
girl with strength to play a noble part. She was thinking only of De
Wilton, when two horsemen drenched with human gore, rode up, bearing a
wounded knight, his shield bent, his helmet gone. He yet bore in his
hand a broken brand. Could this be Marmion? Blount unlaced the armor;
Eustace removed the casque; revived by the free air, Marmion cried:

"Fitz-Eustace, Blount,

    "'Redeem my pennon,--charge again!
      Cry,--"Marmion to the rescue!"
       'Must I bid twice?--hence, varlets! fly!
        Leave Marmion here alone,--to die.'
        They parted, and alone he lay;
        Clare drew her from the sight away,
      Till pain wrung forth a lowly moan,
      And half he murmur'd--'Is there none,
        Of all my halls have nursed,
      Page, squire, or groom, one cup to bring
      Of blessed water from the spring,
        To slake my dying thirst!'"

     "O Woman! in our hours of ease,
      Uncertain, coy, and hard to please,
      And variable as the shade
      By the light quivering aspen made;
      When pain and anguish wring the brow,
      A ministering angel thou!
      Scarce were the piteous accents said,
      When, with the baron's casque, the maid
        To the nigh streamlet ran:
      Forgot were hatred, wrongs, and fears;
      The plaintive voice alone she hears,
      Sees but the dying man."

She stooped by the side of the rill, but drew back in horror,--it ran
red with the best blood of two kingdoms. Near by, a fountain played, the
well of Sybil Grey. At this, the helmet was quickly filled, and
accompanied by a monk, who was present to shrive the dying or to bless
the dead, the Lady Clare hurried to the side of Marmion. Deep he drank,
saying:

"Is it the hand of Constance or of Clare that bathes my brow? Speak not
to me of shrift and prayer; while the spark of life lasts, I must
redress the wrongs of Constance."

Between broken sobs the Lady Clare replied:

    "'In vain for Constance is your zeal;
      She--died at Holy Isle.'"

Lord Marmion started from the ground, but fainting fell, supported by
the monk.

The din of war ceased for a moment, then there swelled upon the gale the
cry, "Stanley! Stanley!"

    "A light on Marmion's visage spread,
       And fired his glazing eye:
     With dying hand, above his head,
     He shook the fragment of his blade,
       And shouted 'Victory!
     Charge, Chester, charge! On, Stanley, on!'
     Were the last words of Marmion."

The monk gently placed the maid on her steed, and led her to the fair
Chapel of Tilmouth. The night was spent in prayer, and at dawn she was
safely given to her kinsman, Lord Fitz-Clare.

All day, till darkness drew her wing over the ghastly scene, more
desperate grew the deadly strife. When night had fallen, Surrey drew his
shattered bands from the fray. Then Scotland learned her loss.

    "Their king, their lords, their mightiest low,
     They melted from the field as snow,
     Tweed's echoes heard the ceaseless splash
       While many a broken band,
     Disorder'd, through her currents dash,
       To gain the Scottish land;
     To town and tower, to down and dale,
     To tell red Flodden's dismal tale,
     And raise the universal wail.
     Tradition, legend, tune, and song,
     Shall many an age that wail prolong:
     Still from the sire the son shall hear
     Of the stern strife, and carnage drear.
       Of Flodden's fatal field,
     Where shiver'd was fair Scotland's spear,
       And broken was her shield!

    "Day dawns upon the mountain's side:--
     There, Scotland! lay thy bravest pride,
     Chiefs, knights, and nobles, many a one:
     The sad survivors all are gone.
     View not that corpse mistrustfully,
     Defaced and mangled-though it be;
     He saw the wreck his rashness wrought;
     Reckless of life, he desperate fought,
       And fell on Flodden plain:
     And well in death his trusty brand,
     Firm clench'd within his kingly hand,
       Beseem'd the monarch slain."

Little remains to be told. Fitz-Eustace, faithful to the last, bore "To
Litchfield's lofty pile," what he believed to be the pierced and mangled
body of his once proud master. Here was reared a Gothic tomb; carved
tablets were set in fretted niche; around were hung his arms and armor,
and the walls were blazoned with his deeds of valor; but Lord Marmion's
body lay not there. Midst the din and roar of battle, a poor dying
peasant had dragged himself to the fountain where died the Lord of
Fontenaye, the Lord of Tamworth tower and town. Spoilers stripped and
mutilated both bodies and the lowly woodsman was carried to the proud
baron's tomb.

Through the long and dreadful fight, Wilton was in the foremost and
thickest. When Surrey's horse was slain, it was De Wilton's horse on
which the noble leader was again mounted. It was Wilton's brand that
hewed down the spearsmen. He was the living soul of all.

In that battle, he won back rank and lands, adding to his crest bearings
bought on Flodden Field. King and kinsman blessed fair Clara's
constancy. As he reads, each must paint for himself the bridal scene,
and imagine that,

    "Bluff King Hal the curtain drew,
     And Catherine's hand the stocking threw;
     And afterwards, for many a day,
     That it was held enough to say,
     In blessing to a wedded pair,
    'Love they like Wilton and like Clare.'"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Prose Marmion, by Sara D. Jenkins

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PROSE MARMION ***

***** This file should be named 10778.txt or 10778.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/7/7/10778/

Produced by PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


