The Project Gutenberg EBook of Legends, Tales and Poems
by Gustavo Adolfo Becquer
Edited with Introduction, Notes and Vocabulary, by Everett Ward Olmsted

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Legends, Tales and Poems

Author: Gustavo Adolfo Becquer
Edited with Introduction, Notes and Vocabulary, by Everett Ward Olmsted

Release Date: January 24, 2004 [EBook #10814]
[Last updated: January 12, 2016]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEGENDS, TALES AND POEMS ***




Produced by Keren Vergon, Arno Peters and PG Distributed Proofreaders




Legends, Tales and Poems

[Illustration: After an etching by B. Maura]



LEGENDS, TALES AND POEMS

BY

GUSTAVO ADOLFO BECQUER

EDITED

WITH INTRODUCTION, NOTES AND VOCABULARY

BY

EVERETT WARD OLMSTED, PH.D.

ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF THE ROMANCE LANGUAGES IN

CORNELL UNIVERSITY

       *       *       *       *       *

TO

MY MOTHER

       *       *       *       *       *



PREFACE


In preparing this collection of Becquer's legends, tales, and short
poems, which is the only annotated edition of this author's works that
has been published as yet for English-speaking students, the editor
has aimed to give to our schools and colleges a book that may serve,
not only as a reader for first or second year classes, but also as an
introduction to Spanish literature, through the works of one of the
most original and charming authors of the Spanish Romantic school.

Fondness for good literature should be stimulated from the very first,
and the quaint tales and legends of old Spain contained in this
edition, told, as they are, in a most fascinating style, are well
adapted to captivate the student's interest and to lead him to
investigate further the rich mine of Spanish literature. Becquer's
poetry is no less pleasing than his prose, and not much more difficult
to read. With the aid of the ample treatise on Spanish versification
contained in the introduction, the student will be enabled to
appreciate the harmony and rhythm of Becquer's verse, and in all
subsequent reading of Spanish poetry he will find this treatise a
convenient and valuable work of reference.

The Life of Becquer, though concise, is perhaps the most complete that
has yet been published, for it embodies all the data given by previous
biographers and a certain number of facts gathered by the writer at
the time of his last visit to Spain (in 1905-1906), from friends of
Becquer who were then living.

The vocabulary has been made sufficiently complete to free the notes
from that too frequent translation of words or phrases which often
encumbers them.

The notes have been printed in the only convenient place for them, at
the bottom of each page, and will be found to be as complete and
definite as possible on geographical, biographical, historical, or
other points that may not be familiar to the student or the teacher.
All grammatical or syntactical matter, unless of a difficult or
peculiar character, has been omitted, while the literary citations
that abound will, it is hoped, stimulate the student to do further
reading and to make literary comparisons of his own.

It remains for the editor to express his profound gratitude to the
following gentlemen for their aid in collecting facts regarding
Becquer and for their encouragement of this work: the Exc^{mo} Sr.
Conde de las Navas, the Exc^{mo} Sr. Licenciado D. Jose Gestoso y
Perez, and the Exc^{mo} Sr. D. Francisco de Laiglesia. It is his
pleasure also to convey his thanks to Professor George L. Burr of
Cornell University for aid in certain of the historical notes, and
most especially to gratefully acknowledge his indebtedness to the aid,
or rather collaboration, of Mr. Arthur Gordon of Cornell University,
and Mr. W. R. Price of the High School of Commerce, New York City.

  EVERETT WARD OLMSTED
  CORNELL UNIVERSITY
  Ithaca, N.Y.



CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION
   LIFE OF BECQUER
   UNPUBLISHED LETTER OF BECQUER
   BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
   SPANISH PROSODY
DESDE MI CELDA--CARTA SEXTA
LOS OJOS VERDES
LA CORZA BLANCA
LA AJORCA DEL ORO
EL CRISTO DE LA CALAVERA
EL BESO
MAESE PEREZ EL ORGANISTA
LA CRUZ DEL DIABLO
CREED EN DROS
LAS HOJAS SECAS
RIMAS
VOCABULARY



INTRODUCTION


LIFE OF BECQUER


"In Seville, along the Guadalquivir, and close to the bank that leads
to the convent of San Jeronimo, may be found a kind of lagoon, which
fertilizes a miniature valley formed by the natural slope of the bank,
at that point very high and steep. Two or three leafy white poplars,
intertwining their branches, protect the spot from the rays of the
sun, which rarely succeeds in slipping through them. Their leaves
produce a soft and pleasing murmur as the wind stirs them and causes
them to appear now silver, now green, according to the point from
which it blows. A willow bathes its roots in the current of the
stream, toward which it leans as though bowed by an invisible weight,
and all about are multitudes of reeds and yellow lilies, such as grow
spontaneously at the edges of springs and streams.

"When I was a boy of fourteen or fifteen, and my soul was overflowing
with numberless longings, with pure thoughts and with that infinite
hope that is the most precious jewel of youth, when I deemed myself a
poet, when my imagination was full of those pleasing tales of the
classic world, and Rioja in his _silvas_ to the flowers, Herrera in
his tender elegies, and all my Seville singers, the Penates of my
special literature, spoke to me continually of the majestic Betis, the
river of nymphs, naiads, and poets, which, crowned with belfries and
laurels, flows to the sea from a crystal amphora, how often, absorbed
in the contemplation of my childish dreams, I would go and sit upon
its bank, and there, where the poplars protected me with their shadow,
would give rein to my fancies, and conjure up one of those impossible
dreams in which the very skeleton of death appeared before my eyes in
splendid, fascinating garb! I used to dream then of a happy,
independent life, like that of the bird, which is born to sing, and
receives its food from God. I used to dream of that tranquil life of
the poet, which glows with a soft light from generation to generation.
I used to dream that the city that saw my birth would one day swell
with pride at my name, adding it to the brilliant list of her
illustrious sons, and, when death should put an end to my existence,
that they would lay me down to dream the golden dream of immortality
on the banks of the Betis, whose praises I should have sung in
splendid odes, and in that very spot where I used to go so often to
hear the sweet murmur of its waves. A white stone with a cross and my
name should be my only monument.

"The white poplars, swaying night and day above my grave, should seem
to utter prayers for my soul in the rustling of their green and silver
leaves. In them the birds should come and nest, that they might sing
at dawn a joyous hymn to the resurrection of the spirit to regions
more serene. The willow, covering the spot with floating shadows,
should lend to it its own vague sadness, as it bent and shed about its
soft, wan leaves, as if to protect and to caress my mortal spoils. The
river, too, which in flood tide might almost come and kiss the border
of the slab o'ergrown with reeds, should lull my sleep with pleasant
music. And when some time had passed, and patches of moss had begun to
spread over the stone, a dense growth of wild morning-glories, of
those blue morning-glories with a disk of carmine in the center, which
I loved so much, should grow up by its side, twining through its
crevices and clothing it with their broad transparent leaves, which,
by I know not what mystery, have the form of hearts. Golden insects
with wings of light, whose buzzing lulls to sleep on heated
afternoons, should come and hover round their chalices, and one would
be obliged to draw aside the leafy curtain to read my name, now
blurred by time and moisture. But why should my name be read? Who
would not know that I was sleeping there?"[1]

  [Footnote 1: _Obras de Gustavo A. Becquer_, Madrid, 1898, vol. II,
  pp. 242-245. This edition will be understood hereafter in all
  references to the works of Becquer.]

So mused the poet Becquer[1] in the golden days of his youth, when his
veins were swelling with health, when his heart was fired with
ambition, and in his ears was ringing the joyous invitation of his
muse.

  [Footnote 1: The name is spelled indifferently with or without
  accent--_Becquer_ or _Becquer_. In the choice of the latter
  spelling, the authority of his principal biographer, Ramon Rodriguez
  Correa, has been followed.]

His knowledge of the world was confined to the enchanting city of his
birth. Her gems of art and architecture had wrought themselves into
the fabric of his dreams; he had mused in her palm-gardens, worshiped
in her temples, and dreamed long afternoons on the shores of her
historic river. He knew nothing of the cold, prosaic world of selfish
interests. The time had not yet come when, in bitterness of spirit,
and wrapping his mantle about him against the chill wind of
indifference, he should say: "To-day my sole ambition is to be a
supernumerary in the vast human comedy, and when my silent role is
ended, to withdraw behind the scenes, neither hissed nor applauded,
making my exit unnoticed."[1]

  [Footnote 1: _Obras_, vol. II, p. 251.]

Indeed, in those later days of trial and hardship, he would often look
out wearily upon Madrid, the city of his adoption, the scene of his
crushing struggle with necessity, as it lay outspread before his
windows,--"dirty, black, and ugly as a fleshless skeleton, shivering
under its immense shroud of snow,"[1] and in his mind he would conjure
up the city of his youth, his ever cherished Seville, "with her
_Giralda_ of lacework, mirrored in the trembling Guadalquivir, with
her narrow and tortuous Moorish streets, in which one fancies still he
hears the strange cracking sound of the walk of the Justiciary King;
Seville, with her barred windows and her love-songs, her iron
door-screens and her night watchmen, her altar-pieces and her stories,
her brawls and her music, her tranquil nights and her fiery
afternoons, her rosy dawns and her blue twilights; Seville, with all
the traditions that twenty centuries have heaped upon her brow, with
all the pomp and splendor of her southern nature."[2] No words of
praise seemed too glowing for her ardent lover.

  [Footnote 1: _Ibid_., vol. III, p. iii.]

  [Footnote 2: _Obras_, vol. III, pp. 109-110.]

By some strange mystery, however, it had been decreed by fate that he
should only meet with disappointment in every object of his love. The
city of his birth was no exception to the rule: since Becquer's death
it has made but little effort to requite his deep devotion or satisfy
his youthful dreams. You may search "the bank of the Guadalquivir that
leads to the ruined convent of San Jeronimo," you may spy among the
silvery poplars or the willows growing there, you may thrust aside the
reeds and yellow lilies or the tangled growth of morning-glories, but
all in vain--no "white stone with a cross" appears. You may wander
through the city's many churches, but no tomb to the illustrious poet
will you find, no monument in any square. His body sleeps well-nigh
forgotten in the cemetery of San Nicolas in Madrid.

If you will turn your steps, however, to the _barrio_ of Seville in
which the celebrated D. Miguel de Manara, the original type of _Juan
Tenorio_ and the _Estudiante de Salamanca_, felt the mysterious blow
and saw his own funeral train file by, and will enter the little
street of the Conde de Barajas, you will find on the facade of the
house No. 26 a modest but tasteful tablet bearing the words


  EN ESTA CASA NACIO
  GUSTAVO ADOLFO
  BECQUER
  XVII FEBRERO MDCCCXXXVI.[1]

  [Footnote 1: This memorial, which was uncovered on January 10th,
  1886, is due to a little group of Becquer's admirers, and especially
  to the inspiration of a young Argentine poet, Roman Garcia Pereira
  (whose _Canto a Becquer_, published in _La Ilustracion Artistica_,
  Barcelona, December 27, 1886, is a tribute worthy of the poet who
  inspired it), and to the personal efforts of the illustrious Seville
  scholar, Don Jose Gestoso y Perez. It is only fair to add here that
  there is also an inferior street in Seville named for Becquer.]

Here Gustavo Adolfo Dominguez Becquer opened his eyes upon this
inhospitable world. Eight days later he was baptized in the church of
San Lorenzo.[1] He was one of a family of eight sons, Eduardo,
Estanislao, Valeriano, Gustavo Adolfo, Alfredo, Ricardo, Jorge, and
Jose. His father, Don Jose Dominguez Becquer, was a well-known Seville
genre painter. He died when Gustavo was but a child of five, too young
to be taught the principles of his art; but he nevertheless bequeathed
to him the artistic temperament that was so dominant a trait in the
poet's genius. Becquer's mother, Dona Joaquina, survived his father
but a short time, and left her children orphaned while they were yet
very young. Gustavo was but nine and a half years old at the time of
his mother's death. Fortunately an old and childless uncle, D. Juan
Vargas, took charge of the motherless boys until they could find homes
or employment.

  [Footnote 1: The following is a copy of his baptismal record:

  "En jueves 25 de Febrero de 1836 anos D. Antonio Rodriguez Arenas
  Pbro. con licencia del infrascrito Cura de la Parroquial de Sn.
  Lorenzo de Sevilla: bautizo solemnemente a Gustavo Adolfo que nacio
  en 17 de dicho mes y ano hijo de Jose Dominguez Vequer (_sic_) y
  Dona Juaquina (_sic_) Bastida su legitima mujer. Fue su madrina Dona
  Manuela Monchay vecina de la collacion de Sn. Miguel a la que se
  advirtio el parentesco espiritual y obligaciones y para verdad lo
  firme.--Antonio Lucena Cura." See La _Illustracion Artistica_,
  Barcelona, December 27, 1886, pp. 363-366. Citations from this
  periodical will hereafter refer to the issue of this date.]

Gustavo Adolfo received his first instruction at the College of San
Antonio Abad. After the loss of his mother his uncle procured for him
admission to the College of San Telmo, a training school for
navigators, situated on the banks of the Guadalquivir in the edifice
that later became the palace of the Dukes of Montpensier. This
establishment had been founded in 1681 in the ancient suburb of
Marruecos as a reorganization of the famous _Escuela de Mareantes_
(navigators) of Triana. The Government bore the cost of maintenance
and instruction of the pupils of this school, to which were admitted
only poor and orphaned boys of noble extraction. Gustavo fulfilled all
these requirements. Indeed, his family, which had come to Seville at
the close of the sixteenth century or at the beginning of the
seventeenth century, from Flanders, was one of the most distinguished
of the town. It had even counted among its illustrious members a
Seville Veinticuatro, and no one who was unable to present proof of
noble lineage could aspire to that distinction.[1]

  [Footnote 1: "Don Martin Becquer, _mayorazgo_ and _Veinticuatro_, of
  Seville, native of Flanders, married Dona Ursula Diez de Tejada.
  Born to them were Don Juan and Dona Mencia Becquer. The latter
  married Don Julian Dominguez, by whom she had a son Don Antonio
  Dominguez y Becquer, who in turn contracted marriage with Dona Maria
  Antonia Insausti y Bausa. Their son was Don Jose Dominguez Insausti
  y Bausa, husband of Dona Joaquina Bastida y Vargas, and father of
  the poet Becquer." The arms of the family "were a shield of azure
  with a chevron of gold, charged with five stars of azure, two leaves
  of clover in gold in the upper corners of the shield, and in the
  point a crown of gold." The language of the original is not
  technical, and I have translated literally. See _Carta a M. Achille
  Fouquier_, by D. Jose Gestoso y Perez, in _La Ilustracion
  Artistica_, pp. 363-366.]

Among the students of San Telmo there was one, Narciso Campillo, for
whom Gustavo felt a special friendship,--a lad whose literary tastes,
like his own, had developed early, and who was destined, later on, to
occupy no mean position in the field of letters. Writing of those days
of his youth, Senor Campillo says: "Our childhood friendship was
strengthened by our life in common, wearing as we did the same
uniform, eating at the same table, and sleeping in an immense hall,
whose arches, columns, and melancholy lamps, suspended at intervals, I
can see before me still.

"I enjoy recalling this epoch of our first literary utterance
(_vagido_), and I say _our_, for when he was but ten years old and I
eleven, we composed and presented in the aforesaid school (San Telmo)
a fearful and extravagant drama, which, if my memory serves me right,
was entitled Los _Conjurados_ ('The Conspirators'). We likewise began
a novel. I wonder at the confidence with which these two children, so
ignorant in all respects, launched forth upon the two literary lines
that require most knowledge of man, society, and life. The time was
yet to come when by dint of painful struggles and hard trials they
should possess that knowledge, as difficult to gain as it is
bitter!"[1]

  [Footnote 1: Article on Gustavo Adolfo Becquer, by Narciso Campillo,
  in La Ilustracion Artistica, pp. 358-360]

Shortly after the matriculation of young Becquer, the College of San
Telmo was suppressed by royal orders, and the lad found himself in the
streets. He was then received into the home of his godmother, Dona
Manuela Monchay, who was a woman of kind heart and much intelligence.
She possessed a fair library, which was put at the disposal of the
boy; and here he gratified his love for reading, and perfected his
literary taste. Two works that had considerable influence upon him at
this time were the Odes of Horace, translated by P. Urbano Campos, and
the poems of Zorrilla. He began to write verses of his own, but these
he later burned.

"In 1849," says Senor Campillo, "there were two noteworthy painters in
Seville, whose studios were open to and frequented by numerous
students, future rivals, each in his own imagination, of the glories
of Velasquez and Murillo. One of these studios, situated in the same
building as the Museo de Pinturas, was that of D. Antonio Cabral
Bejarano, a man not to be forgotten for his talent, and perhaps also
for his wit, the delight of those who knew him. The other, situated in
an upper room of the Moorish _alcazar de Abdelasis_, near the patio
_de Banderas_, was directed by D. Joaquin Dominguez Becquer, a brother
and disciple of D. Jose, Gustavo's father."[1]

  [Footnote 1: Narciso Campillo, _loc_. cit.]

In spite of this relationship, Gustavo Adolfo, at the age of fourteen,
entered the studio of Bejarano. There he remained for two years,
practicing the art of drawing, for which he had a natural talent. He
then came under the instruction of his uncle, who, judging that his
nephew was even better qualified for a literary than for an artistic
career, advised him to follow the former, and procured for him a few
Latin lessons. Meanwhile Gustavo continued to enlarge his poetical
horizon by reading from the great poets and by the contemplation of
the beauties of nature. With his friend Campillo he composed the first
three cantos of a poem entitled La _Conquista de Sevilla_, and with
him he wandered about the beautiful city of his birth and dreamed such
dreams as the one with which this Introduction begins.

Gustavo's godmother, who was a woman in easy circumstances and without
children or near relatives, would doubtless have bequeathed to him her
property had he fulfilled her wishes and settled down to an honorable
mercantile life. But the child, who had learned to draw and to compose
almost before he could write, and who had always paled before the
simplest problem of arithmetic, could not reconcile himself to such a
life. The artist within him rebelled, and at the age of seventeen and
a half, feeling the attraction of the capital strong upon him, he bade
farewell to the friends of his youth and set out to seek for fame and
fortune. It was in the autumn of 1854 that Becquer arrived in Madrid,
"with empty pockets, but with a head full of treasures that were not,
alas, to enrich him." Here he encountered an indifference that he had
not dreamed of; and here he remained in the shadow of oblivion, eking
out a miserable existence of physical as well as mental suffering, in
utter loneliness of spirit, until he was joined in 1856 by one who
came to be his lifelong friend and first biographer--Ramon Rodriguez
Correa, who had come to the capital with the same aims as Becquer, and
whose robust health and jovial temperament appealed singularly to the
sad and ailing dreamer. The new-found friend proved indeed a godsend,
for when, in 1857, Gustavo was suffering from a terrible illness,
Correa, while attending him, chanced to fall upon a writing entitled
_El caudillo de las manos rojas, tradicion india_. Charmed by its
originality in form and conception, he urged his friend to publish it.
Becquer acquiesced, and the story was accepted and published by La
_Cronica_. The joy of this first success, and perhaps the material aid
that resulted, must have had a great deal to do with Gustavo's speedy
recovery.

A short time after this he entered with his friend Correa the office
of the _Direccion de Bienes Nacionales_ as copyist, at the munificent
salary of some $150 a year. The employment was decidedly contrary to
his taste, and to amuse his tedium he used often to sketch or read
from his favorite poets. One day, as he was busy sketching, the
Director entered, and, seeing a group about Gustavo's chair,--for the
young artist's sketches were eagerly awaited and claimed by his
admiring associates,--stole up from behind and asked, "What is this?"
Gustavo, suspecting nothing, went on with his sketch, and answered in
a natural tone, "This is Ophelia, plucking the leaves from her
garland. That old codger is a grave-digger. Over there..." At this,
noticing that every one had risen, and that universal silence reigned,
Becquer slowly turned his head. "Here is one too many," said the
Director, and the artist was dismissed that very day.

It cannot be said that he received the news of his dismissal
regretfully, for he had accepted the position largely to please a
sympathetic friend. Slight as was the remuneration, however, it had
aided him to live; and when this resource was removed, Gustavo was
again obliged to depend upon his wits. His skill with the brush served
him in good stead at this time, and he earned a little money by aiding
a painter who had been employed by the Marquis of Remisa to decorate
his palace, but who could not do the figures in the fresco.

In 1857, together with other _litterateurs_, Becquer undertook the
preparation and direction of a work entitled _Historia de los Templos
de Espana_.[1] Like so many of the author's plans, this work remained
unfinished; but from the single volume that appeared can be seen how
vast was the scope of the work, and how scholarly its execution.
Gustavo is himself the author of some of the best pages contained in
the volume, as, for example, those of the Introduction and of the
chapters on _San Juan de los_ Reyes. He is likewise the author of many
of the excellent sketches that adorn the work, notably that of the
_portada_. These sketches, as well as others published elsewhere, show
how eminent his work as artist would have been, had he decided to
cultivate that field instead of literature.

  [Footnote 1: The complete title of the work is _Historia de los
  Templos de Espana, publicada bajo la proteccion de SS. MM. AA. y muy
  reverendos senores arzobispos y obispos--dirigida por D. Juan de la
  Puerta Vizcaino y D. Gustavo Adolfo Becquer. Tomo I, Madrid, 1857.
  Imprenta y Estereotipia Espanola de los Senores Nieto y Compania._]

Essentially an artist in temperament, he viewed all things from the
artist's standpoint. His distaste for politics was strong, and his
lack of interest in political intrigues was profound. "His artistic
soul, nurtured in the illustrious literary school of Seville," says
Correa, "and developed amidst Gothic Cathedrals, lacy Moorish and
stained-glass windows, was at ease only in the field of tradition. He
felt at home in a complete civilization, like that of the Middle Ages,
and his artisticopolitical ideas and his fear of the ignorant crowd
made him regard with marked predilection all that was aristocratic and
historic, without however refusing, in his quick intelligence, to
recognize the wonderful character of the epoch in which he lived.
Indolent, moreover, in small things,--and for him political parties
were small things,--he was always to be found in the one in which were
most of his friends, and in which they talked most of pictures,
poetry, cathedrals, kings, and nobles. Incapable of hatred, he never
placed his remarkable talent as a writer at the service of political
animosities, however certain might have been his gains."[1]

  [Footnote 1: Ramon Rodriguez Correa, _Prologo_, in _Obras de
  Becquer_, vol. I, xvi.]

Early in his life in Madrid, Gustavo came under the influence of a
charming young woman, Julia Espin y Guillen.[1] Her father was
director of the orchestra in the Teatro Real, and his home was a
rendezvous of young musicians, artists, and _litterateurs_. There
Gustavo, with Correa, Manuel del Palacio, Augusto Ferran, and other
friends, used to gather for musical and literary evenings, and there
Gustavo used to read his verses. These he would bring written on odd
scraps of paper, and often upon calling cards, in his usual careless
fashion.

  [Footnote 1: She later married Don Benigno Quiroga Ballesteros, an
  illustrious engineer, congressman, minister of state, and man of
  public life, who is still living. She died in January, 1907.]

His friends were not slow in discovering that the tall, dark, and
beautiful Julia was the object of his adoration, and they advised him
to declare his love openly. But his timid and retiring nature imposed
silence upon his lips, and he never spoke a word of love to her. It
cannot be said, moreover, that the impression created upon the young
lady by the brilliant youth was such as to inspire a return of his
mute devotion. Becquer was negligent in his dress and indifferent to
his personal appearance, and when Julia's friends upbraided her for
her hardness of heart she would reply with some such curt and cruel
epigram as this: "Perhaps he would move my heart more if he affected
my stomach less."[1]

  [Footnote 1: Facts learned from conversation with Don Manuel del
  Palacio, since deceased.

  The editor of this sketch is indebted to the courtesy of the
  Exc^{mo}. Sr. D. Benigno Quiroga Ballesteros and to his lately
  deceased wife, Dona Julia, the muse of at least some of Becquer's
  _Rimas_, for an opportunity to examine a couple of albums containing
  some of the poet's verse and a most interesting collection of pencil
  sketches, which but confirm his admiration for Becquer's artistic
  talent. Here is a list of the sketches:

  _First Album:_

  Lucia di Lamermoor--Eleven sketches, including frontispiece.

  A dream, or rather a nightmare, in which a man is pictured in a
  restless sleep, with a small devil perched upon his knees, who
  causes to fly as a kite above the sleeper's head a woman in graceful
  floating garments.

  A fat and jolly horned devil in the confessional box, with a
  confessor of the fair sex kneeling at one side, while at the extreme
  right two small acolytes point out to each other a suspicious
  looking tail that protrudes from beneath her skirts, thus stamping
  her as Satan's own.

  A belfry window with a swinging bell, and bestriding the bell a
  skeleton tightly clutching the upper part of it--ringing the
  _animas_ perhaps.

  Gustavo himself seated smoking, leaning back in his chair, and in
  the smoke that rises a series of women, some with wings.

  A nun in horror at discovering, as she turns down the covers of her
  bed, a merry devil.

  A woman's coffin uncovered by the sexton, while a lover standing by
  exclaims, "iiCascaras!! icomo ha cambiado!"

  A scene at the _Teatro Real_ with Senor Espin y Guillen in a small
  group behind the scenes, and a prima donna singing. Actors standing
  apart in the wings.

  A visit to the cemetery. A skeleton thrusting out his head from his
  burial niche, and a young man presenting his card. "DIFUNTO: No
  recibo. VISITANTE: Pues hai (_sic_) queda la targeta (_sic_)."

  A fine sketch of "Eleonora," a stately form in rich
  fifteenth-century garb.

  A number of sketches of women, knights, monks, devils, soldiers,
  skeletons, etc.

  _Second Album: Les morts pow rire, Bizarreries dediees a
  Mademoiselle Julie, par G. A. Becker (sic)_.

  Fantastic frontispiece of skulls, bones, and leafy fronds, and two
  young lovers seated, sketching.

  Skeletons playing battledore and shuttlecock with skulls.

  A tall slim skeleton and a round short one.

  Skeletons at a ball.

  A skeleton widow visiting her husband's grave.

  The husband returning her visit, and coming to share her lunch in
  the park.

  A circus of skeletons, in two scenes: (1) Leaping through the hoop.
  (2) One skeleton balancing himself, head downward, on the head of
  another who is standing.

  A skeleton singer on the stage.

  A skeleton horse leaping a hurdle.

  A skeleton drum-major with his band.

  A skeleton bull-fight.

  A duel between skeletons.

  A tournament on skeleton horses.

  A woman recently deceased, surrounded by skeletons offering their
  compliments. They are presented by one of their number, with hat in
  hand.

  A balcony courting scene between skeleton lovers.

  The word _FIN_ in bones concludes the series of grotesque and
  uncanny sketches, which but emphasize a fact ever present in the
  poet's mind--that while we are in life we _are_ in death.]

Finding his devotion to Julia unrequited, Becquer, in a rebellious
mood, and having come under the influence of the charms and
blandishments of a woman of Soria, a certain Casta Esteban y Navarro,
contracted, in or about the year 1861, an unfortunate marriage, which
embittered the rest of his life and added cares and expenses which he
could ill support. He lived with his wife but a short time, during
which period two sons were born to them--Gustavo, whose later career
was unfortunately not such as to bring credit to the memory of his
illustrious father, and, Jorge, who died young. Becquer was
passionately fond of his children, and succeeded in keeping them with
him after the separation from his wife. They were constantly the
objects of his affectionate solicitude, and his last thoughts were for
them.

About 1858 the newspaper _El Contemporaneo_ had been founded by the
able and broad-minded Jose Luis Albareda, and Correa, who was
associated with the management, succeeded in obtaining for his friend
a position on its staff. Becquer entered upon his new labors in 1861,
and was a fairly regular contributor until the suppression of the
paper. Here he published the greater part of his legends and tales, as
well as his remarkable collection of letters _Desde mi Celda_ ("From
my Cell"). The following year his brother Valeriano, who up to that
time had exercised his talents as a genre painter in Seville, came to
join him in Madrid. He too had been unfortunate in his domestic
relations, and the brothers joined in sympathy to form a new
household. A period of comparative comfort seemed to open up before
them. This period was of short duration, however; for Gustavo (who was
never strong) soon fell ill, and was obliged to withdraw from the
capital, in search of purer air, to the historic monastery of Veruela,
situated on the Moncayo, a mountain in northern Spain. His brother
Valeriano accompanied him, and there they passed a year in complete
isolation from the rest of the world. The spur of necessity, however,
compelled them both to keep to their work, and while Gustavo was
writing such legends as that of _Maese Perez_, and composing his
fascinating _Cartas desde mi Celda_, Valeriano was painting Aragonese
scenes such as La _Vendimia_ ("The Vintage") or fanciful creations
such as _El Barco del Diablo_ or La _Pecadora_.

The next year the two brothers returned to the capital, and Gustavo,
together with his friend D. Felipe Vallarino, began the publication of
_La Gaceta literaria_, of brief but brilliant memory. During this same
year and during 1863 Gustavo continued on the staff of _El
Contemporaneo_, enriching its pages with an occasional legend of
singular beauty.

At the Baths of Fitero in Navarre, whither, with his inseparable
brother, he had gone to recuperate his health in the summer of 1864,
Gustavo composed the fantastic legend of the _Miserere_, and others no
less interesting. On his return from Fitero he continued in _El
Contemporaneo_, and shortly after entered a ministerial daily, the
irksome duties of which charge he bore with resignation.

At this time Luis Gonzalez Bravo, a man of _fine_ literary
discrimination, whatever may be thought of him politically, was prime
minister under Isabel II. He had become interested in the work of
Gustavo, and, knowing the dire financial straits in which the young
poet labored, he thought to diminish these anxieties and thus give him
more time to devote to creative work by making him censor of novels. A
new period of calm and comparative comfort began, and for the first
time in his life Becquer had the leisure to carry out a long-cherished
project, at once his own desire and the desire of his friends: that of
gathering together in one volume all his scattered verse and of adding
to the collection other poems as well that had not yet seen the light.
This he did, and the completed volume so charmed his friend and
patron, Gonzalez Bravo, that he offered of his own accord to write a
prologue for the work and to print it at his own expense. But in 1868
came the revolution which dethroned Isabel II, and in the confusion
that followed the downfall of the ministry and the hasty withdrawal of
Gonzalez Bravo to the French frontier the volume of poems was lost.
This was a sad blow to Becquer, but he courageously set to work to
repair the loss, and with painful effort succeeded in recalling and
rewriting his _Rimas_, which were published after his death in the
third volume of his works by his friend Correa.

Becquer, with extreme punctiliousness, tendered his resignation as
censor of novels. A pension of 10,000 reals that the government had
assigned to Valeriano for the study of national customs was withdrawn,
and both brothers were again deprived of permanent employment. They
joined forces, and while the one sketched admirable woodcuts for the
_Almanac Anual_ of Gaspar y Roig, the other wrote such original
articles as _Las Hojas Secas_, or chafed under such hack work as the
translation of popular novels from the French, which language he read
with ease, though he did not speak it well. Gustavo had already felt
and described the charm of the old Moorish city of Toledo in his
_Historia de los Templos de Espana_, and in 1869 he and Valeriano
moved their little household temporarily to the city of their dreams,
with a view to finding inspiration for their pens and brushes, and
thus subsistence for their joint families.[1]

  [Footnote 1: It was at this time that Gustavo wrote the letter which
  is published for the first time on page xxxix.]

An amusing account is given by Correa of an adventure that befell the
two brothers one night in Toledo as they were wandering about its
streets. He says: "One magnificent moonlight night both artists
decided to contemplate their beloved city bathed in the fantastic
light of the chilly orb. The painter armed with pencils and the writer
with his souvenirs had abandoned the old city and on a ruined wall had
given themselves up for hours to their artistic chatter ... when a
couple of _Guardias civiles_, who had doubtless those days been
looking for marauders, approached them. They heard something of apses,
squinches, ogives, and other terms as suspicious or as dangerous ...
and observing the disarray of those who thus discoursed, their long
beards, their excited mien, the lateness of the hour, the solitude of
the place, and obeying especially that axiomatic certainty of the
Spanish police to blunder, they angrily swooped down upon those night
birds, and, in spite of protests and unheard explanations, took them
to continue their artistic themes in the dim and horrid light of a
dungeon in the Toledo jail.... We learned all this in the office of
_EC Contemporaneo_, on receiving from Gustavo an explanatory letter
full of sketches representing the probable passion and death of both
innocents. The staff _en masse_ wrote to the mistaken jailer, and at
last we saw the prisoners return safe and sound, parodying in our
presence with words and pencils the famous prisons of Silvio
Pellico."[1]

  [Footnote 1: Correa, _op. cit._, pp. xxi-xxiii.]

In this same year, 1869, we find the brothers housed in modest
quarters in the Barrio de la Concepcion in the outskirts of Madrid.
Here Adolfo wrote some new poems and began a translation of Dante for
a _Biblioteca de grandes autores_ which had been planned and organized
by _La Ilustracion de Madrid_, founded by Gasset in 1870. The first
number of this noteworthy paper appeared on January 12 of that year,
and from its inception to the time of his death Gustavo was its
director and a regular contributor.[1] His brother Valeriano
illustrated many of its pages, and here one can form some idea of his
skill as a portrayer of Spanish types and customs. "But who could
foretell," says their friend Campillo, "that within so short a time
his necrology and that of his beloved brother were to appear in this
same paper?"[2]

  [Footnote 1: These articles of Gustavo's have not, for the most
  part, been published elsewhere. There remains for the future editor
  of his complete works a large number of such articles, which it
  would be well worth while to collect.]

  [Footnote 2: _La Ilustracion Artistica_, p. 360.]

Their life of hardship and anxiety was tearing to shreds the delicate
health of the two young artists, and on September 23, 1870, Valeriano
breathed his last in the arms of Gustavo. His death was a blow from
which Gustavo never recovered. It was as though the mainspring was
broken in a watch; and, though the wheels still turned of their own
momentum, the revolutions were few in number and soon ceased. "A
strange illness," says Correa, "and a strange manner of death was
that! Without any precise symptom, that which was diagnosed as
pneumonia turned to hepatitis, becoming in the judgment of others
pericarditis, and meanwhile the patient, with his brain as clear as
ever and his natural gentleness, went on submitting himself to every
experiment, accepting every medicine, and dying inch by inch."[1]

  [Footnote 1: Correa, _op. cit._, p. xix.]

Shortly before the end he turned to his friends who surrounded his
bed, and said to them, "Acordaos de mis ninos."[1] He realized that he
had extended his arm for the last time in their behalf, and that now
that frail support had been withdrawn. "At last the fatal moment came,
and, pronouncing clearly with his trembling lips the words 'Todo
mortal!', his pure and loving soul rose to its Creator."[2] He died
December 22, 1870.

  [Footnote 1: This fact was learned from a conversation with Don
  Francisco de Laiglesia, who, with Correa, Ferran and others, was
  present when the poet breathed his last.]

  [Footnote 2: Correa, _op. cit._, p. xx.]

Thanks to the initiative of Ramon Rodriguez Correa and to the aid of
other friends, most of the scattered tales, legends, and poems of
Becquer were gathered together and published by Fernando Fe, Madrid,
in three small volumes. In the Prologue of the first edition Correa
relates the life of his friend with sympathy and enthusiasm, and it is
from this source that we glean most of the facts that are to be known
regarding the poet's life. The appearance of these volumes caused a
marked effect, and their author was placed by popular edict in the
front rank of contemporary writers.

Becquer may be said to belong to the Romantic School, chief of whose
exponents in Spain were Zorilla and Espronceda. The choice of
mediaeval times as the scene of his stories, their style and
treatment, as well as the personal note and the freedom of his verse,
all stamp him as a Romanticist.

His legends, with one or two exceptions, are genuinely Spanish in
subject, though infused with a tender melancholy that recalls the
northern ballads rather than the writings of his native land. His love
for old ruins and monuments, his archaeological instinct, is evident
in every line. So, too, is his artistic nature, which finds a greater
field for its expression in his prose than in his verse. Add to this a
certain bent toward the mysterious and supernatural, and we have the
principal elements that enter into the composition of these legends,
whose quaint, weird beauty not only manifests the charm that naturally
attaches to popular or folk tales, but is due especially to the way in
which they are told by one who was at once an artist and a poet.

Zorilla has been said to be Becquer's most immediate precursor, in
that he possesses the same instinct for the mysterious. But, as Blanco
Garcia observes, "Becquer is less ardent than Zorilla, and preferred
the strange traditions in which some unknown supernatural power hovers
to those others, more probable, in which only human passions with
their caprices and outbursts are involved."[1] Correa says of his
legends that they "can compete with the tales of Hoffmann and of
Grimm, and with the ballads of Rueckert and of Uhland," and that
"however fantastic they may be, however imaginary they may appear,
they always contain such a foundation of truth, a thought so real,
that in the midst of their extraordinary form and contexture a fact
appears spontaneously to have taken place or to be able to take place
without the slightest difficulty, if you but analyze the situation of
the personages, the time in which they live, or the circumstances that
surround them."[2]

  [Footnote 1: _La Literatura Espanola en el Siglo XIX_, Madrid, 1891,
  vol. II, p. 275.]

  [Footnote 2: Correa, _op. cit._, p. xxx.]

The subtle charm of such legends as _Los Ojos Verdes_, _La Corza
Blanca_, _Maese Perez el Organista_, etc., full of local color as they
are, and of an atmosphere of old Spain, is hard to describe, but none
the less real. One is caught by the music of the prose at the first
lines, enraptured by the weird charm of the story, and held in
breathless interest until the last words die away. If Becquer's phrase
is not always classic, it is, on the other hand, vigorous and
picturesque; and when one reflects upon the difficult conditions under
which his writings were produced, in the confusion of the
printing-office, or hurriedly in a miserable attic to procure food for
the immediate necessities of his little family, and when one likewise
recalls the fact that they were published in final book form only
after the author's death, and without retouching, the wonder grows
that they are written in a style so pleasing and so free from
harshness.

Becquer's prose is doubtless at its best in his letters entitled
_Desde mi Celda_, written, as has been said, from the monastery of
Veruela, in 1864. Read his description of his journey to the ancient
Aragonese town of Tarazona, picturesquely situated on the River
Queiles, of his mule trip over the glorious Moncayo, of the
peacefulness and quiet of the old fortified monastery of Veruela, and
you will surely feel inspired to follow him in his wanderings. Writing
of his life in the seclusion of Veruela, Becquer says: "Every
afternoon, as the sun is about to set, I sally forth upon the road
that runs in front of the monastery doors to wait for the postman, who
brings me the Madrid newspapers. In front of the archway that gives
entrance to the first inclosure of the abbey stretches a long avenue
of poplars so tall that when their branches are stirred by the evening
breeze their summits touch and form an immense arch of verdure. On
both sides of the road, leaping and tumbling with a pleasant murmur
among the twisted roots of the trees, run two rivulets of crystalline
transparent water, as cold as the blade of a sword and as gleaming as
its edge. The ground, over which float the shadows of the poplars,
mottled with restless spots of light, is covered at intervals with the
thickest and finest of grass, in which grow so many white daisies that
they look at first sight like that rain of petals with which the
fruit-trees carpet the ground on warm April days. On the banks of the
stream, amid the brambles and the reeds, grow wild violets, which,
though well-nigh hidden amongst their creeping leaves, proclaim
themselves afar by their penetrating perfume. And finally, also near
the water and forming as it were a second boundary, can be seen
between the poplar trunks a double row of stocky walnut-trees with
dark, round, compact tops." About half way down the avenue stands a
marble cross, which, from its color, is known in the vicinity as the
Black Cross of Veruela. "Nothing is more somberly beautiful than this
spot. At one end of the road the view is closed by the monastery, with
its pointed arches, its peaked towers, and its imposing battlemented
walls; on the other, the ruins of a little hermitage rise, at the foot
of a hillock bestrewn with blooming thyme and rosemary. There, seated
at the foot of the cross, and holding in my hands a book that I
scarcely ever read and often leave forgotten on the steps of the
cross, I linger for one, two, and sometimes even four hours waiting
for the papers." At last the post arrives, and the _Contemporaneo_ is
in his hands. "As I was present at its birth, and as since its birth I
have lived its feverish and impassioned life, _El Contemporaneo_ is
not for me a common newspaper like the rest, but its columns are
yourselves, my friends, my companions in hope or disappointment, in
failure or triumph, in joy or bitterness. The first impression that I
feel upon receiving it, then, is one of joy, like that experienced
upon opening a letter on whose envelope we recognize a dear familiar
handwriting, or when in a foreign land we grasp the hand of a
compatriot and hear our native tongue again. The peculiar odor of the
damp paper and the printer's ink, that characteristic odor which for a
moment obscures the perfume of the flowers that one breathes here on
every hand, seems to strike the olfactory memory, a strange and keen
memory that unquestionably exists, and it brings back to me a portion
of my former life,--that restlessness, that activity, that feverish
productiveness of journalism. I recall the constant pounding and
creaking of the presses that multiply by thousands the words that we
have just written, and that have come all palpitating from our pens. I
recall the strain of the last hours of publication, when night is
almost over and copy scarce. I recall, in short, those times when day
has surprised us correcting an article or writing a last notice when
we paid not the slightest attention to the poetic beauties of the
dawn. In Madrid, and for us in particular, the sun neither rises nor
sets: we put out or light the lights, and that is the only reason we
notice it."

At last he opens the sheet. The news of the clubs or the Cortes
absorbs him until the failing light of the setting sun warns him that,
though he has read but the first columns, it is time to go. "The
shadows of the mountains fall rapidly, and spread over the plain. The
moon begins to appear in the east like a silver circle gleaming
through the sky, and the avenue of poplars is wrapped in the uncertain
dusk of twilight.... The monastery bell, the only one that still hangs
in its ruined Byzantine tower, begins to call to prayers, and one near
and one afar, some with sharp metallic notes, and some with solemn,
muffled tones, the other bells of the hillside towns reply.... It
seems like a harmony that falls from heaven and rises at the same time
from the earth, becomes confounded, and floats in space, intermingling
with the fading sounds of the dying day and the first sighs of the
newborn night.

"And now all is silenced,--Madrid, political interests, ardent
struggles, human miseries, passions, disappointments, desires, all is
hushed in that divine music. My soul is now as serene as deep and
silent water. A faith in something greater, in a future though unknown
destiny, beyond this life, a faith in eternity,--in short, an
all-absorbing larger aspiration, overwhelms that petty faith which we
might term personal, that faith in the morrow, that sort of goad that
spurs on irresolute minds, and that is so needful if one must struggle
and exist and accomplish something in this world."[1]

  [Footnote 1: _Obras_, _vol._ II, pp. 222-229.]

This graceful musing, full in the original of those rich harmonies
that only the Spanish language can express, will serve sufficiently to
give an impression of the series as a whole. The broad but fervent
faith expressed in the last lines indicates a deeply religious and
somewhat mystical nature. This characteristic of Becquer may be
noticed frequently in his writings and no one who reads his works
attentively can call him elitist, as have some of his calumniators.

Beautiful as Becquer's prose may be considered, however, the universal
opinion is that his claim to lasting fame rests on his verse. Mrs.
Humphrey Ward, in her interesting article entitled "A Spanish
Romanticist,"[1] says of him: "His literary importance indeed is only
now beginning to be understood. Of Gustavo Becquer we may almost say
that in a generation of rhymers he alone was a poet; and now that his
work is all that remains to us of his brilliant and lovable
personality, he only, it seems to us, among the crowd of modern
Spanish versifiers, has any claim to a European audience or any chance
of living to posterity." This diatribe against the other poets of
contemporary Spain may seem to us unjust; but certain it is that
Becquer in the eyes of many surpasses either Nunez de Arce or
Campoamor, with whom he forms "a triumvirate that directs and
condenses all the manifestations of contemporary Spanish lyrics."[2]

  [Footnote 1: _Macmillan's Magazine_, February, 1883, p. 307.]

  [Footnote 2: Blanco Garcia, _op. cit._, vol. II, p. 79.]

Becquer has none of the characteristics of the Andalusian. His lyrical
genius is not only at odds with that of Southern Spain, but also with
his own inclination for the plastic arts, says Blanco Garcia. "How
could a Seville poet, a lover of pictorial and sculptural marvels, so
withdraw from the outer form as to embrace the pure idea, with that
melancholy subjectivism as common in the gloomy regions bathed by the
Spree as it is unknown on the banks of the Darro and Guadalquivir?"[1]
The answer to the problem must be found in his lineage.

  [Footnote 1: _Ibid._, p. 80.]

In spite of the fascination early exercised by Julia Espin y Guillen
over the young poet, it may be doubted if she can fairly be said to
have been the muse of his _Rimas_. She doubtless inspired some of his
verse; but the poet seems to sing the praises or lament the cruelty of
various sweethearts. The late Don Juan Valera, who knew Gustavo well,
goes so far as to say: "I venture to suspect that none of these women
ever lived in the world which we all corporeally inhabit. When the
mind of the poet descended to this world, he had to struggle with so
much poverty, he saw himself engulfed and swallowed up by so many
trials, and he was obliged to busy himself with such prosaic matters
of mean and commonplace bread-winning, that he did not seek, nor would
he have found had he sought them, those elegant and semi-divine women
that made of him now a Romeo, now a Macias, now an Othello, and now a
Pen-arch.... To enjoy or suffer really from such loves and to become
ensnared therein with such rare women, Becquer lacked the time,
opportunity, health, and money.... His desire for love, like the arrow
of the Prince in one of the tales of the Arabian Nights, shot high
over all the actual _high-life_ and pierced the golden door of the
enchanted palaces and gardens of the Fairy Paribanu, who, enraptured
by him, took him for her spouse."[1] In fact Becquer, speaking of the
unreality of the numerous offspring of his imagination, says in the
Introduction to his works, written in June, 1868: "It costs me labor
to determine what things I have dreamed and what things have happened
to me. My affections are divided between the phantasms of my
imagination and real personalities. My memory confuses the names and
dates, of women and days that have died or passed away with the days
and women that have never existed save in my mind."[2]

  [Footnote 1: _Florilegio de Poesias Castellanas del Siglo XIX_, con
  introduccion y notas, por Juan Valera. Madrid, 1902, vol. I, pp.
  186-188.]

  [Footnote 2: _Obras_, vol. I, p. L.]

Whatever may be one's opinion of the personality of the muse or muses
of his verse, the love that Becquer celebrates is not the love of
oriental song, "nor yet the brutal deification of woman represented in
the songs of the Provencal Troubadours, nor even the love that
inspired Herrera and Garcilaso. It is the fantastic love of the
northern ballads, timid and reposeful, full of melancholy tenderness,
that occupies itself in weeping and in seeking out itself rather than
in pouring itself forth on external objects."[1] In this matter of
lyrical subjectivism Becquer is unique, for it cannot be found in any
other of the Spanish poets except such mystic writers as San Juan de
la Cruz or Fray Luis de Leon.

  [Footnote 1: Blanco Garcia, _op. cit._, p. 83.]

In one of Becquer's most beautiful writings in prose, in a _Prologo_
to a collection of _Cantares_ by Augusto Ferran y Fornies, our author
describes two kinds of poetry that present themselves to one's choice:
"There is a poetry which is magnificent and sonorous, the offspring of
meditation and art, which adorns itself with all the pomp of language,
moves along with a cadenced majesty, speaks to the imagination,
perfects its images, and leads it at will through unknown paths,
beguiling with its harmony and beauty." "There is another poetry,
natural, rapid, terse, which springs from the soul as an electric
spark, which strikes our feelings with a word, and flees away. Bare of
artificiality, free within a free form, it awakens by the aid of one
kindred idea the thousand others that sleep in the bottomless ocean of
fancy. The first has an acknowledged value; it is the poetry of
everybody. The second lacks any absolute standard of measurement; it
takes the proportions of the imagination that it impresses; it may be
called the poetry of poets."[1]

  [Footnote 1: _Obras_, vol. III, pp. 112-113.]

In this description of the short, terse, and striking compositions of
his friend Ferran, Becquer has written likewise the apology for his
own verse. His was a poetry of "rapid, elemental impressions." He
strikes but one chord at a time on his lyre, but he leaves you
thrilled. This extreme simplicity and naturalness of expression may be
well illustrated by the refrain of the seventy-third poem:

  _iDios mio, que solos
  Se quedan los muertos!_

His poetry has often been compared to that of Heine, whom he is said
to have imitated. Becquer did not in fact read German; but in _El
Museo Universal_, for which he was a collaborator, and in which he
published his _Rimas_, there appeared one of the first versions of the
_Intermezzo_,[1] and it is not unlikely that in imitation of the
_Intermezzo_ he was led to string his _Rimas_ like beads upon the
connecting thread of a common autobiographical theme. In the
seventy-six short poems that compose his _Rimas_, Becquer tells "a
swiftly-moving, passionate story of youth, love, treachery, despair,
and final submission." "The introductory poems are meant to represent
a stage of absorption in the beauty and complexity of the natural
world, during which the poet, conscious of his own high,
incommunicable gift, by which he sees into the life of things, is
conscious of an aimless fever and restlessness which is forever
turning delight into weariness."[2]

  [Footnote 1: Blanco Garcia, op. cit., p. 86.]

  [Footnote 2: Mrs. Ward, _loc. cit._, p. 316.]

Some of these poems are extremely beautiful, particularly the tenth.
They form a sort of prelude to the love-story itself, which begins in
our selections with the thirteenth. Not finding the realization of his
ideal in art, the poet turns to love. This passion reaches its
culminating point in the twenty-ninth selection, and with the
thirtieth misunderstanding, dissatisfaction, and sadness begin.
Despair assails him, interrupted with occasional notes of melancholy
resignation, such as are so exquisitely expressed in the fifty-third
poem, the best-known of all the poet's verse. With this poem the
love-story proper comes to a close, and "the melancholy, no doubt more
than half imaginary and poetical, of his love poems seems to broaden
out into a deeper sadness embracing life as a whole, and in which
disappointed passion is but one of the many elements."[1] "And,
lastly, regret and passion are alike hushed in the presence of that
voiceless love which shines on the face of the dead and before the
eternal and tranquil slumber of the grave."[2]

  [Footnote 1: Mrs. Ward, _loc. cit._, p.319.]

  [Footnote 2: _Ibid._, p. 316.]

Whatever Becquer may have owed to Heine, in form or substance, he was
no servile imitator. In fact, with the exception of the thirtieth, no
one of his _Rimas_ seems to be inspired directly by Heine's
_Intermezzo_. The distinguishing note in Heine's verse is sarcasm,
while that of Becquer's is pathos. Heine is the greater poet, Becquer,
the profounder artist. As Blanco Garcia well points out,[1] the moral
inclinations of the two poets were distinct and different also.
Becquer's instinct for the supernatural freed him from Heine's
skepticism and irreligion; and, though he had suffered much, he never
doubted Providence.

  [Footnote 1: op. _cit._, p.86.]

The influence of Alfred de Musset may be felt also in Becquer's
_Rimas_, particularly in the forty-second and forty-third; but in
general, the Spanish poet is "less worldly and less ardent"[1] than
the French.

  [Footnote 1: Corm, _op. cit._, p. xl.]

The _Rimas_ are written for the most part in assonanced verse. A
harmonious rhythm seems to be substituted for the music of the rhyme.
The meter, too, is very freely handled. Notwithstanding all this, the
melody of Becquer's verse is very sweet, and soon catches and charms
even the foreign ear. His _Rimas_ created a school like that inspired
by the _Doloras_ of Campoamor. But the extreme simplicity and
naturalness of Becquer's expression was difficult to reproduce without
falling into the commonplace, and his imitators have for the most part
failed.




AN UNPUBLISHED LETTER OF THE POET BECQUER, ONE OF THE FEW THAT HAVE
SURVIVED HIM, ADDRESSED TO SOR. C. FRANCO DE LA IGLESIAS, MINISTERIO
DE ULTRAMAR, MADRID. DATED IN TOLEDO, JULY 18TH, 1869.[1]

  [Footnote 1: The accentuation and punctuation of the original are
  preserved. This letter is of particular interest, showing, as it
  does, the tender solicitude of Becquer for his children, his dire
  financial straits when a loan of three or four dollars is a godsend,
  and his hesitation to call upon friends for aid even when in such
  difficulties. The letter was presented to the writer of this sketch
  by Don Francisco de Laiglesia, a distinguished Spanish writer and
  man of public life and an intimate friend of Becquer. Senor de
  Laiglesia is the owner of the magnificent portrait of Gustavo by
  Valeriano Becquer, of the beauty of which but a faint idea can be
  had from the copy of the etching by Maura, which serves as a
  frontispiece to the present volume.]


Mi muy querido amigo:

Me volvi de esa con el cuidado de los chicos y en efecto parecia
anunciarmelo apenas llegue cayo en cama el mas pequeno. Esto se
prolonga mas de lo que pensamos y he escrito a Gaspar y a Valera que
solo pago la mitad del importe del cuadro Gaspar he sabido que salio
ayer para Aguas Buenas y tardara en recibir mi carta Valera espero
enviara ese pico pero suele gastar una calma desesperante en este
apuro recurro una vez mas a vd. y aunque me duele abusar tanto de su
amistad le ruego que si es posible me envie tres o cuatro duros para
esperar el envio del dinero que aguardamos el cual es seguro pero no
sabemos que dia vendra y aqui tenemos al medico en casa y atenciones
que no esperan un momento.

Adios estoy aburrido de ver que esto nunca cesa. Adios mande vd. a su
amigo que le quiere

  Gustavo Becquer


Espresiones a Pepe Marco S/c Calle de San Ildefonso Toledo. Si le es a
vd. posible enviar eso hagalo si puede en el mismo dia que reciba esta
carta por que el apuro es de momento.




BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE


A list of the works consulted in the preparation of the sketch of
Becquer's life.


WORKS BY BECQUER

Obras de Gustavo A. Becquer. _Quinta edicion aumentada con varias
poesias y leyendas. Madrid, Libreria de Fernando Fe, 1898._ Three
volumes.

Historia de los Templos de Espana, _publicada bajo la proteccion de
SS. MM. AA. y muy reverendos senores arzobispos y obispos--dirigida
por D. Juan de la Puerto Vizcaino y D. Gustavo Adolfo Becquer. Tomo I,
Madrid, 1857. Imprenta y Estereotipia Espanola de los Senores Nieto y
Campania._ Becquer is the author of only a portion of this work--see
Introduction, p. xx.

La Ilustracion de Madrid, January 12-October 12, 1870, contains a
large number of articles by Becquer that have never been published in
book form. The same can be said of other periodicals for which Becquer
collaborated.


TRANSLATIONS

Gustave Becquer--Legendes espagnoles. _Traduction de Achille Fouquier,
dessins de S. Arcos. Paris, Librairie de Firmin-Didot et Cie, 1885_.
French.

Terrible Tales--Spanish. _W. W. Gibbings, London, W. C._ In this
collection the following seven out of the twelve tales that it
contains are by Becquer,--"The Golden Bracelet," "The Green Eyes,"
"The Passion Flower," "The White Doe," "Maese Perez, the Organist,"
"The Moonbeam," and "The Mountain of Spirits." The translation is
often inaccurate.


WORKS OR ARTICLES ON BECQUER

P. Francisco Blanco Garcia. _La Literatura Espanola en el Siglo XIX,
parte segunda, Madrid, 1891_, contains a good criticism of the
literary work of Becquer, pp. 79-91, and pp. 274-277.

Narciso Campillo. _Gustavo Adolfo Becquer_ is the title of an
excellent article on the Seville poet, by one who knew him well, in
_La Ilustracion Artistica_, Barcelona, December 27, 1886, pp. 358-360.
This number (261--Ano V) is dedicated to Becquer, and contains many
prose articles and much verse relative to him.

Achille Fouquier. _Gustave Becquer, Legendes Espagnoles. Traduction de
Achille Fouquier, dessins de S. Arcos. Paris, Firmin-Didot et Cie,
1885,--Avant-Propos_, pp. 1-19. An interesting sketch of Becquer's
life and an excellent appreciation of his style.

Jose Gestoso y Perez. _Carta a Mr. Achille Fouquier_ is the title of a
valuable article in _La Ilustracion Artistica_, Barcelona, December
27, 1886, pp. 363-366. This article contains important genealogical
matter regarding Becquer, which had not until that time been
published.

Eduardo de Lustono. Becquer is the titie of a sketch by this writer,
published in _Alrededor del Mundo_, No. 109, July 4, 1901, pp. 11-13,
and No. 110, July 11, 1901, pp. 22-23. It is largely a copy of the
article by Narciso Campillo, mentioned above, and of the following by
Rodriguez Correa.

Ramon Rodriguez Correa. _Prologo de las Obras de Gustavo A. Becquer.
Quinta edicion, Madrid, Fernando Fe, 1898_. Vol. I, pp. IX-XLV. This
is the principal biography of Becquer and the source of all the
others. Its author was Becquer's most intimate friend.

Juan Valera. In _Florilegio de Poesias Castellanas del Siglo XIX, Tomo
I, Madrid, Fernando Fe, 1902_, pp. 182-191, may be found an excellent
appreciation of the poet by one of the most capable of Spanish critics
and a personal friend of Becquer.

P. Restituto del Valle Ruiz, Agustino. In his _Estudios Literarios_,
pp. 104-116, there is a chapter devoted to Gustavo A. Becquer, which
contains an interesting critique of his poetry.

Mrs. (Mary A.) Humphrey Ward, in _Macmillan's Magazine_, No. 280,
February, 1883, pp. 305-320, has an article entitled "A Spanish
Romanticist: Gustavo Becquer." This is one of the best articles on
Becquer that have been published.



SPANISH PROSODY


The basis for the following remarks on Spanish prosody is, for the
most part, E. Benot's _Prosodia Castellana y Versification_, 3 vols.,
Madrid, 1892. Other works which have been consulted are the _Ortologia
y Arte Metrica_ of A. Bello, published in his _Obras Completas_, vol.
4, Madrid, 1890; Rengifo's _Arte Poetica Espanola_, Barcelona, 1759;
J. D. M. Ford's "Notes on Spanish Prosody," in _A Spanish Anthology_,
published by Silver, Burdett & Co., 1901; and a _Tratado de Literatura
Preceptiva_, by D. Saturnino Milego e Inglada, published at Toledo in
1887.

Spanish versification has nothing to do with the quantity of vowels
(whether long or short), which was the basis of Latin prosody.

There are four important elements in Spanish versification. Of these
four elements two are essential, and the other two are usually
present.

The essential elements, without which Spanish verse cannot exist,
are--

  I. A determined number of syllables per line.

  II. A rhythmic distribution of the accents in the line.

The additional elements usually present in Spanish poetical
compositions are--

  III. Caesural pauses.

  IV. Rhyme.


I. SYLLABIFICATION

Consonants.--In verse the same rules hold as in prose for the
distribution of consonants in syllables.

Vowels.--If there were but one vowel in a syllable, Spanish
syllabification would be easy; but sometimes two or more vowels are
found either between consonants, or at the beginning or at the end of
a word. When such is the case, intricacies arise, for sometimes the
contiguous vowels are pronounced in a single syllable and sometimes
they are divided into separate syllables.

The contiguous vowels may belong to a single word (see A); or they may
be the final vowel or vowels of one word and the initial vowel or
vowels of a following word or words (see B).

A. _Diphthongization_,--If two contiguous vowels of a single word are
pronounced in but one syllable they form a diphthong, e.g. _hu^esped_.

B. _Synalepha_.--If two or more contiguous vowels belonging to two or
more words are pronounced in a single syllable, they form synalepha.

  Ex. _Yo se^un himno gigante y^extrano_, p. 164, I, l. 1.

Since Spanish verse depends upon a determined number of syllables per
line, _diphthongization_ and _synalepha_ are important factors in
versification.


A. DIPHTHONGIZATION

Mute _h_ between vowels is disregarded and does not prevent
diphthongization, e.g. _a^h^ora_, _re^h^usar_.

The separation of two vowels that are usually united in one syllable
is called _diaeresis_, e.g. _vi|oleta_.

The union in one syllable of two vowels that are usually in separate
syllables is called _synaeresis_, e.g. _ca^os_.

1. THE TWENTY-FIVE POSSIBLE COMBINATIONS OP VOWELS IN DIPHTHONGS

The vowels may be divided into strong vowels (a, e, o) and weak vowels
(i, u). For purposes of versification y as a vowel may be treated as
i. The five vowels (a, e, o, i, u) taken in pairs may form diphthongs
in twenty-five possible combinations, as follows:

a. Pairs of two weak vowels: ui, iu, ii, uu.

b. Pairs of two strong vowels:

  { ae, ao, aa,
  { ea, eo, ee,
  { oa, oe, oo.

c. Pairs of a strong vowel plus a weak vowel

  { ai, au,
  { ei, eu,
  { oi, ou.

d. Pairs of a weak vowel plus a strong vowel

  { ua, ue, uo,
  { ia, ie, io.

NOTE: In diphthongs a dominates o and e; and o dominates e. Any strong
vowel dominates a weak one.

  Ex. In Bo^abdil, if a were not dominant, the diphthong would be
  dissolved.


2. DIPHTHONGS AND WORD ACCENTUATION

There are with regard to accent three possible conditions under which
two contiguous vowels may occur within a word.

a. The contiguous vowels may precede the accented syllable.

b. One of the contiguous vowels may be accented.

c. The contiguous vowels may come after the accented syllable.


a. Two contiguous vowels before the accent.

(1) Of the twenty-five possible combinations all are admissible in
diphthongs in a syllable preceding the accented syllable.

  Ex. _Habra po^esta_, p. 165, IV, l. 4.

(a) Diaeresis may be employed to dissolve the diphthong.

  Ex. _Sobre una vi|oleta_, p. 169, XIII, l. 8.

b. One of two contiguous vowels accented.

(1) _When two contiguous vowel's are strong._

(a) There is no diphthong if one of two contiguous strong vowels
receives the accent.

  Ex. _Chispe|ando el sol hiere_, p. 173, XXVI I, l. 17.

  Ex. _Tu, sombra a|erea que, cuantas veces_, p. 170, XV, l. 7.

By synaeresis, however, a diphthong may be formed, especially in the
combinations a^o, a^e, o^e--_c^a^o^s, c^a^e, ro^e_. But in order to
diphthongize oa, ea, and eo, when the accent naturally falls on the
first vowel, the accent must shift to the second, which is a dominant
vowel. Such diphthongization is harsh. For example, _loa_ would shift
the accent from o to a in order to form a diphthong. The accent would
also shift in _cre^a, fe^o_.

(2) _When one of the contiguous vowels is weak and the other strong._

(a) There is no diphthong if an accented weak vowel precedes a strong.

  Ex. _Yo, que a tus ojos en mi agoni|a_, p. 171, XV, l. 18.
  Synaeresis is, however, sometimes employed to overcome this rule.
  The accent must then shift.

  Ex. _Habi^a llegado una nave._ Calderon.

(b) There is no diphthong if an accented weak vowel follows a strong.

  Ex. _?Como puede re|ir?_ p. 182, XLIX, l. 4.

Synaeresis serves sometimes to overcome this rule. The result is
usually harsh.

  Ex. _En re^ir a costa ajena, les prepara._

(c) If an accented strong vowel precedes a weak, they form a
diphthong. The diphthong is rarely dissolved, and is usually marked
with a diaresis, if dissolution takes place.

  Ex. _Beso del aura, onda de luz_, p. 170, XV, l. 5.

(d) If an accented strong vowel follows a weak they may or may not
form a diphthong.

  Ex. _Por una sonrisa, un ci^elo_, p. 172, XXIII, l. 2. [Diphthong.]

  Ex. _Domando el rebelde, mezquino idi|oma_, p. 164, I, l. 6. [No
  diphthong.]

Diaeresis or synaeresis may usually be employed according to the case.

Thus, _fiel_ becomes by diaeresis _fi|el_, and _br|ioso_ becomes by
synaeresis _bri^oso_.

It should be remembered that in some words the accentuation is
variable, while in others it is fixed.

There are two classes of words that have a variable accentuation:
first, those in which an unaccented weak vowel is followed by an
accented strong vowel, e.g. _majestu^oso_, _majestu|oso_; second,
those in which an accented strong vowel is followed by an unaccented
strong vowel, e.g. _tra|e, tra^e._

  Ex. _Cre^es que la afe|an_. Becquer.
     _Cre|es que suspirando pasa el viento_, p. 171, XVI, l. 3.

Etymological conditions often determine whether or not a diphthong is
formed.

ie and ue, derived from the Latin e and o respectively, form
indissoluble diphthongs.

The ending -ion for substantives is usually a diphthong and rarely
suffers dissolution.

Synaeresis may be employed to unite in a single syllable two
contiguous vowels (unaccented weak + accented strong) that are
separated on account of etymology, or, in the case of derivatives,
analogy with the original word; but diaeresis is employed very rarely
to dissolve a proper diphthongal combination (unaccented weak +
accented strong).

For example, _di|ario_ by analogy with _dia_, and _fi|o_ from the
Latin _fidavit_, have ordinarily the _i_ in separate syllables, but a
diphthong may be formed by synaeresis.

(3) _When the two contiguous vowels are weak_.

(a) Two contiguous weak vowels with the accent on the first form an
indissoluble diphthong, e.g. _mu^y_.

(b) Two contiguous weak vowels with the accent on the second may or
may not form a diphthong.

  Ex. _Si antes no juras que por ru^in falsia_. Hermosilla.
  [Diphthong.]

  Ex. _Con sus mil rue|idos_, p. 188, LXXIII, l. 19, [No diphthong.]

c. Two contiguous vowels after the accented syllable.

(1) Two contiguous strong vowels after the accented syllable naturally
form a diphthong.

  Ex. _Tu, sombra aere^a que, cuantas veces_, p. 170, XV, l. 7.

Diaeresis may be employed to dissolve the diphthong.

(2) If a strong vowel is followed by a weak vowel after the accented
syllable, they form a diphthong, e.g. _hablaba^is, amara^is_.

This diphthong is easily dissolved.

(3) If a weak vowel is followed by a strong vowel after the accented
syllable, they form a diphthong, e.g. _histor^i^a, ans^i^a_.

  Ex. _De la brisa nocturna al tenu^e soplo_, p. 192, LXXV, l. 6.

The diphthong may, however, be dissolved, e.g. _estatu|a, tenu|e,
nadi|e_.

3. TRIPHTHONGS AND COMBINATIONS OP THREE OR MORE CONTIGUOUS VOWELS

If three vowels belonging to the same word are contiguous, one of them
must be accented. There are then three possible arrangements.

(i) Three contiguous vowels of a word with the accent on the first,
e.g. _traeos_.

(ii) Three contiguous vowels of a word with the accent on the second,
e.g. creia, _buey_.

(iii) Three contiguous vowels with the accent on the third, e.g.
_rehui_.

Each of the above arrangements has two combinations of accented and
unaccented vowels to which the rules for diphthongs may be applied. In
(i) there will be a combination of two vowels with the first accented,
plus a combination of two vowels after the accent. In _traeos_, for
example, the a and e would probably be in separate syllables by b (1)
(a), and eo would probably form a diphthong by c (1). _Traeos_ would,
then, probably be a dissyllable.

In (ii) there will be a combination of two vowels with the accent an
the second, and one of two vowels with the accent on the first. In
creia, for example, the e and i would be in separate syllables by b
(2) (b), and the i and a would probably be in separate syllables also
by b (2)(a). Therefore, _creia_ would probably be a trisyllable. In
_cambiaos_ the i and a might form one syllable or two by b (2) (_d_),
and the a and o would probably be in separate syllables by b (1) (a).
Therefore, in _cambiaos_ the combination iao might form a dissyllable
or a trisyllable.

In (iii) there will be a combination of two vowels before the accent,
and one of two vowels with the second accented. In _rehui_, for
example, the e and u might be in the same syllable by a (1), or in
separate syllables by dieresis by a (1) (a), and the u and i might be
in separate syllables or not by b (3) (b). Therefore, _rehui_ might be
a monosyllable, a dissyllable, or a trisyllable.

Other combinations of three vowels may be analyzed in a similar way,
as may also combinations of more than three vowels, e.g. _creiais_,
etc.


B. SYNALEPHA

Between the contiguous vowels of separate words there may occur
synalepha (which corresponds to diphthongization within a word), or
hiatus (which is similar to diaeresis within a word).

  Ex. _Abre^una^eternidad_, p. 178, XXXVI I, l. 22. _?A que me lo
  decis? lo se^:^es mudable_, p. 179, XXXIX, l. 1. [Synalepha.]

  Ex. _Como la onda^azul, en cuya cresta_, p. 173, XXVII, l. 16.
  [Hiatus.]

The vowels contracted by synalepha are each pronounced, except when
the same vowel is repeated, when only a prolonged sound is heard, as
in _onda^azul_ or _se^es_ above.

Synalepha may join into a single syllable two, three, four, and even
five vowels. The union of two vowels (diphthongal synalepha) and the
union of three vowels (triphthongal synalepha) are the most common.

A pause due to a break in sense does not prevent synalepha. Mute h is
disregarded in the verse and does not prevent synalepha.

  Ex. _Capaz de encerrarlo, y apenas ioh^hermosa!_ p. 164, I, l. 10.



DIPHTHONGAL SYNALEPHA


Synalepha takes place between two contiguous unaccented vowels
belonging to separate words.

  Ex. _Abre^una^eternidad_, p. 178, XXXVII, l. 22.

Synalepha occurs when the final vowel of the first word is accented.

  Ex. _Te vi^un punto, y, flotando ante mis ojos_, p. 169, XIV, l. 1.

Synalepha usually occurs when the initial vowel of the second word is
accented, especially when the first word ends in a weak vowel, and
also in the combinations aa, oa, oa, ea, eo, ee.

  Ex. _Me parece^en el cielo de la tarde_, p. 169, XIII, l. 11.

NOTE: Synalepha is possible with the other combinations, but hiatus is
preferable even with the above combinations, in a syllable on which
the rhythmical accent falls (see under Rhythmic Accent).

  Ex. _Despierta, hablas, y al hablar, vibrantes_, p. 174, XXVII, l.
  23.

  Ex. _Como la ola que a la playa_ viene, p. 178, XXXVII, l. 19.



TRIPHTHONGAL SYNALEPHA


There is always triphthongal synalepha when a is the middle vowel; or
when o or e is the middle vowel, except in the following combinations,
aoa, aoo, ooo, aea, aeo, oea, oeo.

  Ex. _Silenciosa a expirar_, p. 178, XXXVII, l. 20.

There is never triphthongal synalepha when an accented weak vowel
stands between two strong vowels. Therefore the conjunctions y and u
prevent triphthongal synalepha.

  Ex. _Y de purpura y oro la matiza_, p. 168, IX, l. 4.

There may be triphthongal synalepha when i (y) is the middle vowel, if
u precedes it, or i follows it.

  Ex. _Fui diestro, fui valiente, fui arrogante_. Cervantes.

When u is the middle vowel there may be synalepha if i follows it. The
construction is very rare.

There is no synalepha with a word beginning with hue.

  Ex. _Mucho nuestro huesped tarda_. Tirso de Molina.

In the following cases the groups of vowels which would usually make
triphthongal synalepha are pronounced in two syllables:

(1) When the first word of the group ends in two vowels which do not
form a diphthong.

  Ex. _Que aun teni|a^abiertos_, p. 187, LXXIII, l. 2.

(2) When the two initial vowels of the second word do not form a
diphthong.

  Ex. _Tu, sombra^a|erea que, cuantas veces_, p. 170, XV, l. 7.

(3) When the first word ends in a diphthong and the second begins with
a vowel in a constituent syllable (i.e. a syllable on which the
rhythmical accent falls).

  Ex. _Tan gran designio honra tus audacias._

If the accented vowel is not in a constituent syllable synalepha may
occur.

  Ex. _Mientras la cencia a descubrir no alcance_, p. 165, IV, l. 13.

(4) When the first word ends in a single vowel, and the second word
begins with a diphthong in a constituent syllable.

  Ex. _Tu, proceloso austro que derribas_.

(3) and (4) might well be considered as cases of hiatus.



SYNALEPHA BETWEEN FOUR OR MORE VOWELS


This is less common, yet it exists.

  Ex. _No^h^a^y^amor donde no hay celos_. Lope de Vega.




HIATUS

Hiatus is most frequently found between words having a close
syntactical relation, particularly if the initial vowel of the second
word is in a constituent syllable. It may occur between the article
and its substantive, the possessive adjective and its substantive, a
preposition and its object, the negatives _no_ and _ni_ and a
following vowel; and after the conjunctions _y, que, si_, and other
words having a weak accent such as _desde, coma, todo, otro, cuando_,
etc.

Hiatus is most likely to occur when the accented vowel is the initial
vowel of the final word in a phrase or verse, or of a word that has a
strongly accented position in the verse; as, for example, when the
syllable is the next to the last syllable in a verse, or is the fourth
or eighth syllable of a hendecasyllabic verse of the second class.

  Ex. _Rumor de besos y batir de alas_, p. 168, X, l. 6.

  Ex. _Como la ola que a la playa viene_, p. 178, XXXVII, l. 19.

In the above-mentioned case, the phrase _de^oro_ is usually joined by
synalepha.

  Ex. _Mi frente es palida, mis trenzas de^oro._ Becquer.

Hiatus is, however, sometimes observed in this phrase.

  Ex. _De plumas y de oro_, p. 180, XL, l. 28.

When both vowels are accented hiatus is more common than synalepha,
even though there is no close syntactical relation, although the
vowels may be joined by synalepha if they do not come in a constituent
syllable.

  Ex. _iOh ya isla catolica patente!_ Herrera. [Hiatus.]

  Ex. _?Sabes tu^a donde va?_ p. 178, XXXVIII, l. 4. [Synalepha.]



II. RHYTHMIC ACCENT


The second essential element of Spanish verse is a rhythmic
distribution of accents within a line. Words have an accent of their
own and another stronger accent on account of their position in a
verse.

This extraordinary accentual stress, which strengthens periodically
certain naturally accented syllables of a verse, is known as _rhythmic
accent_. It plays somewhat the same role as did quantity in Latin
verse. All other accents and pauses in the verse are subservient to
the rhythmic accent.

Spanish verse being accentual, however, and not quantitative, the
terms used to determine the regular recurrence of long and short
syllables in Latin verse are not very applicable to it, and few
compositions are regular in the arrangement of the stress.


A. LATIN TERMS OF VERSIFICATION APPLIED TO SPANISH VERSE

As Latin terms of versification are sometimes applied to Spanish
verse, the following rules may be helpful.

A _trochaic_ octosyllabic line, for example, substituting stress for
quantity, would be scanned

  / -- | / -- | / -- | / --,

with the stress on the first, third, fifth, and seventh syllables.

_Iambic_ verse would have a regular alternation of unaccented and
accented syllables, -- / -- /, etc.

_Dactylic_ verse would have a regular recurrence of an accented
syllable followed by two unaccented syllables, etc.

  / -- -- | / -- -- |, etc.

_Amphibrachic_ verse would be formed by a regular recurrence of three
syllables of which the middle one would be stressed, -- / --. This
construction is sometimes followed in lines of twelve syllables (p.
164, I, 1. 2), and also in lines of six syllables (p. 167, VII, 1.-4).

_Anapestic_ verse consists of a regular recurrence of two unstressed
syllables preceding a stressed syllable, -- -- /. This is sometimes
found in ten-syllable lines (p. 164, I, 1. i).


B. SPANISH VERSE ENDINGS

An accented word is called _aguda_ when it has the accent on the last
syllable, e.g. _verdad, luz, yo_; _llana_ (or grave) when it has the
accent on the penult, e.g. _trabajo, fruto_; _esdrujula_ when it has
the accent on the antepenult, e.g. _limpido, pajaro, portico_.

A verse is called _agudo, llano_ (or grave), or _esdrujulo_ according
to whether its final word is _aguda, llana_ (or grave), or
_esdrujula_.

In a _verso agudo_ the last syllable counts for two syllables.
Therefore, _Ni tu ni yo jamas_, p. 177, XXXIII, l. 2, is a
heptasyllable.

In a _verso llano_ (grave) the number of syllables does not change.
Therefore, _Detras del abanico_, p. 180, XL, l. 27, is a
heptasyllable.

In a _verso esdrujulo_, the intermediate syllable between the accented
syllable and the final syllable does not count, either in enumerating
the syllables in the verse or for the rhyme (assonance). Therefore,
_Umbrales de su portico_, p. 180, XL, l. 32, is a heptasyllable.


C. THE DISTRIBUTION OF RHYTHMIC ACCENTS

In verses of different length there are different rules with regard to
the distribution of accents, but the following general rules should be
observed.

Every verse must be accented upon the syllable nominally preceding the
final syllable.

NOTE: It should be borne in mind that the actual final syllable in a
versa _agudo_ counts as two syllables, and that the next to the last
actual syllable in a verso _esdrujulo_ does not count.

Besides the necessary accent on the next to the last syllable, all
verses of seven syllables or more must have other necessary accents,
which are determined by the number of syllables in the line.

The syllable directly preceding the one that has the rhythmical accent
should never be accented, for it obstructs the proper accentuation of
the constituent syllable. A syllable so accented is called
_obstruccionista_.


D. THE NUMBER OF SYLLABLES IN SPANISH VERSE

Spanish verse may consist of any number of syllables from two up to
sixteen. All must have an accent on the next to the last syllable.

_Dissyllabic Verse_: A dissyllabic verse may be composed of a single
word (either _aguda_, _llana_, or _esdrujula_).

  Ex. _iDuerme!_ p. 173, XXVII, l. 13.

There can be no supernumerary accents.

_Trisyllabic Verse_: A verse of three syllables can have no
supernumerary accent, for the accent would be _obstruccionista_.

  Ex. _Suspira._

_Tetrasyllable Verse_: A verse of four syllables must have an accent
on the third syllable. There may or may not be a supernumerary accent
on the first.

  Ex. _De ese brio._

_Pentasyllabic Verse_: A verse of five syllables must have an accent
on the fourth. It may or may not have a supernumerary accent on the
first or second syllable.

  Ex. _Rumor sonoro_, p. I 70, XV, l. 3.

_Adonic verse_ is a pentasyllable with necessary accents on the first
and fourth syllables.

  Ex. _Cefiro blando_. Villegas.

_Hexasyllabic Verse_: A verse of six syllables must have an accent on
the fifth. There may or may not be supernumerary accents, but never on
the fourth syllable.

                       5
  Ex. _Y^entre^aquella sombra
        2         5
      Veiase^a^intervalos
           3     5
      Dibujarse rigida
          2          5
      La forma del cuerpo_, p. 188, LXXIII, ll. 13-16.

_Heptasyllabic Verse_: A verse of seven syllables must have an accent
on the sixth, and at least one other necessary accent, which may be on
any syllable except the fifth.

       2               6
  Ex. _Su mano^entre mis manos,
          2           6
      Sus ojos en mis ojos_, p. 179, XL, ll. 1-2.

_Octosyllabic Verse_: A verse of eight syllables must have an accent
on the seventh, and at least one other accent, which may fall on any
syllable except the sixth.


         1        4       7
  Ex. _Hojas del arbol caidas
          2         5     7
      Juguetes al viento son._ Espronceda.

_Hendecasyllabic verse_: There are two classes of hendecasyllables.

_First Class_: Verses of eleven syllables which have the sixth
syllable and the tenth syllable stressed are hendecasyllables of the
first class.

  Ex. _Los invisibles 'atomos del 'aire_, p. 168, X, l. 1.

Hendecasyllables of the first class may have supernumerary accents on
other syllables, provided they do not fall upon the fifth or ninth.

  Ex. _Los sus'pires son 'aire, y van al 'aire.
      Las 'lagrimas son 'agua, y van al 'mar._ p. 178, XXXVIII, ll.
      1-2.

_Second Class_: Hendecasyllables of the second class are
eleven-syllable verses with the accent on the fourth, eighth, and
tenth syllables. There may be accents on other syllables, provided
that they be not _obstruccionistas_.

  Ex. _Olas gi'gantes qu^e^os rom'peis bra'mando,_ p. 183, LII, l. 1.

If it is difficult to classify a hendecasyllable because it has
accents on the fourth, sixth, eighth, and tenth syllables, one must
decide on the prominence of the accents from pauses, or from emphasis.
The hendecasyllable,

  _La vida es 'corta, 'si; muy 'largo el 'arte,_

would belong to the first class on account of the emphasis of _si_,
while the verse,

  _La vida es 'corta, 'corta; 'largo el 'arte,_

would belong to the second class on account of the pause after the
fourth and the emphasis on the eighth. The accent on the sixth is,
then, not constituent, but supernumerary.

All meters thus far have

Obligatory (constituent) accents.

Facultative (supernumerary) accents.

A necessary termination in a combination of an unaccented plus an
accented plus an unaccented syllable (-- / --). The dissyllable is the
only exception.

The facultative accent is opposed to the regular recurrence in each
line of dissyllabic and trisyllabic elements, which elements caused
the rhythm of Latin verse.

Spanish rhythm is a rhythm of series, of strophes, not a rhythm of
regularly recurring accents within a verse.

Verses of ten or twelve syllables, however, lend themselves more
readily to rhythm from regularly recurring stress.

_Decasyllabic Verse_: A verse of ten syllables may be formed by the
triple repetition of the trisyllable -- -- /. One extra unaccented
syllable is admissible when the verse is _llano_; and two when the
verse is _esdrujulo_.

Scheme:

  -- -- / -- -- / -- -- ,        _agudo_.
  -- -- / -- -- , -- -- , --     _llano_.
  -- -- / -- -- / -- -- / -- --  _esdrujulo_.

_Dodecasyllable Verse_: A verse of twelve syllables, with
the stress on the second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh syllables,
makes a dodecasyllable of amphibrachs. This dodecasyllable
has a short metrical pause after the sixth syllable, and a longer
one after the twelfth.

Scheme:

  -- / -- -- / -- || -- / -- -- /      _agudo_.
  -- / -- -- / -- || -- / -- -- / --    _llano_.
  -- / -- -- /      -- / -- -- / -- --  _esdrujulo_.

Verses of different length do not readily intermingle. There are some
measures, however, which are used much together.

Verses of eleven syllables are used with those of seven or of five
syllables.

Verses of eight syllables are used with those of four syllables.

Verses of ten syllables are used with those of twelve (p. 164, I); and
also with those of six (p. 167, VII). These meters lend themselves to
regularly recurring stress more readily than any others.




III. CAESURAL PAUSES


The caesura is an important, though not essential, element in Spanish
verse. In verses of eleven or twelve syllables, however, the caesura
is usually employed to give a break in a determined place. The caesura
requires a strong accent on the syllable preceding it, and does not
prevent synalepha.

  Ex. _Si al resonar confus|o^a tus espaldas_, p. 171, XVI, l. 7.

  Ex. _Sabe que, ocul|to^entre las verdes hojas_, p. 171, XVI, l.5.

The disposition of the caesural pauses determines the harmony of the
versification, and usually varies with the accents so as to avoid
monotony in the verse.



IV. RHYME


N.B. For purposes of Rhyme, words may be divided into two classes:

_First_, words ending in a vowel.

Second, words ending in a consonant.

Rhymes are called feminine, if the rhyme words end in a vowel.

Rhymes are called masculine, if the rhyme words end in a consonant.

NOTE: Final s and final n, especially in the plural of nouns and in
verbs, do not count. Therefore, _penas_ and _arenas_ would form a
feminine rhyme.

There are two kinds of rhyme: Consonance and Assonance.


A. CONSONANCE

_Consonantal rhyme_ is one in which all the letters, vowels and
consonants, are the same from the accented syllable to the end of the
word, e.g. _bruma--espuma_; _flor--amor_.

In consonantal rhyme both consonants and vowels should agree exactly
(_sonante--errante_); b and v can, however, rhyme together, since they
represent the same sound, e.g. _estaba--esclava_; _haba--clava_.

The following are a few general rules for consonantal rhyme.

A word should not rhyme with itself. Sometimes, however, a simple word
rhymes with a derivative (_menor--pormenor_) or two derivatives with
each other (_menosprecio--desprecio_).

The tenses of verbs which end in -aba, -ando, -ais, -eis; the present
and past participles of regular verbs; adverbs with the termination
-mente; verbal nouns ending in -miento, -cion, and other similar
endings,--should not rhyme together.

Words similar in sound and form but distinct in meaning may rhyme.

  _son_ ('sound')--_son_ ('are')

If an unaccented weak vowel (i, u) precedes or follows a strong vowel
in the same syllable of a word, it is absorbed by the strong vowel,
and does not count in the rhyme. Therefore, _vuelo_ and _cielo_ rhyme;
also _muestra_ and _diestra_.


B. ASSONANCE

When the vowels from the accented syllable to the end of the word are
the same, but the consonants are different, the rhyme is called
assonance. Therefore, _inflaman_ and _pasa_ assonate in a-a; _negros_
and _creo_ in e-o.

In words accented on the last syllable (_agudas_), the assonance is
that of the last syllable only, e.g. _perdon--espiro_; _azul--tu_.

In words accented on the antepenult (_esdrujulas_) or on a preceding
syllable, only the accented syllable and the final syllable count for
purposes of assonance. Therefore, _fabula_ and _lagrimas_ assonate in
a-a; _tremulo_ and _vertigo_ assonate in e-o.

Words accented on the last syllable (_agudas_) cannot assonate with
words accented on the penult (_llanas_), or with those accented on the
antepenult (_esdrujulas_) or upon any preceding syllable.

In words _llanas_ or _esdrujulas_ the assonance is of two vowels only.
In diphthongs the accented vowel only is considered if the diphthong
occur in an accented syllable. Therefore, _verte_ and _duermes_
assonate in e-e; _baile_ and _parte_ assonate in a-e.

Words _llanas_ may assonate with words accented on the antepenult
(_esdrujulas_). Therefore, _portico_ and _olmos_ assonate in o-o.

For purposes of assonance little use is made of words accented on a
syllable preceding the antepenult.

In a final accented or unaccented syllable u and i are absorbed, for
purposes of assonance, by a preceding or following a, o, or e.
Therefore, _sabia_ and _gratia_ assonate in a-a; _igual_ and _mar_
assonate in a, _pleita_ and _pliega_ assonate in e-a.

If in assonance a weak vowel is united in a diphthong with a strong
vowel, the assonance is called _compound assonance_, e.g.
_guarda--fatua_.

Assonance between two single vowels is called _simple assonance_, e.g.
_sangre--trae_.

This distinction is of little value, however, for verses in simple and
compound assonance alternate constantly.

In the case of two strong vowels forming a diphthong after an accented
syllable, the following rules apply.

a in a final unaccented syllable predominates over a preceding or
succeeding o in the same syllable. Therefore, _Astarloa_ and _Danao_
assonate in a-a.

a in a final unaccented syllable predominates over a preceding or
following e in the same syllable. Therefore, _corporea_ and _rosea_
assonate in o-a.

o in a final unaccented syllable predominates over a preceding e in
the same syllable. Therefore, _oleo_ and _erroneo_ assonate in o-o;
but o in a final unaccented syllable is dominated by a following e in
the same syllable, and the e counts in the assonance. Therefore,
_heroe_ and _veces_ assonate in e-e.

When two weak vowels (i, u) are united in a diphthong, the second
predominates. Thus _triunfo_ and _chulo_ assonate in u-o; _cuido_ and
_bendito_ assonate in i-o.

There are twenty possible assonances in Spanish: a, o, e, i, u, a-a,
a-e, a-o, e-a, e-e, e-o, o-a, o-e, o-o, i-a, i-e, i-o, u-a, u-e, u-o.

Words that have in the final unaccented syllable i or u, not in
diphthongs, are considered for purposes of assonance as if ending in e
or o respectively. Therefore, _facil_ and _nave_ assonate in a-e;
_espiritu_ and _liquido_, in i-o.

If ai occurs in a syllable after an a in the accented syllable, the i
rather than the a of the diphthong counts in the assonance. Therefore,
_cantares_ and _trocabais_ assonate in a-e. If the accented vowel is
not a, the a of ai counts in the assonance. Therefore, _Vicenta_ and
_quisierais_ assonate in e-a.

Consonantal rhyme should not be introduced in compositions written in
assonance. This rule is not always observed (see pp. 183-184, LIII).

The assonance of alternate lines (the even numbers) is the rule in
modern Spanish. If the composition is short the same assonance may be
kept throughout.

Blank Verse.--Verses which lack both consonantal rhyme and assonance
occur in Spanish, and are called _versos sueltos_ (or _libres_).
Compositions in blank verse are, however, extremely difficult to write
in Spanish, and are therefore comparatively rare.


STROPHES

The strophe is frequently of arbitrary length, yet when the poet has
once fixed the measure of his strophe he is supposed to preserve the
same measure throughout. The following are some of the strophic
arrangements in Spanish.

_Pareados_ are pairs of contiguous verses of the same number of
syllables, which rhyme[1] together in pairs.

  [Footnote 1: By _rhyme_ hereafter shall be understood _consonantal_
  rhyme, unless otherwise indicated.]

_Tercetos_ are a series of strophes, in the first of which the first
verse rhymes with the third, and, from the second strophe on, the
first and third verse of each successive strophe rhyme with the middle
verse of the preceding strophe. This form of verse is known in Italian
as _terza rima_. The composition ends with a _serventesio_ (see
below), of which the first and third verses rhyme with the middle
verse of the preceding strophe. The rhyme-scheme, then, would be a b
a, b c b, c d c, etc., d e d e.

_Cuartetas_, properly so called, are strophes of four eight-syllable
verses, of which the second verse rhymes (or is in assonance) with the
fourth. _Cuarteta_ is likewise a general name given to strophes of
four verses.

_Serventesios_ are strophes of four hendecasyllables, of which the
first rhymes or assonates with the third, and the second with the
fourth.

_Redondillas_ are strophes of four eight-syllable (or sometimes
six-syllable) verses which rhyme as follows: a b b a.

_Cuartetos_ are strophes of four hendecasyllables with the
rhyme-scheme a b b a. It is not customary to put a final word that is
_aguda_ in the uneven verses of compositions written in
hendecasyllables, or in verses that rhyme with them. Sometimes the
four verses are esdrujulos.

_Romances_, which are the most used of all forms, need not be written
in _cuartetas_. It is sufficient that the even verses be in assonance
and the uneven verses free. Romances, properly so called, are composed
of octosyllabic verses.

_Romancillos_ are romances composed of verses with less than eight
syllables.

_Romances heroicos_ are romances composed of hendecasyllabic verses,
all of which are _llanos_.

_Quintillas_ are combinations of five verses that have but two rhymes,
of which one occurs three times and the other twice. These verses may
rhyme at the will of the poet, provided that three verses having the
same rhyme do not follow each other successively. Of the possible
arrangements the following occur most frequently: a a b b a, a b b a
a, a b a b a, a b a b b.

_Sextinas_ are usually composed of six hendecasyllabic verses in which
a _serventesio_ is followed by a _pareado_.

The first, third, and fifth verses, however, may rhyme together, and
the second, fourth, and sixth.

There are also _sextinas_ which have the third and sixth verses with a
consonantal rhyme in words that are _agudas_, while the first and
second, and the fourth and fifth, form _pareados_.

In compositions written in _sextinas_ the succeeding strophes have the
same arrangement as the first.

Octavas:

_Octavas de Arte mayor_ are composed of eight dodecasyllables divided
into two equal hemistichs, with the accents on the second, fifth,
seventh, and eleventh syllables. The first verse rhymes with the
fourth, fifth, and eighth; the second with the third; and the sixth
with the seventh. Sometimes the second rhymes with the fourth, the
fifth with the eighth, the first with the third, the sixth with the
seventh.

_Octavas reales_ are strophes of eight hendecasyllabic verses
(_llanos_), of which the first six rhyme alternately and the last two
form a _pareado_.

When _octavas_ of this form have eight-syllable verses or less, they
are called _octavillas_.

_Octavas_ and _Octavillas Italianas_:

There are four variants, but all must have the fourth and eighth
verses _agudos_.

_First variant_: There is no _verso libre_, and the rhyme-scheme is a
b b c a d d c.

_Second variant_: The first and fifth verses are _libres_ and the
others rhyme 1 b b c 5 d d c. This form is the most used of all.

_Third variant_: All the verses are _libres_ except the fourth and
eighth.

_Fourth variant_: The rhymes have some other arrangement than those
mentioned in the three preceding cases.

_Decimas_ are strophes of ten octosyllabic verses with the
rhyme-scheme a b b a a c c d d c.

Thus far all the compositions treated have been strophes, of which all
the lines have the same number of syllables.

The most common strophes having an unequal number of syllables in the
component verses are as follows:

_Endechas reales_ are _cuartetas_ in which three heptasyllables are
followed by a hendecasyllable. The even verses are usually in
assonance, although the verses may have the rhyme-scheme a b a b.

The _Lira_ is a strophe of five verses, of which the first, third, and
fourth are heptasyllables, and the second and fifth are
hendecasyllables. The rhyme-scheme is a b a b b.

_Seguidillas_ are strophes composed of seven verses, three of which
are heptasyllables and four pentasyllables. The first, third, and
sixth verses are _libres_, the second and fourth have the same
assonance, and the fifth and seventh another distinct assonance.

_Silvas_ are series of strophes composed of hendecasyllables and
heptasyllables of unequal number and unevenly distributed with a free
arrangement of rhymes. Every verse should rhyme with another, yet
sometimes a verse is left unrhymed in long compositions.

The _Sonnet_ is taken from the Italian and has the same general forms.
It is written in hendecasyllables, and is always divided into four
parts--two quatrains and two tercets.

_Versos sueltos_ (blank verse) are verses which do not assonate with
the other contiguous verses, or with the nearest words in which the
sense demands a pause.

There are many other and very artificial forms that exist, but their
treatment would be irrelevant here. During the nineteenth century the
caprice of the poet invented many new forms of which the arrangement
is evident at a glance.

In closing, it should be said that this study of Spanish prosody,
which is primarily intended as an aid to the reading of Becquer's
poetry contained in this volume, is necessarily too brief to be
exhaustive, and many things are purposely omitted, as, for example,
certain unusual forms of verse such as the nine-syllable verse or that
of more than twelve syllables. Wherever it has been found convenient,
references have been made to Becquer's poems to illustrate points of
versification.




LEGENDS, TALES, AND POEMS
BY BECQUER



DESDE MI CELDA


(_Cartas Literarias_)


CARTA SEXTA

Queridos amigos: Hara cosa de dos a tres anos, tal vez leerian[1]
ustedes en los periodicos de Zaragoza[2] la relacion de un crimen que
tuvo lugar en uno de los pueblecillos de estos contornos. Tratabase
del asesinato de una pobre vieja a quien sus convecinos acusaban de
bruja. Ultimamente, y por una coincidencia extraiia, he tenido ocasion
de conocer los detalles y la historia circunstanciada de un hecho que
se comprende apenas en mitad de un siglo tan despreocupado como el
nuestro.[3]

  [Footnote 1: leerian ustedes = 'you may have read.']

  [Footnote 2: Zaragoza = 'Saragossa.' A Spanish city of some 99,000
  inhabitants, capital of the province of the same name, situated on
  the Ebro river at its junction with the Huerva. It is famous for its
  two cathedrals, _El Pilar_ and La Seo, and for its obstinate and
  heroic resistance at the time of the siege by the French in 1808.]

  [Footnote 3: The belief in witchcraft is still prevalent in some
  quarters, and as late as 1863 a man was drowned at Hedingham, in
  Essex, Eng., for being a wizard, his accusers and persecutors being
  village tradesmen. See Brewer, _Dictionary of Miracles_, Phila.,
  Lippincott & Co., 1884, p. 345.]

Ya estaba para acabar el dia. El cielo, que desde el amanecer se
mantuvo cubierto y nebuloso, comenzaba a obscurecerse a medida que el
sol, que antes transparentaba su luz a traves de las nieblas, iba
debilitandose, cuando, con la esperanza de ver su famoso castillo como
termino y remate de mi artistica expedicion, deje a Litago[1] para
encaminarme a Trasmoz,[2] pueblo del que me separaba una distancia de
tres cuartos de hora por el camino mas corto. Como de costumbre, y
exponiendome, a trueque de examinar a mi gusto los parajes mas asperos
y accidentados, a las fatigas y la incomodidad de perder el camino por
entre aquellas zarzas y penascales, tome el mas dificil, el mas dudoso
y mas largo, y lo perdi en efecto, a pesar de las minuciosas
instrucciones de que me pertreche a la salida del lugar.

  [Footnote 1: Litago. A small village of some 600 inhabitants,
  situated in the province of Saragossa on the northern slope of the
  Moncayo (see p. 8, note 1) to the west of the river Huecha, not far
  from Alcala de Moncayo.]

  [Footnote 2: Trasmoz. A small village of some 300 inhabitants,
  situated in the province of Saragossa near the Moncayo and not far
  from the river Huecha. It contains an ancient castle. See p. 13,
  note 1.]

Ya enzarzado en lo mas espeso y fragoso del monte, llevando del
diestro la caballeria por entre sendas casi impracticables, ora por
las cumbres para descubrir la salida del laberinto, ora por las
honduras con la idea de cortar terreno, anduve vagando al azar un buen
espacio de tarde hasta que por ultimo, en el fondo de una cortadura
tropece con un pastor, el cual abrevaba su ganado en el riachuelo que,
despues de deslizarse sobre un cauce de piedras de mil colores, salta
y se retuerce alli con un ruido particular que se oye a gran
distancia, en medio del profundo silencio de la naturaleza que en
aquel punto y a aquella hora parece muda o dormida.

Pregunte al pastor el camino del pueblo, el cual segun mis cuentas no
debia distar mucho del sitio en que nos encontrabamos, pues aunque sin
senda fija, yo habia procurado adelantar siempre en la direccion que
me habian indicado. Satisfizo el buen hombre mi pregunta lo mejor que
pudo, y ya me disponia a proseguir mi azarosa jornada, subiendo con
pies y manos y tirando de la caballeria como Dios me daba a entender,
por entre unos pedruscos erizados de matorrales y puntas, cuando el
pastor que me veia subir desde lejos, me dio una gran voz
advirtiendome que no tomara la _senda de la tia Casca_, si queria
llegar sano y salvo a la cumbre. La verdad era que el camino, que
equivocadamente habia tornado, se hacia cada vez mas aspero y dificil
y que por una parte la sombra que ya arrojaban las altisimas rocas,
que parecian suspendidas sobre mi cabeza, y por otro el ruido
vertiginoso del agua que corria profunda a mis pies, y de la que
comenzaba a elevarse una niebla inquieta y azul, que se extendia por
la cortadura borrando los objetos y los colores, parecian contribuir a
turbar la vista y conmover el animo con una sensacion de penoso
malestar que vulgarmente podria llamarse preludio de miedo. Volvi pies
atras, baje de nuevo hasta donde se encontraba el pastor, y mientras
seguiamos juntos por una trocha que se dirigia al pueblo, adonde
tambien iba a pasar la noche mi improvisado guia, no pude menos de
preguntarle con alguna insistencia, por que, aparte de las
dificultades que ofrecia el ascenso, era tan peligroso subir a la
cumbre por la senda que llamo de la tia Casca.

--Porque antes de terminar la senda, me dijo con el tono mas natural
del mundo, tendriais que costear el precipicio a que cayo la maldita
bruja que le da su nombre, y en el cual se cuenta que anda penando el
alma que, despues de dejar el cuerpo, ni Dios ni el diablo han querido
para suya.

--iHola! exclame entonces como sorprendido, aunque, a decir verdad, ya
me esperaba una contestacion de esta o parecida clase. Y ?en que
diantres se entretiene el alma de esa pobre vieja por estos
andurriales?

--En acosar y perseguir a los infelices pastores que se arriesgan por
esa parte de monte, ya haciendo ruido entre las matas, como si fuese
un lobo, ya dando quejidos lastimeros como de criatura, o
acurrucandose en las quiebras de las rocas que estan en el fondo del
precipicio, desde donde llama con su mano amarilla y seca a los que
van por el borde, les clava la mirada de sus ojos de buho, y cuando el
vertigo comienza a desvanecer su cabeza, da un gran salto, se les
agarra a los pies y pugna hasta despenarlos en la sima.... iAh,
maldita bruja! exclamo despues de un momento el pastor tendiendo el
puno crispado hacia las rocas como amenazandola; iah! maldita bruja,
muchas hiciste en vida, y ni aun muerta hemos logrado que nos dejes en
paz; pero, no haya cuidado, que a ti y tu endiablada raza de
hechiceras os hemos de aplastar una a una como a viboras.

--Por lo que veo, insisti, despues que hubo concluido su extravagante
imprecacion, esta usted muy al corriente de las fechorias de esa
mujer. Por ventura, ?alcanzo usted a conocerla? Porque no me parece de
tanta edad como para haber vivido en el tiempo en que las brujas
andaban todavia por el mundo.

Al oir estas palabras el pastor, que caminaba delante de mi para
mostrarme la senda, se detuvo un poco, y fijando en los mios sus
asombrados ojos, como para conocer si me burlaba, exclamo con un
acento de buena fe pasmosa:--iQue no le parezco a usted de edad
bastante para haberla conocido! Pues ?y si yo le dijera que no hace
aun tres anos cabales que con estos mismos ojos que se ha de comer la
tierra, la vi caer por lo alto de ese derrumbadero, dejando en cada
uno de los penascos y de las zarzas un jiron de vestido o de carne,
hasta que llego al fondo donde se quedo aplastada como un sapo que se
coge debajo del pie?

--Entonces, respondi asombrado a mi vez de la credulidad de aquel
pobre hombre, dare credito a lo que usted dice, sin objetar palabra;
aunque a mi se me habia figurado, anadi recalcando estas ultimas
frases para ver el efecto que le hacian, que todo eso de las brujas y
los hechizos no eran sino antiguas y absurdas patranas de las aldeas.

--Eso dicen los senores de la ciudad, porque a ellos no les molestan;
y fundados en que todo es puro cuento, echaron a presidio a algunos
infelices que nos hicieron un bien de caridad a la gente del
Somontano,[1] despenando a esa mala mujer.

  [Footnote 1: la gente del Somontano = 'the people of the Slope,'
  those living near the foot of the Moncayo mountain.]

--?Conque no cayo casualmente ella, sino que la hicieron rodar, que
quieras que no? iA ver a ver! Cuenteme usted como paso eso, porque
debe ser curioso, anadi, mostrando toda la credulidad y el asombro
suficiente, para que el buen hombre no maliciase que solo queria
distraerme un rato, oyendo sus sandeces; pues es de advertir que hasta
que no me refirio los pormenores del suceso, no hice memoria de que,
en efecto, yo habia leido en los periodicos de provincia una cosa
semejante. El pastor, convencido por las muestras de interes con que
me disponia a escuchar su relate, de que yo no era uno de esos senores
_de la ciudad_, dispuesto a tratar de majaderias su historia, levanto
la mano en direccion a uno de los picachos de la cumbre, y comenzo
asi, senalandome una de las rocas que se destacaba obscura e imponente
sobre el fondo gris del cielo, que el sol, al ponerse tras las nubes,
tenia de algunos cambiantes rojizos.

--?Ve usted aquel cabezo alto, alto, que parece cortado a pico, y por
entre cuyas penas crecen las aliagas y los zarzales? Me parece que
sucedio ayer. Yo estaba algunos doscientos pasos camino atras de donde
nos encontramos en este momento: proximamente seria[1] la misma hora,
cuando crei escuchar unos alaridos distantes, y llantos e
imprecaciones que se entremezclaban con voces varoniles y colericas
que ya se oian por un lado, ya por otro, como de pastores que
persiguen un lobo por entre los zarzales. El sol, segun digo, estaba
al ponerse, y por detras de la altura se descubria un jiron del cielo,
rojo y encendido como la grana, sobre el que vi aparecer alta, seca y
haraposa, semejante a un esqueleto que se escapa de su fosa, envuelto
aun en los jirones del sudario, una vieja horrible, en la que conoci a
la tia Casca. La tia Casca era famosa en todos estos contornos, y me
basto distinguir sus grenas blancuzcas que se enredaban alrededor de
su frente como culebras, sus formas extravagantes, su cuerpo encorvado
y sus brazos disformes, que se destacaban angulosos y obscuros sobre
el fondo de fuego del horizonte, para reconocer en ella a la bruja de
Trasmoz. Al llegar esta al borde del precipicio, se detuvo un instante
sin saber que partido tomar. Las voces de los que parecian perseguirla
sonaban cada vez mas cerca, y de cuando en cuando la veia hacer una
contorsion, encogerse o dar un brinco para evitar los cantazos que le
arrojaban. Sin duda no traia el bote de sus endiablados untos, porque,
a traerlo, seguro que habria atravesado al vuelo la cortadura, dejando
a sus perseguidores burlados y jadeantes como lebreles que pierden la
pista. iDios no lo quiso asi, permitiendo que de una vez pagara todas
sus maldades!... Llegaron los mozos que venian en su seguimiento, y la
cumbre se corono de gentes, estos con piedras en las manos, aquellos
con garrotes, los de mas alla con cuchillos. Entonces comenzo una cosa
horrible. La vieja, imaldita hipocritona! viendose sin huida, se
arrojo al suelo, se arrastro por la tierra besando los pies de los
unos, abrazandose a las rodillas de los otros, implorando en su ayuda
a la Virgen y a los Santos, cuyos nombres sonaban en su condenada boca
como una blasfemia. Pero los mozos, asi hacian caso de sus lamentos
como yo de la lluvia cuando estoy bajo techado.--Yo soy una pobre
vieja que no he hecho dano a nadie: no tengo hijos ni parientes que me
vengan a amparar; iperdonadme, tened compasion de mi! aullaba la
bruja; y uno de los mozos, que con la una mano la habia asido de las
grenas, mientras tenia en la otra la navaja que procuraba abrir con
los dientes, la contestaba rugiendo de colera: iAh, bruja de Lucifer,
ya es tarde para lamentaciones, ya te conocemos todos!--iTu hiciste
un mal a mi mulo, que desde entonces no quiso probar bocado, y murio
de hambre dejandome en la miseria! decia uno.--iTu has hecho mal de
ojo a mi hijo, y lo sacas de la cuna y lo azotas por las noches!
anadia el otro; y cada cual exclamaba por su lado: iTu has echado una
suerte a mi hermana! iTu has ligado a mi novia! iTu has emponzonado la
hierba! iTu has embrujado al pueblo entero![2]

  [Footnote 1: seria = ' it must have been,']

  [Footnote 2: Accusations commonly made against those deemed guilty
  of witchcraft.]

Yo permanecia inmovil en el mismo punto en que me habia sorprendido
aquel clamoreo infernal, y no acertaba a mover pie ni mano, pendiente
del resultado de aquella lucha.

La voz de la tia Casca, aguda y estridente, dominaba el tumulto de
todas las otras voces que se reunian para acusarla, dandole en el
rostro con sus delitos, y siempre gimiendo, siempre sollozando, seguia
poniendo a Dios y a los santos Patronos del lugar por testigos de su
inocencia.

Por ultimo, viendo perdida toda esperanza, pidio como ultima merced
que la dejasen un instante implorar del cielo, antes de morir, el
perdon de sus culpas, y de rodillas al borde de la cortadura como
estaba, la vieja inclino la cabeza, junto las manos y comenzo a
murmurar entre dientes que se yo que imprecaciones ininteligibles:
palabras que yo no podia oir por la distancia que me separaba de ella,
pero que ni los mismos que estaban a su lado lograron entender; Unos
aseguran que hablaba en latin, otros que en una lengua salvaje y
desconocida, no faltando quien pudo comprender que en efecto rezaba,
aunque diciendo las oraciones al reves, como es costumbre de estas
malas mujeres.

En este punto se detuvo el pastor un momento, tendio a su alrededor
una mirada, y prosiguio asi:

--?Siente usted este profundo silencio que reina en todo el monte, que
no suena un guijarro, que no se mueve una hoja, que el aire esta
inmovil y pesa sobre los hombros y parece que aplasta? ?Ve usted esos
jirones de niebla obscura que se deslizan poco a poco a lo largo de la
inmensa pendiente del Moncayo,[1] como si sus cavidades no bastaran a
contenerlos? ?Los ve usted como se adelantan mudos y con lentitud,
como una legion aerea que se mueve por un impulse invisible? El mismo
silencio de muerte habia entonces, el mismo aspecto extrano y temeroso
ofrecia la niebla de la tarde, arremolinada en las lejanas cumbres,
todo el tiempo que duro aquella suspension angustiosa. Yo lo confieso
con toda franqueza: llegue a tener miedo. ?Quien sabia si la bruja
aprovechaba aquellos instantes para hacer uno de esos terribles
conjuros que sacan a los muertos de sus sepulturas, estremecen el
fondo de los abismos y traen a la superficie de la tierra, obedientes
a sus imprecaciones, hasta a los mas rebeldes espiritus infernales? La
vieja rezaba; rezaba sin parar; los mozos permanecian en tanto
inmoviles cual si estuviesen encadenados por un sortilegio, y las
nieblas obscuras seguian avanzando y envolviendo las penas, en
derredor de las cuales fingian mil figuras extranas como de monstruos
deformes, cocodrilos rojos y negros, bultos colosales de mujeres
envueltas en panos blancos, y listas largas de vapor que, heridas por
la ultima luz del crepusculo, semejaban inmensas serpientes de
colores.

  [Footnote 1: El Moncayo. A mountain of some 7600 feet in height
  situated near the boundaries of the provinces of Soria and
  Saragossa, to the west of the town of Borja and to the south of
  Tarazona. The panorama presented to the view from its summit is most
  extensive. To the south can be seen vaguely the Sierra de
  Guadarrama, to the southeast the mountains of Teruel, to the east
  the plain of the Ebro, to the north and northeast the Pyrenees and
  to the west the summits of the Cantabrian range. The rivers Queiles,
  Huecha, and others of less importance have their source in the
  Moncayo. It is the ancient Mons _Caunus_, celebrated in history for
  the defeat of the Celtiberians in the time of the consul Tiberius
  Sempronius Gracchus (governor of Hither Spain from 181 to 178
  B.C.).]

Fija la mirada en aquel fantastico ejercito de nubes que parecian
correr al asalto de la pena sobre cuyo pico iba a morir la bruja, yo
estaba esperando por instantes cuando se abrian sus senos para abortar
a la diabolica multitud de espiritus malignos, comenzando una lucha
horrible al borde del derrumbadero, entre los que estaban alli para
hacer justicia en la bruja y los demonios que, en pago de sus muchos
servicios, vinieran a ayudarla en aquel amargo trance.

--Y por fin, exclame interrumpiendo el animado cuento de mi
interlocutor, e impaciente ya por conocer el desenlace, ?en que acabo
todo ello? ?Mataron a la vieja? Porque yo creo que por muchos conjures
que recitara la bruja y muchas senales que usted viese en las nubes, y
en cuanto le rodeaba, los espiritus malignos se mantendrian[1]
quietecitos cada cual en su agujero; sin mezclarse para nada en las
cosas de la tierra. ?No fue asi?

  [Footnote 1: se mantendrian = 'must have remained,' 'probably
  remained.']

--Asi fue, en efecto. Bien porque en su turbacion la bruja no acertara
con la formula, o, lo que yo mas creo, por ser viernes, dia en que
murio Nuestro Senor Jesucristo, y no haber acabado aun las visperas,
durante las que los malos no tienen poder alguno, ello es que, viendo
que no concluia nunca con su endiablada monserga, un mozo la dijo que
acabase y levantando en alto el cuchillo, se dispuso a herirla. La
vieja entonces, tan humilde, tan hipocritona, hasta aquel punto, se
puso de pie con un movimiento tan rapido como el de una culebra
enroscada a la que se pisa y despliega[1] sus anillos irguiendose
llena de colera.--iOh! no; ino quiero morir, no quiero morir! decia;
idejadme, u os mordere las manos con que me sujetais!... Pero aun no
habia pronunciado estas palabras, abalanzandose a sus perseguidores,
fuera de si, con las grenas sueltas, los ojos inyectados en sangre, y
la hedionda boca entreabierta y llena de espuma, cuando la oi arrojar
un alarido espantoso, llevarse por dos o tres veces las manos al
costado con grande precipitacion, mirarselas y volverselas a mirar
maquinalmente, y por ultimo, dando tres o cuatro pasos vacilantes como
si estuviese borracha, la vi caer al derrumbadero. Uno de los mozos a
quien la bruja hechizo una hermana, la mas hermosa, la mas buena del
lugar, la habia herido de muerte en el momento en que sintio que le
clavaba en el brazo sus dientes negros y puntiagudos. ?Pero cree usted
que acabo ahi la cosa? Nada menos que eso: la vieja de Lucifer tenia
siete vidas como los gatos.[2] Cayo por un derrumbadero donde
cualquiera otro a quien se le resbalase un pie no pararia hasta lo mas
hondo, y ella, sin embargo, tal vez porque el diablo le quito el golpe
o porque los harapos de las sayas la enredaron en los zarzales, quedo
suspendida de uno de los picos que erizan la cortadura, barajandose y
retorciendose alli como un reptil colgado por la cola, iDios, como
blasfemaba! iQue imprecaciones tan horribles salian de su boca! Se
estremecian las carnes y se ponian de punta los cabellos solo de
oirla.... Los mozos seguian desde lo alto todas sus grotescas
evoluciones, esperando el instante en que se desgarraria el ultimo
jiron de la saya a que estaba sujeta, y rodaria dando tumbos, de pico
en pico, hasta el fondo del barranco; pero ella con el ansia de la
muerte y sin cesar de proferir, ora horribles blasfemias, ora palabras
santas mezcladas de maldiciones, se enroscaba en derredor de los
matorrales; sus dedos largos, huesosos y sangrientos, se agarraban
como tenazas a las hendiduras de las rocas, de modo que ayudandose de
las rodillas, de los dientes, de los pies y de las manos, quizas
hubiese conseguido subir hasta el horde, si algunos de los que la
contemplaban y que llegaron a temerlo asi, no hubiesen levantado en
alto una piedra gruesa, con la que le dieron tal cantazo en el pecho,
que piedra y bruja bajaron a la vez saltando de escalon en escalon por
entre aquellas puntas calcareas, afiladas como cuchillos, hasta dar,
por ultimo, en ese arroyo que se ve en lo mas profundo del valle....
Una vez alli, la bruja permanecio un largo rato inmovil, con la cara
hundida entre el legamo y el fango del arroyo que corria enrojecido
con la sangre; despues, poco a poco, comenzo como a volver en si y a
agitarse convulsivamente. El agua cenagosa y sangrienta saltaba en
derredor batida por sus manos, que de vez en cuando se levantaban en
el aire crispadas y horribles, no se si implorando piedad, o
amenazando aun en las ultimas ansias.... Asi estuvo algun tiempo
removiendose y queriendo inutilmente sacar la cabeza fuera de la
corriente buscando un poco de aire, hasta que al fin se desplomo
muerta; muerta del todo, pues los que la habiamos visto caer y
conociamos de lo que es capaz una hechicera tan astuta como la tia
Casca, no apartamos de ella los ojos hasta que completamente entrada
la noche, la obscuridad nos impidio distinguirla, y en todo este
tiempo no movio pie ni mano; de modo que si la herida y los golpes no
fueron bastantes a acabarla, es seguro que se ahogo en el riachuelo
cuyas aguas tantas veces habia embrujado en vida para hacer morir
nuestras reses. iQuien en mal anda, en mal acaba! exclamamos despues
de mirar una ultima vez al fondo obscuro del despenadero; y
santiguandonos santamente y pidiendo a Dios nos ayudase en todas las
ocasiones, como en aquella, contra el diablo y los suyos, emprendimos
con bastante despacio la vuelta al pueblo, en cuya desvencijada torre
las campanas llamaban a la oracion a los vecinos devotos.

  [Footnote 1: a la que se pisa y despliega. Loose construction, in
  which the relative pronoun object of the first verb is understood as
  subject of the second.]

  [Footnote 2: The cat is credited in our colloquial English
  expression with two more lives.]

Cuando el pastor termino su relato, llegabamos precisamente a la
cumbre mas cercana al pueblo, desde donde se ofrecio a mi vista el
castillo obscuro e imponente con su alta torre del homenaje, de la que
solo queda en pie un lienzo de muro con dos saeteras, que
transparentaban la luz y parecian los ojos de un fantasma. En aquel
castillo, que tiene por cimiento la pizarra negra de que esta formado
el monte, y cuyas vetustas murallas, hechas de pedruscos enormes,
parecen obras de titanes, es fama que las brujas de los contornos
tienen sus nocturnes conciliabulos.

La noche habia cerrado ya, sombria y nebulosa. La luna se dejaba ver a
intervalos por entre los jirones de las nubes que volaban en derredor
nuestro, rozando casi con la tierra, y las campanas de Trasmoz[1]
dejaban oir lentamente el toque de oraciones, como el final de la
horrible historia que me acababan de referir.

  [Footnote 1: Trasmoz. See p. 2, note 2.]

Ahora que estoy en mi celda tranquilo, escribiendo para ustedes la
relacion de estas impresiones extranas, no puedo menos de maravillarme
y dolerme de que las viejas supersticiones tengan todavia tan hondas
raices entre las gentes de las aldeas, que den lugar a sucesos
semejantes; pero, ?por que no he de confesarlo? sonandome aun las
ultimas palabras de aquella temerosa relacion, teniendo junto a mi a
aquel hombre que tan de buena fe imploraba la proteccion divina para
llevar a cabo crimenes espantosos, viendo a mis pies el abismo negro y
profundo en donde se revolvia el agua entre las tinieblas, imitando
gemidos y lamentos, y en lontananza el castillo tradicional,[1]
coronado de almenas obscuras, que parecian fantasmas asomadas a los
muros, senti una impresion angustiosa, mis cabellos se erizaron
involuntariamente, y la razon, dominada por la fantasia, a la que todo
ayudaba, el sitio, la hora y el silencio de la noche, vacilo un punto,
y casi crei que las absurdas consejas de las brujerias y los
maleficios pudieran ser posibles.

  [Footnote 1: tradicional = 'legendary.' Legend says that this castle
  was built in a night by a magician to satisfy the whim of one of the
  early kings. Becquer tells the story of its construction in _Carta
  septima_.]




LOS OJOS VERDES


Hace mucho tiempo que tenia ganas de escribir cualquier cosa con este
titulo.

Hoy, que se me ha presentado ocasion, lo he puesto con letras grandes
en la primera cuartilla de papel, y luego he dejado a capriclio volar
la pluma.

Yo creo que he visto unos ojos como los que he pintado en esta
leyenda. No se si en suenos, pero yo los he visto. De seguro no los
podre describir tales cuales ellos eran, luminosos, transparentes como
las gotas de la lluvia que se resbalan sobre las hojas de los arboles
despues de una tempestad de verano. De todos modos, cuento con la
imaginacion de mis lectores para hacerme comprender en este que
pudieramos llamar boceto de un cuadro que pintare algun dia.


I

--Herido va el ciervo, herido va; no hay duda. Se ve el rastro de la
sangre entre las zarzas del monte, y al saltar uno de esos lentiscos
han flaqueado sus piernas.... Nuestro joven senor comienza por donde
otros acaban ... en cuarenta anos de montero no he visto mejor
golpe.... iPero por San Saturio,[1] patron de Soria![2] cortadle el
paso por esas carrascas, azuzad los perros, soplad en esas trompas
hasta echar los higados, y hundidle a los corceles una cuarta de
hierro en los ijares: ?no veis que se dirige hacia la fuente de los
Alamos,[3] y si la salva antes de morir podemos darle por perdido?

  [Footnote 1: San Saturio. Saint Saturius was born, according to
  Tamayo, in 493. In 532 he withdrew from the world into a cave at the
  foot of a mountain bathed by the river Duero, near where now stands
  the town of Soria. There he lived about thirty-six years, or until
  568, when he died and was buried by his faithful disciple St.
  Prudentius, later bishop of Tarazona, who had been a companion of
  the hermit during the last seven years of his life. His cave is
  still an object of pilgrimage, and a church has been built on the
  spot to the memory of the saint. See Florez, _Espana_ Sagrada,
  Madrid, 1766, tomo vii, pp. 293-294.]

  [Footnote 2: Soria. A mediaeval-looking town of 7296 inhabitants
  situated on a bleak plateau on the right bank of the Duero. It is
  the capital of a province of the same name. The old town of Numantia
  (captured by the Romans under P. Cornelius Scipio AEmilianus, 133
  B.C.) lay about three miles to the north of the present site of
  Soria.]

  [Footnote 3: Alamos. The choice of a grove of poplars as setting to
  the enchanted fount is peculiarly appropriate, as this tree belongs
  to the large list of those believed to have magical properties. In
  the south of Europe the poplar seems to have held sometimes the
  mythological place reserved in the north for the birch, and the
  people of Andalusia believe that the poplar is the most ancient of
  trees. (See de Gubernatis, Za _Mythologie des plantes_, Paris,
  Reinwald, 1882, p. 285.) In classical superstition the black poplar
  was consecrated to the goddess Proserpine, and the white poplar to
  Hercules. "The White Poplar was also dedicated to Time, because its
  leaves were constantly in motion, and, being dark on one side and
  light on the other, they were emblematic of night and day.... There
  is a tradition that the Cross of Christ was made of the wood of the
  White Poplar, and throughout Christendom there is a belief that the
  tree trembles and shivers mystically in sympathy with the ancestral
  tree which became accursed.... Mrs. Hemans, in her 'Wood Walk,' thus
  alludes to one of these old traditions:

    FATHER.--Hast thou heard, my boy,
      The peasant's legend of that quivering tree?

    CHILD.--No, father; doth he say the fairies dance
      Amidst its branches?

    FATHER.--Oh! a cause more deep,
      More solemn far, the rustic doth assign
      To the strange restlessness of those wan leaves.
      The Cross he deems--the blessed Cross, whereon
      The meek Redeemer bow'd His head to death--
      Was formed of Aspen wood; and since that hour
      Through all its race the pale tree hath sent down
      A thrilling consciousness, a secret awe
      Making them tremulous, when not a breeze
      Disturbs the airy Thistle-down, or shakes
      The light lines from the shining gossamer."

  Richard Folkard, _Plant Lore_, London, 1892, p. 503.]

Las cuencas del Moncayo[1] repitieron de eco en eco el bramido de las
trompas, el latir de la jauria desencadenada y las voces de los pajes
resonaron con nueva furia, y el confuso tropel de hombres, caballos y
perros se dirigio al punto que Inigo, el montero mayor de los
marqueses de Almenar,[2] senalara,[3] como el mas a proposito para
cortarle el paso a la res.

  [Footnote 1: El Moncayo. See p. 8, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: Marqueses de Almenar. A title taken doubtless from the
  little town of Almenar (650 inhabitants) situated in the province of
  Soria near the right bank of the Rituerto river, southwest of the
  Moncayo, and not far from that mountain.]

  [Footnote 3: senalara. A relic of the Latin pluperfect (in _-aram_,
  _-eram_), popularly confounded with the imperfect subjunctive. Its
  use is now somewhat archaic, and is restricted to relative clauses.
  See Ramsey's _Spanish Grammar_, H. Holt & Co., 1902, Sec. 944.]

Pero todo fue inutil. Cuando el mas agil de los lebreles llego a las
carrascas jadeante y cubiertas las fauces de espuma, ya el ciervo,
rapido como una saeta, las habia salvado de un solo brinco,
perdiendose entre los matorrales de una trocha, que conducia a la
fuente.

--iAlto!... iAlto todo el mundo! grito Inigo entonces; estaba de Dios
que habia de marcharse.

Y la cabalgata se detuvo, y enmudecieron las trompas, y los lebreles
dejaron refunfunando la pista a la voz de los cazadores.

En aquel momento se reunia a la comitiva el heroe de la fiesta,
Fernando de Argensola,[1] el primogenito de Almenar.

  [Footnote 1: Argensola. A name familiar to students of Spanish
  literature from the writings of the illustrious brothers Bartolome
  and Lupercio Leonardo de Argensola (sixteenth century). It is also
  the name of a small town of some 560 inhabitants in the province of
  Barcelona.]

--?Que haces? exclamo dirigiendose a su montero, y en tanto, ya se
pintaba el asombro en sus facciones, ya ardia la colera en sus ojos.
?Que haces, imbecil? iVes que la pieza esta herida, que es la primera
que cae por mi mano, y abandonas el rastro y la dejas perder para que
vaya a morir en el fondo del bosque! ?Crees acaso que he venido a
matar ciervos para festines de lobos?

--Senor, murmuro, Inigo entre dientes, es imposible pasar de este
punto.

--iImposible! ?y por que?

--Porque esa trocha, prosiguio el montero, conduce a la fuente de los
Alamos; la fuente de los Alamos, en cuyas aguas habita un espiritu del
mal. El que osa enturbiar su corriente, paga caro su atrevimiento. Ya
la res habra salvado sus margenes; ?como la salvareis vos sin atraer
sobre vuestra cabeza alguna calamidad horrible? Los cazadores somos
reyes del Moncayo, pero reyes que pagan un tributo. Pieza que se
refugia en esa fuente misteriosa, pieza perdida.

--iPieza perdida! Primero perdere yo el senorio de mis padres, y
primero perdere el anima en manos de Satanas, que permitir que se me
escape ese ciervo, el unico que ha herido mi venablo, la primicia de
mis excursiones de cazador.... ?Lo ves?... ?lo ves?... Aun se
distingue a intervalos desde aqui ... las piernas le faltan, su
carrera se acorta; dejame... dejame... suelta esa brida, o te revuelco
en el polvo.... ?Quien sabe si no le dare lugar para que llegue a la
fuente? y si llegase, al diablo ella, su limpidez y sus habitadores.
iSus! i_Relampago_! sus, caballo mio! si lo alcanzas, mando engarzar
los diamantes de mi joyel en tu serreta de oro.

Caballo y jinete partieron como un huracan.

Inigo los siguio con la vista hasta que se perdieron en la maleza;
despues volvio los ojos en derredor suyo; todos, como el, permanecian
inmoviles y consternados.

El montero exclamo al fin:

--Senores, vosotros lo habeis visto; me he expuesto a morir entre los
pies de su caballo por detenerle. Yo he cumplido con mi deber. Con el
diablo no sirven valentias. Hasta aqui llega el montero con su
ballesta; de aqui adelante, que pruebe a pasar el capellan con su
hisopo.[1]

  [Footnote 1: hisopo = 'aspergillum.' A brash or metallic instrument
  for the sprinkling of holy water. As to the efficacy of holy water
  against evil spirits St. Teresa of Avila (1515-1582) speaks as
  follows:

  I have learned from frequent experience that there is nothing better
  (than holy water) to drive them away and to prevent them from
  returning: they flee at the sight of the Cross, but return. The
  virtue of holy water must be great indeed.

  See _Escritos de Santa Teresa_, "Libro de su vida," capitulo 31, in
  the _Biblioteca de Autores Espanoles_, Madrid, Rivadeneyra, 1861, p.
  94.

  L'Abbe Jean Joseph Gaume has written a work, entitled _l'Eau lenite
  au XIXe siecle_ (Paris, 1866), in which he also advocates the use of
  holy water to-day for similar purposes.]


II

--Teneis la color quebrada; andais mustio, y sombrio; ?que os sucede?
Desde el dia, que yo siempre tendre por funesto, en que llegasteis a
la fuente de los Alamos en pos de la res herida, diriase que una mala
bruja os ha encanijado con sus hechizos.

Ya no vais a los montes precedido de la ruidosa jauria, ni el clamor
de vuestras trompas despierta sus ecos. Solo con esas cavilaciones que
os persiguen, todas las mananas tomais la ballesta para enderezaros a
la espesura y permanecer en ella hasta que el sol se esconde. Y cuando
la noche obscurece y voiveis palido y fatigado al castillo, en balde
busco en la bandolera los despojos de la caza. ?Que os ocupa tan
largas horas lejos de los que mas os quieren?

Mientras Inigo hablaba, Fernando, absorto en sus ideas, sacaba
maquinalmente astillas de su escano de ebano con el cuchillo de monte.

Despues de un largo silencio, que solo interrumpia el chirrido de la
hoja al resbalarse sobre la pulimentada madera, el joven exclamo
dirigiendose a su servidor, como si no hubiera escuchado una sola de
sus palabras:

--Inigo, tu que eres viejo, tu que conoces todas las guaridas del
Moncayo, que has vivido en sus faldas persiguiendo a las fieras, y en
tus errantes excursiones de cazador subiste mas de una vez a su
cumbre, dime, ?has encontrado por acaso una mujer que vive entre sus
rocas?

--iUna mujer! exclamo el montero con asombro y mirandole de hito en
hito.

--Si, dijo el joven; es una cosa extrana lo que me sucede, muy
extrana.... Crei poder guardar ese secreto eternamente, pero no es ya
posible; rebosa en mi corazon y asoma a mi semblante. Voy, pues, a
revelartelo.... Tu me ayudaras a desvanecer el misterio que envuelve a
esa criatura, que al parecer solo para mi existe, pues nadie la
conoce, ni la ha visto, ni puede darme razon de ella.

El montero, sin despegar los labios, arrastro su banquillo hasta
colocarlo junto al escano de su senor, del que no apartaba un punto
los espantados ojos. Este, despues de coordinar sus ideas, prosiguio
asi:

--Desde el dia en que a pesar de tus funestas predicciones llegue a la
fuente de los Alamos, y atravesando sus aguas recobre el ciervo que
vuestra supersticion hubiera dejado huir, se lleno mi alma del deseo
de la soledad.

Tu no conoces aquel sitio. Mira, la fuente brota escondida en el seno
de una pena, y cae resbalandose gota a gota por entre las verdes y
flotantes hojas de las plantas que crecen al borde de su cuna.
Aquellas gotas que al desprenderse brillan como puntos de oro y suenan
como las notas de un instrumento, se reunen entre los cespedes, y
susurrando, susurrando con un ruido semejante al de las abejas que
zumban en torno de las flores, se alejan por entre las arenas, y
forman un cauce, y luchan con los obstaculos que se oponen a su
camino, y se repliegan sobre si mismas, y saltan, y huyen, y corren,
unas veces con risa, otras con suspires, hasta caer en un lago. En el
lago caen con un rumor indescriptible. Lamentos, palabras, nombres,
cantares, yo no se lo que he oido en aquel rumor cuando me he sentado
solo y febril sobre el penasco, a cuyos pies saltan las aguas de la
fuente misteriosa para estancarse en una balsa profunda, cuya inmovil
superficie apenas riza el viento de la tarde.

Todo es alli grande. La soledad con sus mil rumores desconocidos, vive
en aquellos lugares y embriaga el espiritu en su inefable melancolia.
En las plateadas hojas de los alamos, en los huecos de las penas, en
las ondas del agua, parece que nos hablan los invisibles espiritus de
la naturaleza, que reconocen un hermano en el inmortal espiritu del
hombre.

Cuando al despuntar la manana me veias tomar la ballesta y dirigirme
al monte, no fue nunca para perderme entre sus matorrales en pos de la
caza, no; iba a sentarme al borde de la fuente, a buscar en sus ondas
... no se que, iuna locura! El dia en que salte sobre ella con mi
_Relampago_[1] crei haber visto brillar en su fondo una cosa extrana
... muy extrana ... los ojos de una mujer.

  [Footnote 1: Relampago. The name of his horse, mentioned p. 17.]

Tal vez seria un rayo de sol que serpeo fugitive entre su espuma; tal
vez una de esas flores que flotan entre las algas de su seno, y cuyos
calices parecen esmeraldas ... no se: yo crei ver una mirada que se
clavo en la mia; una mirada que encendio en mi pecho un deseo absurdo,
irrealizable: el de encontrar una persona con unos ojos como aquellos.

En su busca fui un dia y otro a aquel sitio:

Por ultimo, una tarde ... yo me crei juguete de un sueno ... pero no,
es verdad, la[1] he hablado ya muchas veces, como te hablo a ti ahora
... una tarde encontre sentada en mi puesto, y vestida con unas ropas
que llegaban hasta las aguas y flotaban sobre su haz, una mujer
hermosa sobre toda ponderacion. Sus cabellos eran como el oro; sus
pestanas brillaban como hilos de luz, y entre las pestanas volteaban
inquietas unas pupilas que yo habia visto... si; porque los ojos de
aquella mujer eran los ojos que yo tenia clavados en la mente; unos
ojos de un color imposible; unos ojos ...

  [Footnote 1: la. The Spanish Academy condemns the use of _la_
  instead of _le_ as a feminine dative. Spanish writers, however,
  frequently so employ it.]

--iVerdes! exclamo Inigo con un acento de profundo terror, e
incorporandose de un salto en su asiento.

Fernando le miro a su vez como asombrado de que concluyese lo que iba
a decir, y le pregunto con una mezcla de ansiedad y de alegria:

--?La conoces?

--iOh, no! dijo el montero. iLibreme Dios de conocerla! Pero mis
padres, al prohibirme llegar hasta esos lugares, me dijeron mil veces
que el espiritu, trasgo, demonio o mujer que habita en sus aguas,
tiene los ojos de ese color. Yo os conjuro, por lo que mas ameis en la
tierra, a no volver a la fuente de los Alamos. Un dia u otro-os
alcanzara su venganza, y expiareis, muriendo, el delito de haber
encenagado sus ondas.

--iPor los que mas amo!... murmuro el joven con una triste sonrisa.

--iSi!, prosiguio el anciano; por vuestros padres, por vuestros
deudos, por las lagrimas de la que el cielo destina para vuestra
esposa, por las de un servidor que os ha visto nacer ...

--?Sabes tu lo que mas amo en este mundo? Sabes tu por que daria yo el
amor de mi padre, los besos de la que me dio la vida, y todo el carino
que pueden atesorar todas las mujeres de la tierra? Por una mirada,
por una sola mirada de esos ojos ... iComo podre yo dejar de
buscarlos!

Dijo Fernando estas palabras con tal acento, que la lagrima que
temblaba en los parpados de Inigo se resbalo silenciosa por su
mejilla, mientras exclamo con acento sombrio: iCumplase la voluntad
del cielo!


III

--?Quien eres tu? ?Cual es tu patria? ?En donde habitas? Yo vengo un
dia y otro en tu busca, y ni veo el corcel que te trae a estos
lugares, ni a los servidores que conducen tu litera. Rompe de una vez
el misterioso velo en que te envuelves como en una noche profunda, yo
te amo, y, noble o villana, sere tuyo, tuyo siempre....

El sol habia traspuesto la cumbre del monte; las sombras bajaban a
grandes pasos, por su falda; la brisa gemia entre los alamos de la
fuente, y la niebla, elevandose poco a poco de la superficie del lago,
comenzaba a envolver las rocas de su margen.

Sobre una de estas rocas, sobre una que parecia proxima a desplomarse
en el fondo de las aguas, en cuya superficie se retrataba temblando el
primogenito de Almenar, de rodillas a los pies de su misteriosa
amante, procuraba en vano arrancarle el secreto de su existencia.

Ella era hermosa, hermosa y palida, como una estatua de alabastro. Uno
de sus rizos caia sobre sus hombros, deslizandose entre los pliegues
del velo como un rayo de sol que atraviesa las nubes, y en el cerco de
sus pestanas rubias brillaban sus pupilas como dos esmeraldas sujetas
en una joya de oro.

Cuando el joven acabo de hablarle, sus labios se removieron como para
pronunciar algunas palabras, pero solo exhalaron un suspiro, un
suspiro debil, doliente, como el de la ligera onda que empuja una
brisa al morir entre los juncos.

--iNo me respondes! exclamo Fernando al ver burlada su esperanza;
?querras que de credito a lo que de ti me han dicho? iOh! No....
Hablame: yo quiero saber si me amas; yo quiero saber si puedo amarte,
si eres una mujer...

--O un demonio.... ?Y si lo fuese?

El joven vacilo un instante; un sudor frio corrio por sus miembros;
sus pupilas se dilataron al fijarse con mas intensidad en las de
aquella mujer, y fascinado por su brillo fosforico, demente casi,
exclamo en un arrebato de amor:

--Si lo fueses ... fe amaria ... te amaria como te amo ahora, como es
mi destino amarte, hasta mas alla de esta vida, si hay algo mas alla
de ella.

--Fernando, dijo la hermosa entonces con una voz semejante a una
musica: yo te amo mas aun que tu me amas; yo, que desciendo hasta un
mortal, siendo un espiritu puro. No soy una mujer como las que existen
en la tierra; soy una mujer digna de ti, que eres superior a los demas
hombres. Yo vivo en el fondo de estas aguas; incorporea como ellas,
fugaz y trasparente, hablo con sus rumores y ondulo con sus pliegues.
Yo no castigo al que osa turbar la fuente donde moro; antes le premio
con mi amor ... como a un mortal superior a las supersticiones del
vulgo, como a un amante capaz de comprender mi carino extrano y
misterioso.

Mientras ella hablaba asi, el joven, absorto en la contemplacion de su
fantastica hermosura, atraido como por una fuerza desconocida, se
aproximaba mas y mas al borde de la roca. La mujer de los ojos verdes
prosiguio asi:

--?Ves, ves el limpido fondo de ese lago, ves esas plantas de largas y
verdes hojas que se agitan en su fondo?... Ellas nos daran un lecho de
esmeraldas y corales ... y yo ... yo te dare una felicidad sin nombre,
esa felicidad que has sonado en tus horas de delirio, y que no puede
ofrecerte nadie.... Ven, la niebla del lago flota sobre nuestras
frentes como un pabellon de lino ... las ondas nos llaman con sus
voces incomprensibles, el viento empieza entre los alamos sus himnos
de amor; ven ... ven ...

La noche comenzaba a extender sus sombras, la luna rielaba en la
superficie del lago, la niebla se arremolinaba al soplo del aire, y
los ojos verdes brillaban en la obscuridad como los fuegos fatuos que
corren sobre el haz de las aguas infectas.... Ven ... ven ... estas
palabras zumbaban en los oidos de Fernando como un conjuro. Ven ... y
la mujer misteriosa le llamaba al borde del abismo, donde estaba
suspendida, y parecia ofrecerle un beso ... un beso ...

Fernando dio un paso hacia ella ... otro ... y sintio unos brazos
delgados y flexibles que se liaban a su cuello, y una sensacion fria
en sus labios ardorosos, un beso de nieve ... y vacilo ... y perdio
pie, y cayo al agua con un rumor sordo y lugubre.

Las aguas saltaron en chispas de luz, y se cerraron sobre su cuerpo, y
sus circulos de plata fueron ensanchandose, ensanchandose hasta
expirar[1] en las orillas.[2]

  [Footnote 1: expirar. Becquer uses incorrectly the form _espirar_.]

  [Footnote 2: "It was a maxim both in ancient India and ancient
  Greece not to look at one's reflection in water.... They feared that
  the water-spirits would drag the person's reflection or soul under
  water, leaving him soulless to die. This was probably the origin of
  the classical story of Narcissus.... The same ancient belief
  lingers, in a faded form, in the English superstition that whoever
  sees a water-fairy must pine and die.

    'Alas, the moon should ever beam
    To show what man should never see!--
    I saw a maiden on a stream,
    And fair was she!

    I staid to watch, a little space,
    Her parted lips if she would sing;
    The waters closed above her face
    With many a ring.

    I know my life will fade away,
    I know that I must vainly pine,
    For I am made of mortal clay.
    But she's divine!'"

  Fraser, _The Golden Bough_, London, Macmillan & Co., 1900, vol. i,
  pp. 293-294. The object of Fernando's love was evidently an undine
  (see p. 43, note 1, and p. 47, note 1).]



LA CORZA BLANCA


I

En un pequeno lugar[1] de Aragon,[1] y alla por los anos de mil
trescientos y pico, vivia retirado en su torre senorial un famoso
caballero llamado don Dionis, el cual, despues de haber servido a su
rey[3] en la guerra contra infieles, descansaba a la sazon, entregado
al alegre ejercicio de la caza, de las rudas fatigas de los combates.

  [Footnote 1: un pequeno lugar. Veraton, a feudal town in the
  neighborhood of the Moncayo (see p. 8, note 1). Population (1900),
  484.]

  [Footnote 2: Aragon. "An ancient kingdom, now a captaincy-general of
  Spain, capital Saragossa, bounded by France on the north, by
  Catalonia on the east, by Valencia on the south, and by New Castile,
  Old Castile, and Navarre on the west, comprising the provinces of
  Huesca, Saragossa, and Teruel. It is traversed by mountains and
  intersected by the Ebro. During the middle ages it was one of the
  two chief Christian powers in the peninsula. In 1035 it became a
  kingdom; was united to Catalonia in 1137; rose to great influence
  through its acquisitions in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries
  of Valencia, the Balearic Islands, Sardinia, and the Sicilies; and
  was united with Castile in 1479 through the marriage of Ferdinand of
  Aragon with Isabella of Castile." _Century Dict._]

  [Footnote 3: The kings who reigned in Aragon during the fourteenth
  century were as follows: Jaime II _el Justo_ (1291-1327), Alfonso IV
  _el Benigno_ (1327-1336), Pedro IV _el Ceremonioso_ (1336-1387),
  Juan I _el Cazador_ (1387-1395), and Martin (1395-1410).]

Acontecio una vez a este caballero, hallandose en su favorita
diversion acompanado de su hija, cuya belleza singular y
extraordinaria blancura le habian granjeado el sobrenombre de la
Azucena, que como se les entrase a mas andar el dia engolfados en
perseguir a una res en el monte de su feudo, tuvo que acogerse,
durante las horas de la siesta, a una canada por donde corria un
riachuelo, saltando de roca en roca con un ruido manso y agradable.

Haria[1] cosa de unas dos horas que don Dionis se encontraba en aquel
delicioso lugar, recostado sobre la menuda grama a la sombra de una
chopera, departiendo amigablemente con sus monteros sobre las
peripecias del dia, y refiriendose unos a otros las aventuras mas o
menos curiosas que en su vida de cazador les habian acontecido, cuando
por lo alto de la mas empinada ladera y a traves de los alternados
murmullos del viento que agitaba las hojas de los arboles, comenzo a
percibirse, cada vez mas cerca, el sonido de una esquililla semejante
a la del guion de un rebano.

  [Footnote 1: Haria = 'it must have been.' See p. 5, note 2, and p.
  42, note 1.]

En efecto, era asi, pues a poco de haberse oido la esquililla,
empezaron a saltar por entre las apinadas matas de cantueso y tomillo,
y a descender a la orilla opuesta del riachuelo, hasta unos cien
corderos, blancos como la nieve, detras de los cuales, con su caperuza
calada para libertarse la cabeza de los perpendiculares rayos del sol,
y su atillo al hombro en la punta de un palo, aparecio el zagal que
los conducia.

--A proposito de aventuras extraordinarias, exclamo al verle uno de
los monteros de don Dionis, dirigiendose a su senor: ahi teneis a
Esteban el zagal, que de algun tiempo a esta parte anda mas tonto que
lo que naturalmente lo hizo Dios, que no es poco, y el cual puede
haceros pasar un rato divertido refiriendo la causa de sus continuos
sustos.

--?Pues que le acontece a ese pobre diablo? exclamo don Dionis con
aire de curiosidad picada.

--iFriolera! anadio el montero en tono de zumba: es el caso, que sin
haber nacido en Viernes Santo[1] ni estar senalado con la cruz,[2] ni
hallarse en relaciones con el demonic, a lo que se puede colegir de
sus habitos de cristiano viejo, se encuentra sin saber como ni por
donde, dotado de la facultad mas maravillosa que ha poseido hombre
alguno, a no ser Salomon,[3] de quien se dice que sabia hasta el
lenguaje de los pajaros.

  [Footnote 1: Viernes Santo = 'Good Friday,' the Friday of Holy Week,
  anniversary of the death of Jesus Christ. Friday has long been
  considered an unlucky day, and Good Friday, in spite of its name,
  has been regarded by popular superstition as a fatal day. One born
  on that day might have particular aptitude for witchcraft.]

  [Footnote 2: senalado con la cruz = 'marked with the cross.' The
  reference here is doubtless to a birth-mark in the form of a cross,
  which would indicate a special aptitude for thaumaturgy or
  occultism. This might take the form of Christian mysticism, as in
  the case of St. Leo, who is said to have been "marked all over with
  red crosses" at birth (see Brewer, _Dictionary of Miracles_, Phila.,
  1884, p. 425), or the less orthodox form of magic, as is suggested
  here.]

  [Footnote 3: Salomon = 'Solomon.' "A famous king of Israel, 993-953
  B.C. (Duncker), son of David and Bathsheba.... The name of Solomon,
  who was supposed to have possessed extraordinary magical powers,
  plays an important part in Eastern and thence in European legends,"
  _Century Dict._ "His wisdom enabled him (as legend informs us) to
  interpret the speech of beasts and birds, a gift shared afterwards,
  it was said, by his descendant Hillel (Koran, sura 37, Ewald,
  _Gesch. Isr._, iii, 407)." M'Clintock and Strong, _Cyclopedia of
  Biblical, Theological, and Ecclesiastical Literature_, N.Y., 1880,
  vol. ix, p. 871.]

--?Y a que se refiere esa facultad maravillosa?

--Se refiere, prosiguio el montero, a que, segun el afirma, y lo jura
y perjura por todo lo mas sagrado del mundo, los ciervos que discurren
por estos montes, se han dado de ojo para no dejarle en paz, siendo lo
mas gracioso del caso, que en mas de una ocasion les ha sorprendido
concertando entre si las burlas que han de hacerle, y despues que
estas burlas se han llevado a termino, ha oido las ruidosas carcajadas
con que las celebran.

Mientras esto decia el montero, Constanza, que asi se llamaba la
hermosa hija de don Dionis, se habia aproximado al grupo de los
cazadores, y como demostrase su curiosidad por conocer la
extraordinaria historia de Esteban, uno de estos se adelanto hasta el
sitio en donde el zagal daba de beber a su ganado, y le condujo a
presencia de su senor, que para disipar la turbacion y el visible
encogimiento del pobre mozo, se apresuro a saludarle por su nombre,
acompanando el saludo con una bondadosa sonrisa.

Era Esteban un muchacho de diecinueve a veinte anos, fornido, con la
cabeza pequena y hundida entre los hombros, los ojos pequenos y
azules, la mirada incierta y torpe como la de los albinos, la nariz
roma, los labios gruesos y entreabiertos, la frente calzada, la tez
blanca pero ennegrecida por el sol, y el cabello que le caia en parte
sobre los ojos y parte alrededor de la cara, en guedejas asperas y
rojas semejantes a las crines de un rocin colorado.

Esto, sobre poco mas o menos, era Esteban en cuanto al fisico;
respecto a su moral, podia asegurarse sin temor de ser desmentido ni
por el ni por ninguna de las personas que le conocian, que era
perfectamente simple, aunque un tanto suspicaz y malicioso como buen
rustico.

Una vez el zagal repuesto de su turbacion, le dirigio de nuevo la
palabra don Dionis, y con el tono mas serio del mundo, y fingiendo un
extraordinario interes por conocer los detalles del suceso a que su
montero se habia referido, le hizo una multitud de preguntas, a las
que Esteban comenzo a contestar de una manera evasiva, como deseando
evitar explicaciones sobre el asunto.

Estrechado, sin embargo, por las interrogaciones de su senor y por los
ruegos de Constanza, que parecia la mas curiosa e interesada en que el
pastor refiriese sus estupendas aventuras, decidiose este a hablar,
mas no sin que antes dirigiese a su alrededor una mirada de
desconfianza, como temiendo ser oido por otras personas que las que
alli estaban presentes, y de rascarse tres o cuatro veces la cabeza
tratando de reunir sus recuerdos o hilvanar su discurso, que al fin
comenzo do esta manera:

--Es el caso, senor, que segun me dijo un preste de Tarazona,[1] al
que acudi no ha mucho, para consultar mis dudas, con el diablo no
sirven juegos, sino punto en boca, buenas y muchas oraciones a San
Bartolome,[2] que es quien le conoce las cosquillas, y dejarle andar;
que Dios, que es justo y esta alla arriba, proveera a todo. Firme en
esta idea, habia decidido no volver a decir palabra sobre el asunto a
nadie, ni por nada; pero lo hare hoy por satisfacer vuestra
curiosidad, y a fe a fe que despues de todo, si el diablo me lo toma
en cuenta, y torna a molestarme en castigo de mi indiscrecion, buenos
Evangelios llevo cosidos a la pellica, y con su ayuda creo que, como
otras veces no me sera inutil el garrote.

  [Footnote 1: Tarazona. A venerable town of some 8800 inhabitants
  situated on the river Queiles, northeast of the Moncayo (see p. 8,
  note 1) and northwest of the town of Borja.]

  [Footnote 2: San Bartolome--'St. Bartholomew,' one of the twelve
  apostles, deemed by some to be identical with Nathanael. "Little is
  known of his work. According to tradition he preached in various
  parts of Asia, and was flayed alive and then crucified, head
  downward, at Albanopolis in Armenia. His memory is celebrated in the
  Roman Catholic church on August 24." _Century Dict._ In popular
  superstition St. Bartholomew is supposed to have had particular
  power over the devil, and prayers to this saint are thought to be
  specially efficacious against the wiles of the evil one. For a
  detailed account of St. Bartholomew's power over the devil, see
  Jacobi a Voragine, _Legenda Aurea_ (Th. Graesse), Lipsiae, MDCCCL,
  cap. cxxiii, pp. 540-544.]

--Pero, vamos, exclamo don Dionis, impaciente al escuchar las
digresiones del zagal, que amenazaban no concluir nunca; dejate de
rodeos y ve derecho al asunto.

--A el voy, contesto con calma Esteban, que despues de dar una gran
voz acompanada de un silbido para que se agruparan los corderos, que
no perdia de vista y comenzaban[1] a desparramarse por el monte, torno
a rascarse la cabeza y prosiguio asi:

  [Footnote 1: que no perdia de vista y comenzaban. Compare the use of
  the relative in this phrase with that to which attention has been
  called on p. 10, note 1.]

--Por una parte vuestras continuas excursiones, y por otra el dale que
le das de los cazadores furtivos, que ya con trampa o con ballesta no
dejan res a vida en veinte jornadas al contorno, habian no hace mucho
agotado la caza en estos montes, hasta el extremo de no encontrarse un
venado en ellos ni por un ojo de la cara.

Hablaba yo de esto mismo en el lugar, sentado en el porche de la
iglesia, donde despues de acabada la misa del domingo solia reunirme
con algunos peones de los que labran la tierra de Veraton,[1] cuando
algunos de ellos me dijeron:

  [Footnote 1: Veraton. See p. 25, note 1.]

--Pues, hombre, no se en que consista el que tu no los topes, pues de
nosotros podemos asegurarte que no bajamos una vez a las hazas que no
nos encontremos rastro, y hace tres o cuatro dias, sin ir mas lejos,
una manada, que a juzgar por las huellas debia componerse de mas de
veinte, le segaron antes de tiempo una pieza de trigo al santero de la
Virgen del Romeral.[1]

  [Footnote 1: la Virgen del Romeral. A hermitage in the locality.]

--?Y hacia que sitio seguia el rastro? pregunte a los peones, con
animo de ver si topaba con la tropa.

--Hacia la canada de los cantuesos, me contestaron.

No eche en saco roto la advertencia: aquella noche misma fui a
apostarme entre los chopos. Durante toda ella estuve oyendo por aca y
por alla, tan pronto lejos como cerca, el bramido de los ciervos que
se llamaban unos a otros, y de vez en cuando sentia moverse el ramaje
a mis espaldas; pero por mas que me hice todo ojos, la verdad es que
no pude distinguir a ninguno.

No obstante, al romper el dia, cuando lleve los corderos al agua, a la
orilla de este rio, como obra de dos tiros de honda del sitio en que
nos hallamos, y en una umbria de chopos, donde ni a la hora de siesta
se desliza un rayo de sol, encontre huellas recientes de los ciervos,
algunas ramas desgajadas, la corriente un poco turbia, y lo que es mas
particular, entre el rastro de las reses las breves huellas de unos
pies[1] pequenitos como la mitad de la palma de mi mano, sin
ponderacion alguna.

  [Footnote 1: pies. Human feet are of course referred to here.]

Al decir esto, el mozo, instintivamente y al parecer buscando un punto
de comparacion, dirigio la vista hacia el pie de Constanza, que
asomaba por debajo del brial, calzado de un precioso chapin de
tafilete amarillo; pero como al par de Esteban bajasen tambien los
ojos don Dionis y algunos de los monteros que le rodeaban, la hermosa
nina se apresuro a esconderlos, exclamando con el tono mas natural del
mundo:

--iOh, no! por desgracia no los tengo yo tan pequenitos, pues de ese
tamano solo se encuentran en las hadas; cuya historia nos refieren los
trovadores.[1]

  [Footnote 1: trovadores = 'troubadours.' "A class of early poets who
  first appeared in Provence, France. The troubadours were considered
  the inventors of a species of lyrical poetry, characterized by an
  almost entire devotion to the subject of chivalric love, and
  generally very complicated in regard to meter and rhyme. They
  fourished from the eleventh to the latter part of the thirteenth
  century, principally in the south of France, Catalonia, Aragon, and
  northern Italy." _Century Dict._ Belief in the marvelous, and hence
  in fairies, likewise characterized these poets.]

--Pues no paro aqui la cosa, continuo el zagal, cuando Constanza hubo
concluido; sino que otra vez, habiendome colocado en otro escondite
por donde indudablemente habian de pasar los ciervos para dirigirse a
la canada, alla al filo de la media noche me rindio un poco el sueno,
aunque no tanto que no abriese los ojos en el mismo punto en que crei
percibir que las ramas se movian a mi alrededor. Abri los ojos segun
dejo dicho: me incorpore con sumo cuidado, y poniendo atencion a
aquel confuso murmullo que cada vez sonaba mas proximo, oi en las
rafagas del aire, como gritos y cantares extranos, carcajadas y tres o
cuatro voces distintas que hablaban entre si con un ruido y una
algarabia semejante al de las muchachas del lugar, cuando riendo y
bromeando por el camino, vuelven en bandadas de la fuente con sus
cantaros a la cabeza.

Segun colegia de la proximidad de las voces y del cercano chasquido de
las ramas que crujian al romperse para dar paso a aquella turba de
locuelas, iban a salir de la espesura a un pequeno rellano que formaba
el monte en el sitio donde yo estaba oculto, cuando enteramente a mis
espaldas, tan cerca o mas que me encuentro de vosotros, oi una nueva
voz fresca, delgada y vibrante, que dijo ... creedlo, senores, esto es
tan seguro como que me he de morir ... dijo ... claro y distintamente
estas propias palabras:

  _iPor aqui, por aqui, companeras,
  que esta ahi el bruto de Esteban!_

Al llegar a este punto de la relacion del zagal, los circunstantes no
pudieron ya contener por mas tiempo la risa, que hacia largo rato les
retozaba en los ojos, y dando rienda a su buen humor, prorrumpieron en
una carcajada estrepitosa. De los primeros en comenzar a reir y de los
ultimos en dejarlo, fueron don Dionis, que a pesar de su fingida
circunspeccion no pudo por menos de tomar parte en el general
regocijo, y su hija Constanza, la cual cada vez que miraba a Esteban
todo suspenso y confuso, tornaba a reirse como una loca hasta el punto
de saltarle las lagrimas a los ojos.

El zagal, por su parte, aunque sin atender al efecto que su narracion
habia producido, parecia todo turbado e inquieto; y mientras los
senores reian a sabor de sus inocentadas, el tornaba la vista a un
lado y a otro con visibles muestras de temor y como queriendo
descubrir algo a traves de los cruzados troncos de los arboles.

--?Que es eso, Esteban, que te sucede? le pregunto uno de los monteros
notando la creciente inquietud del pobre mozo, que ya fijaba sus
espantadas pupilas en la hija risuena de don Dionis, ya las volvia a
su alrededor con una expresion asombrada y estupida.

--Me sucede una cosa muy extrana, exclamo Esteban. Cuando despues de
escuchar las palabras que dejo referidas, me incorpore con prontitud
para sorprender a la persona que las habia pronunciado, una corza
blanca como la nieve salio de entre las mismas matas en donde yo
estaba oculto, y dando unos saltos enormes por cima de los carrascales
y los lentiscos, se alejo seguida de una tropa de corzas de su color
natural, y asi estas como la blanca que las iba guiando, no arrojaban
bramidos al huir, sino que se reian con unas carcajadas, cuyo eco
juraria que aun me esta sonando en los oidos en este momento.

--iBah!... ibah!... Esteban, exclamo don Dionis con aire burlon, sigue
los consejos del preste de Tarazona; no hables de tus encuentros con
los corzos amigos de burlas, no sea que haga el diablo que al fin
pierdas el poco juicio que tienes; y pues ya estas provisto de los
Evangelios y sabes las oraciones de San Bartolome, vuelvete a tus
corderos, que comienzan a desbandarse por la canada. Si los espiritus
malignos tornan a incomodarte, ya sabes el remedio: _Pater
Noster_[1] y garrotazo.

  [Footnote 1: Pater Noster. The first words of the Lord's Prayer in
  Latin.]

El zagal, despues de guardarse en el zurron un medio pan blanco y un
trozo de came de jabali, y en el estomago un valiente trago de vino
que le dio por orden de su senor uno de los palafreneros, despidiose
de don Dionis y su hija, y apenas anduvo cuatro pasos, comenzo a
voltear la honda para reunir a pedradas los corderos.

Como a esta sazon notase don Dionis que entre unas y otras las horas
del calor eran ya pasadas y el vientecillo de la tarde comenzaba a
mover las hojas de los chopos y a refrescar los campos, dio orden a su
comitiva para que aderezasen las caballerias que andaban paciendo
sueltas por el inmediato soto; y cuando todo estuvo a punto, hizo sena
a los unos para que soltasen las traillas, y a los otros para que
tocasen las trompas, y saliendo en tropel de la chopera, prosiguio
adelante la interrumpida caza.


II

Entre los monteros de don Dionis habla uno llamado Garces, hijo de un
antiguo servidor de la familia, y por tanto el mas querido de sus
senores.

Garces tenia poco mas o menos la edad de Constanza, y desde muy nino
habiase acostumbrado a prevenir el menor de sus deseos, y a adivinar y
satisfacer el mas leve de sus antojos.

Por su mano se entretenia en afilar en los ratos de ocio las agudas
saetas de su ballesta de marfil; el domaba los potros que habia de
montar su senora; el ejercitaba en los ardides de la caza a sus
lebreles favoritos y amaestraba a sus halcones, a los cuales compraba
en las ferias de Castilla[1] caperuzas rojas bordadas de oro.

  [Footnote 1: Castilla = 'Castile.' An old kingdom of Spain, in the
  northern and central part of the peninsula. The kingdoms of Castile
  and Leon, after several unions and separations, were finally united
  under Ferdinand III in 1230. Isabella of Castile married Ferdinand
  of Aragon in 1469, and in 1479 the two kingdoms of Castile and
  Aragon were united.]

Para con los otros monteros, los pajes y la gente menuda del servicio
de don Dionis, la exquisita solicitud de Garces y el aprecio con que
sus senores le distinguian, habianle valido una especie de general
animadversion, y al decir de los envidiosos, en todos aquellos
cuidados con que se adelantaba a prevenir los caprichos de su senora
revelabase su caracter adulador y rastrero. No faltaban, sin embargo,
algunos que, mas avisados o maliciosos, creyeron sorprender en la
asiduidad del solicito mancebo algunos Senales de mal disimulado amor.

Si en efecto era asi, el oculto carino de Garces tenia mas que sobrada
disculpa en la incomparable hermosura de Constanza. Hubierase
necesitado un pecho de roca y un corazon de hielo para permanecer
impasible un dia y otro al lado de aquella mujer singular por su
belleza y sus raros atractivos.

La Azucena _del Moncayo_[1] llamabanla en veinte leguas a la redonda,
y bien merecia este sobrenombre, porque era tan airosa, tan blanca y
tan rubia que, como a las azucenas, parecia que Dios la habia hecho de
nieve y oro.

  [Footnote 1: Moncayo. See p. 8, note 1]

Y sin embargo, entre los senores comarcanos murmurabase que la hermosa
castellana de Veraton[1] no era tan limpia de sangre como bella, y que
a pesar de sus trenzas rubias y su tez de alabastro, habia tenido por
madre una gitana. Lo de cierto que pudiera haber en estas
murmuraciones, nadie pudo nunca decirlo, porque la verdad era que don
Dionis tuvo una vida bastante azarosa en su juventud, y despues de
combatir largo tiempo bajo la conducta del monarca aragones,[2] del
cual recabo entre otras mercedes el feudo del Moncayo,[3] marchose a
Palestina,[4] en donde anduvo errante algunos anos, para volver por
ultimo a encerrarse en su castillo de Veraton,[5] con una hija
pequena, nacida sin duda en aquellos paises remotos. El unico que
hubiera podido decir algo acerca del misterioso origen de Constanza,
pues acompano a don Dionis en sus lejanas peregrinaciones, era el
padre de Garces, y este habia ya muerto hacia bastante tiempo, sin
decir una sola palabra sobre el asunto ni a su propio hijo, que varias
veces y con muestras de grande interes, se lo habia preguntado.

  [Footnote 1: Veraton. See p. 25, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: monarca aragones. See p. 25, note 3.]

  [Footnote 3: Moncayo. See p. 8, note 1]

  [Footnote 4: Palestina = 'Palestine.' A territory in the southern
  part of Syria. Chief city Jerusalem. "It passed under Mohammedan
  rule about 636, was held by the Christians temporarily during the
  Crusades [seventh and last under St. Louis 1270-1272], and since
  1516 has been in the possession of the Turkish government." _Century
  Dict._]

  [Footnote 5: Veraton. See p. 25, note 1.]

El caracter, tan pronto retraido y melancolico como bullicioso y
alegre de Constanza, la extrana exaltacion de sus ideas, sus
extravagantes caprichos, sus nunca vistas costumbres, hasta la
particularidad de tener los ojos y las cejas negras como la noche,
siendo blanca y rubia como el oro, habian contribuido a dar pabulo a
las hablillas de sus convecinos, y aun el mismo Garces, que tan
intimamente la trataba, habia llegado a persuadirse que su senora era
algo especial y no se parecia a las demas mujeres.

Presente a la relacion de Esteban, como los otros monteros, Garces fue
acaso el unico que oyo con verdadera curiosidad los pormenores de su
increible aventura, y si bien no pudo menos de sonreir cuando el zagal
repitio las palabras de la corza blanca, desde que abandono el soto en
que habian sesteado comenzo a revolver en su mente las mas absurdas
imaginaciones.

No cabe duda que todo eso del hablar las corzas es pura aprension de
Esteban, que es un completo mentecato, decia entre si el joven
montero, mientras que jinete en un poderoso alazan, seguia paso a paso
el palafren de Constanza, la cual tambien parecia mostrarse un tanto
distraida y silenciosa, y retirada del tropel de los cazadores, apenas
tomaba parte en la fiesta. ?Pero quien dice que en lo que refiere ese
simple no existira algo de verdad? prosiguio pensando el mancebo.
Cosas mas extranas hemos visto en el mundo, y una corza blanca bien
puede haberla, puesto que si se ha de dar credito a las cantigas del
pais, San Huberto,[1] patron de los cazadores, tenia una. iOh, si yo
pudiese coger viva una corza blanca para ofrecersela a mi senora!

  [Footnote 1: San Huberto = 'St. Hubert.' The patron saint of
  hunters; died about 727. His memory is celebrated by the church
  November 3. Legend says that he was the son of a nobleman of
  Aquitaine, and a keen hunter; and that once when he was engaged in
  the chase on Good Friday, in the forest of Ardennes, a stag appeared
  to him having a shining crucifix between its antlers. He heard a
  warning voice and was converted, entered the chnrch, and became
  bishop of Maestricht and Liege. See the _Encyclopedia Americano_.

  The role of the deer in mythology, however, is not usually so
  beneficent, and "the antelope, the gazelle, and the stag generally,
  instead of helping the hero, involve him rather in perplexity and
  peril. This mythical subject is amplified in numerous Hindoo
  legends." See de Gubernatis, _Zooelogical Mythology_, London, 1872,
  vol. ii, p. 84 and following.

  La Biche au Bois_ (The Hind of the Woods) of Mme. d'Aulnoy is a
  story that offers some striking resemblances to _La Corza Blanca_ of
  Becquer. A beautiful princess is transformed by a wicked fairy into
  a white hind, which form she is allowed to quit at certain hours of
  the day. One day, while still in the form of the hind, she is
  pursued by her lover and wounded by an arrow. However, a release
  from the enchantment and a happy marriage end the sufferings of the
  heroine. In this Spanish tale the transformation is voluntary, which
  fact gives to Constanza the traits of a witch.

  In Wordsworth's beautiful poem _The White Doe of Rylstone_ we find
  the doe divested of all the elements of witchcraft, and in its
  solicitude for the gentle and bereft Lady Emily it is likened
  symbolically

    To the grief of her soul that doth come and go
    In the beautiful form of this innocent Doe:
    Which, though seemingly doomed in its breast to sustain
    A softened remembrance of sorrow and pain,
    Is spotless, and holy, and gentle, and bright;
    And glides o'er the earth like an angel of light.]

Asi pensando y discurriendo paso Garces la tarde, y cuando ya el sol
comenzo a esconderse por detras de las vecinas lomas y don Dionis
mando volver grupas a su gente para tornar al castillo, separose sin
ser notado de la comitiva y echo en busca del zagal por lo mas espeso
e intrincado del monte.

La noche habia cerrado casi por completo cuando don Dionis llegaba a
las puertas de su castillo. Acto continuo dispusieronle una frugal
colacion, y sentose con su hija a la mesa.

--Y Garces ?donde esta? pregunto Constanza notando que su montero no
se encontraba alli para servirla como tenia de costumbre.

--No sabemos, se apresuraron a contestar los otros servidores;
desaparecio de entre nosotros cerca de la canada, y esta es la hora en
que todavia no le hemos visto.

En este punto llego Garces todo sofocado, cubierta aun de sudor la
frente, pero con la cara mas regocijada y satisfecha que pudiera
imaginarse.

--Perdonadme, senora, exclamo, dirigiendose a Constanza; perdonadme si
he faltado un momento a mi obligacion; pero alla de donde vengo a todo
el correr de mi caballo, como aqui, solo me, ocupaba en serviros.

--?En servirme? repitio Constanza; no comprendo lo que quieres decir.

--Si, senora; en serviros, repitio el joven, pues he averiguado que es
verdad que la corza blanca existe. A mas de Esteban, lo dan por seguro
otros varios pastores, que juran haberla visto mas de una vez, y con
ayuda de los cuales espero en Dios y en mi patron San Huberto que
antes de tres dias, viva o muerta, os la traere al castillo.

--iBah!... iBah!... exclamo Constanza con aire de zumba, mientras
hacian coro a sus palabras las risas mas o menos disimuladas de los
circunstantes; dejate de cacerias nocturnas y de corzas blancas: mira
que el diablo ha dado en la flor de tentar a los simples, y si te
empenas en andarle a los talones, va a dar que reir contigo como con
el pobre Esteban.

--Senora, interrumpio Garces con voz entrecortada y disimulando en lo
posible la colera que le producia el burlon regocijo de sus
companeros, yo no me he visto nunca con el diablo, y por consiguiente,
no se todavia como las gasta; pero conmigo os juro que todo podra
hacer menos dar que reir, porque el uso de ese privilegio solo en vos
se tolerarlo.

Constanza conocio el efecto que su burla habia producido en el
enamorado joven; pero deseando apurar su paciencia hasta lo ultimo,
torno a decir en el mismo tono:

--?Y si al dispararla te saluda con alguna risa del genero de la que
oyo Esteban, o se te rie en la nariz, y al escuchar sus sobrenaturales
carcajadas se te cae la ballesta de las manos, y antes de reponerte
del susto ya ha desaparecido la corza blanca mas ligera que un
relampago?

--iOh! exclamo Garces, en cuanto a eso estad segura que como yo la
topase a tiro de ballesta, aunque me hiciese mas monos que un juglar,
aunque me hablara, no ya en romance, sino en latin como el abad de
Munilla,[1] no se iba[2] sin un arpon en el cuerpo.

  [Footnote 1: Munilla. A town of 1170 inhabitants situated in the
  province of Logrono to the west of the town of Arnedillo on the
  Cidacos. Munilla was a place of considerable importance at the time
  in which the events of this story are supposed to have occurred.]

  [Footnote 2: no se iba = 'it would not escape.' See p. 108, note 3]

En este punto del dialogo, tercio don Dionis, y con una desesperante
gravedad a traves de la que se adivinaba toda la ironia de sus
palabras, comenzo a darle al ya asendereado mozo los consejos mas
originales del mundo, para el caso de que se encontrase de manos a
boca con el demonio convertido en corza blanca.

A cada nueva ocurrencia de su padre, Constanza fijaba sus ojos en el
atribulado Garces y rompia a reir como una loca, en tanto que los
otros servidores esforzaban las burlas con sus miradas de inteligencia
y su mal encubierto gozo.

Mientras duro la colacion prolongose esta escena, en que la credulidad
del joven montero fue, por decirlo asi, el tema obligado del general
regocijo; de modo que cuando se levantaron los panos, y don Dionis y
Constanza se retiraron a sus habitaciones, y toda la gente del
castillo se entrego al reposo, Garces permanecio un largo espacio de
tiempo irresoluto, dudando si a pesar de las burlas de sus senores,
proseguiria firme en su proposito, o desistiria completamente de la
empresa.

--iQue diantre! exclamo saliendo del estado de incertidumbre en que se
encontraba: mayor mal del que me ha sucedido no puede sucederme, y si
por el contrario es verdad lo que nos ha contado Esteban ... ioh,
entonces, como he de saborear mi triunfo!

Esto diciendo, armo su ballesta, no sin haberla[1] hecho antes la
senal de la cruz en la punta de la vira, y colocandosela a la espalda
se dirigio a la poterna del castillo para tomar la vereda del monte.

  [Footnote 1: la. See p. 20, note 2.]

Cuando Garces llego a la canada y al punto en que, segun las
instrucciones de Esteban, debia aguardar la aparicion de las corzas,
la luna comenzaba a remontarse con lentitud por detras de los cercanos
montes.

A fuer de buen cazador y practico en el oficio, antes de elegir un
punto a proposito para colocarse al acecho de las reses, anduvo un
gran rato de aca para alla examinando las trochas y las veredas
vecinas, la disposicion de los arboles, los accidentes del terreno,
las curvas del rio y la profundidad de sus aguas.

Por ultimo, despues de terminar este minucioso reconocimiento del
lugar en que se encontraba, agazapose en un ribazo junto a unos chopos
de copas elevadas y obscuras, a cuyo pie crecian unas matas de
lentisco, altas lo bastante para ocultar a un hombre echado en tierra.

El rio, que desde las musgosas rocas donde tenia su nacimiento venia
siguiendo las sinuosidades del Moncayo a entrar en la canada por una
vertiente, deslizabase desde alli banando el pie de los sauces que
sombreaban su orilla, o jugueteando con alegre murmullo entre las
piedras rodadas del monte hasta caer en una hondura proxima al lugar
que servia de escondrijo al montero.

Los alamos, cuyas plateadas hojas movia el aire con un rumor
dulcisimo, los sauces que inclinados sobre la limpia corriente
humedecian en ella las puntas de sus desmayadas ramas, y los apretados
carrascales por cuyos troncos subian y se enredaban las madreselvas y
las campanillas azules, formaban un espeso muro de follaje alrededor
del remanso del rio.

El viento, agitando los frondosos pabellones de verdura que derramaban
en torno su flotante sombra, dejaba penetrar a intervalos un furtivo
rayo de luz, que brillaba como un relampago de plata sobre la
superficie de las aguas inmoviles y profundas.

Oculto tras los matojos, con el oido atento al mas leve rumor y la
vista clavada en el punto en donde segun sus calculos debian aparecer
las corzas, Garces espero inutilmente un gran espacio de tiempo.

Todo permanecia a su alrededor sumido en una profunda calma.

Poco a poco, y bien fuese que el peso de la noche, que ya habia pasado
de la mitad, comenzara a dejarse sentir, bien que el lejano murmullo
del agua, el penetrante aroma de las flores silvestres y las caricias
del viento comunicasen a sus sentidos el dulce sopor en que parecia
estar impregnada la naturaleza toda, el enamorado mozo que hasta aquel
punto habia estado entretenido revolviendo en su mente las mas
halagueenas imaginaciones comenzo a sentir que sus ideas se elaboraban
con mas lentitud y sus pensamientos tomaban formas mas leves e
indecisas.

Despues de mecerse un instante en ese vago espacio que media entre la
vigilia y el sueno, entorno al fin los ojos, dejo escapar la ballesta
de sus manos y se quedo profundamente dormido. . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . .

Cosa de dos horas o tres haria[1] ya que el joven montero roncaba a
pierna suelta, disfrutando a todo sabor de uno de los suenos mas
apacibles de su vida, cuando de repente entreabrio los ojos
sobresaltado; e incorporose a medias lleno aun de ese estupor del que
se vuelve en si de improviso despues de un sueno profundo.

  [Footnote 1: haria = 'it must have been.' See p. 5, note 2, and p.
  26, note 1.]

En las rafagas del aire y confundido con los leves rumores de la
noche, creyo percibir un extrano rumor de voces delgadas, dulces y
misteriosas que hablaban entre si, reian o cantaban cada cual por su
parte y una cosa diferente, formando una algarabia tan ruidosa y
confusa como la de los pajaros que despiertan al primer rayo del sol
entre las frondas de una alameda.

Este extrano rumor solo se dejo oir un instante, y despues todo volvio
a quedar en silencio.

--Sin duda sonaba con las majaderias que nos refirio el zagal, exclamo
Garces restregandose los ojos con mucha calma, y en la firme
persuasion de que cuanto habia creido oir no era mas que esa vaga
huella del ensueno que queda, al despertar, en la imaginacion, como
queda en el oido la ultima cadencia de una melodia despues que ha
expirado temblando la ultima nota. Y dominado por la invencible
languidez que embargaba sus miembros, iba a reclinar de nuevo la
cabeza sobre el cesped, cuando torno a oir el eco distante de aquellas
misteriosas voces, que acompanandose del rumor del aire, del agua y de
las hojas, cantaban asi:



CORO


"El arquero que velaba en lo alto de la torre ha reclinado su pesada
cabeza en el muro.

"Al cazador furtivo que esperaba sorprender la res, lo ha sorprendido
el sueno.

"El pastor que aguarda el dia consultando las estrellas, duerme ahora
y dormira hasta el amanecer.

"Reina de las ondinas,[1] sigue nuestros pasos.

  [Footnote 1: ondinas = 'undines.' Female water-sprites, without
  souls. They form one branch of the elemental spirits (see p. 24,
  note 2, and p. 47, note 1). Read Fouque's romantic novel entitled
  _Undine_.]

"Ven a mecerte en las ramas de los sauces sobre el haz del agua.

"Ven a embriagarte con el perfume de las violetas que se abren entre
las sombras.

"Ven a gozar de la noche, que es el dia de los espiritus."

Mientras flotaban en el aire las suaves notas de aquella deliciosa
musica, Garces se mantuvo inmovil. Despues que se hubo desvanecido,
con mucha precaucion aparto un poco las ramas, y no sin experimentar
algun sobresalto vio aparecer las corzas que en tropel y salvando los
matorrales con ligereza increible unas veces, deteniendose como a
escuchar otras, jugueteando entre si, ya escondiendose entre la
espesura, ya saliendo nuevamente a la senda, bajaban del monte con
direccion al remanso del rio.

Delante de sus companeras, mas agil, mas linda, mas juguetona y alegre
que todas, saltando, corriendo, parandose y tornando a correr, de modo
que parecia no tocar el suelo con los pies, iba la corza blanca, cuyo
extrano color destacaba como una fantastica luz sobre el obscuro fondo
de los arboles.

Aunque el joven se sentia dispuesto a ver en cuanto le rodeaba algo de
sobrenatural y maravilloso, la verdad del caso era, que prescindiendo
de la momentanea alucinacion que turbo un instante sus sentidos
fingiendole musicas, rumores y palabras, ni en la forma de las corzas
ni en sus movimientos, ni en los cortos bramidos con que parecian
llamarse, habia nada con que no debiese estar ya muy familiarizado un
cazador practico en esta clase de expediciones nocturnas.

A medida que desechaba la primera impresion, Garces comenzo a
comprenderlo asi, y riendose interiormente de su incredulidad y su
miedo, desde aquel instante solo se ocupo en averiguar, teniendo en
cuenta la direccion que seguian, el punto donde se hallaban las
corzas.

Hecho el calculo, cogio la ballesta entre los dientes, y arrastrandose
como una culebra por detras de los lentiscos, fue a situarse obra de
unos cuarenta pasos mas lejos del lugar en que antes se encontraba.
Una vez acomodado en su nuevo escondite, espero el tiempo suficiente
para que las corzas estuvieran ya dentro del rio, a fin de hacer el
tiro mas seguro. Apenas empezo a escucharse ese ruido particular que
produce el agua que se bate a golpes o se agita con violencia, Garces
comenzo a levantarse poquito a poco y con las mayores precauciones,
apoyandose en la tierra primero sobre la punta de los dedos, y despues
con una de las rodillas.

Ya de pie, y cerciorandose a tientas de que el arma estaba preparada,
dio un paso hacia adelante, alargo el cuello por cima de los arbustos
para dominar el remanso, y tendio la ballesta; pero en el mismo punto
en que, a par de la ballesta, tendio la vista buscando el objeto que
habia de herir, se escapo de sus labios un imperceptible e
involuntario grito de asombro.

La luna que habia ido remontandose con lentitud por el ancho
horizonte, estaba inmovil y como suspendida en la mitad del cielo. Su
dulce claridad inundaba el soto, abrillantaba la intranquila
superficie del rio y hacia ver los objetos como a traves de una gasa
azul.

Las corzas habian desaparecido.

En su lugar, lleno de estupor y casi de miedo, vio Garces un grupo de
bellisimas mujeres, de las cuales, unas entraban en el agua
jugueteando, mientras las otras acababan de despojarse de las ligeras
tunicas que aun ocultaban a la codiciosa vista el tesoro de sus
formas.

En esos ligeros y cortados suenos de la manana, ricos en imagenes
risuenas y voluptuosas, suenos diafanos y celestes como la luz que
entonces comienza a transparentarse a traves de las blancas cortinas
del lecho, no ha habido nunca imaginacion de veinte anos que
bosquejase con los colores de la fantasia una escena semejante a la
que se ofrecia en aquel punto a los ojos del atonito Garces.

Despojadas ya de sus tunicas y sus velos de mil colores, que
destacaban sobre el fondo, suspendidas de los arboles o arrojadas con
descuido sobre la alfombra del cesped, las muchachas discurrian a su
placer por el soto, formando grupos pintorescos, y entraban y salian
en el agua, haciendola saltar en chispas luminosas sobre las flores de
la margen como una menuda lluvia de rocio.

Aqui una de ellas, blanca como el vellon de un cordero, sacaba su
cabeza rubia entre las verdes y flotantes hojas de una planta
acuatica, de la cual parecia una flor a medio abrir, cuyo flexible
tallo mas bien se adivinaba que se veia temblar debajo de los
infinites circulos de luz de las ondas.

Otra alla, con el cabello suelto sobre los hombros meciase suspendida
de la rama de un sauce sobre la corriente de un rio, y sus pequenos
pies, color de rosa, hacian una raya de plata al pasar rozando la
tersa superficie. En tanto que estas permanecian recostadas aun al
borde del agua con los azules ojos adormidos, aspirando con
voluptuosidad el perfume de las flores y estremeciendose ligeramente
al contacto de la fresca brisa, aquellas danzaban en vertiginosa
ronda, entrelazando caprichosamente sus manos, dejando caer atras la
cabeza con delicioso abandono, e hiriendo el suelo con el pie en
alternada cadencia.

Era imposible seguirlas en sus agiles movimientos, imposible abarcar
con una mirada los infinitos detalles del cuadro que formaban, unas
corriendo, jugando y persiguiendose con alegres risas por entre el
laberinto de los arboles; otras surcando el agua como un cisne, y
rompiendo la corriente con el levantado seno; otras, en fin,
sumergiendose en el fondo, donde permanecian largo rato para volver a
la superficie, trayendo una de esas flores extranas que nacen
escondidas en el lecho de las aguas profundas.

La mirada del atonito montero vagaba absorta de un lado a otro, sin
saber donde fijarse, hasta que sentado bajo un pabellon de verdura que
parecia servirle de dosel, y rodeado de un grupo de mujeres todas a
cual mas bellas, que la ayudaban a despojarse de sus ligerisimas
vestiduras, creyo ver el objeto de sus ocultas adoraciones, la hija
del noble don Dionis, la incomparable Constanza.

Marchando de sorpresa en sorpresa, el enamorado joven no se atrevia ya
a dar credito ni al testimonio de sus sentidos, y creiase bajo la
influencia de un sueno fascinador y enganoso.

No obstante, pugnaba en vano por persuadirse de que todo cuanto veia
era efecto del desarreglo de su imaginacion; porque mientras mas la
miraba, y mas despacio, mas se convencia de que aquella mujer era
Constanza.

No podia caber duda, no: suyos eran aquellos ojos obscuros y
sombreados de largas pestanas, que apenas bastaban a amortiguar la luz
de sus pupilas; suya aquella rubia y abundante cabellera, que despues
de coronar su frente se derramaba por su blanco seno y sus redondas
espaldas como una cascada de oro; suyos, en fin, aquel cuello airoso,
que sostenia su languida cabeza, ligeramente inclinada como una flor
que se rinde al peso de las gotas de rocio, y aquellas voluptuosas
formas que el habia sonado tal vez, y aquellas manos semejantes a
manojos de jazmines, y aquellos pies diminutos, comparables solo con
dos pedazos de nieve que el sol no ha podido derretir, y que a la
manana blanquean entre la verdura.

En el momento en que Constanza salio del bosquecillo, sin velo alguno
que ocultase a los ojos de su amante los escondidos tesoros de su
hermosura, sus companeras comenzaron nuevamente a cantar estas
palabras con una melodia dulcisima:



CORO


"Genios del aire, habitadores del luminoso eter, venid envueltos en un
jiron de niebla plateada.

"Silfos[1] invisibles, dejad el caliz de los entreabiertos lirios, y
venid en vuestros carros de nacar al que vuelan uncidas las mariposas.

  [Footnote 1: The spirits mentioned here belong to the race of
  sub-human intelligences known in the old magical doctrine as
  elemental or elementary spirits, "who are formally grouped into four
  broad species. The air is inhabited by the amiable race of Sylphs,
  the sea by the delightful and beautiful Undines, the earth by the
  industrious race of swarthy Gnomes, and the fire by the exalted and
  glorious nation of Salamanders, who are supreme in the elementary
  hierarchy. There is a close analogy in the natures of all these
  intelligences with the more lofty constitution of certain angelical
  choirs.... the Seraphim, Virtues, and Powers (being) of a fiery
  character, the Cherubim terrestrial, the Thrones and Archangels
  aquatic, while the Dominations and Principalities are aerial." A. E.
  Waite, _The Occult Sciences_, London, 1891, p. 37.

  The elementary spirits are believed to be without souls. "Sometimes,
  however, an elementary spirit procures a soul by means of a loving
  union with one of the human race. At other times, the reverse
  happens, and the soul of the mortal is lost, who, leaving the haunts
  of men, associates with those soulless, but often amiable and
  affectionate beings." Idem, pp. 35-36. See p. 24, note 2, and p. 43,
  note 1.]

"Larvas de las fuentes,[1] abandonad el lecho de musgo y caed sobre
nosotras en menuda lluvia de perlas.

  [Footnote 1: See p. 47, note 1.]

"Escarabajos de esmeralda, luciernagas de fuego, mariposas negras,[1]
venid!

  [Footnote 1: These insects figure frequently in popular mythology.
  Consult de Gubematis, _Zoological Mythology_, London, 1872, 2 vols.]

"Y venid vosotros todos, espiritus de la noche, venid zumbando como un
enjambre de insectos de luz y de oro.

"Venid, que ya el astro protector de los misterios[1] brilla en la
plenitud de su hermosura.

  [Footnote 1: The moon.]

"Venid, que ha llegado el momento de las transformaciones
maravillosas.

"Venid, que las que os aman os esperan impacientes."

Garces, que permanecia inmovil, sintio al oir aquellos cantares
misteriosos que el aspid de los celos le mordia el corazon, y
obedeciendo a un impulso mas poderoso que su voluntad, deseando romper
de una vez el encanto que fascinaba sus sentidos, separo con mano
tremula y convulsa el ramaje que le ocultaba, y de un solo salto se
puso en la margen del rio. El encanto se rompio, desvaneciose todo
como el humo, y al tender en torno suyo la vista, no vio ni oyo mas
que el bullicioso tropel con que las timidas corzas, sorprendidas en
lo mejor de sus nocturnos juegos, huian espantadas de su presencia,
una por aqui, otra por alla, cual salvando de un salto los matorrales,
cual ganando a todo correr la trocha del monte.

--iOh! bien dije yo que todas estas cosas no eran mas que
fantasmagorias del diablo, exclamo entonces el montero; pero por
fortuna esta vez ha andado un poco torpe dejandome entre las manos la
mejor presa.

Y en efecto, era asi: la corza blanca, deseando escapar por el soto,
se habia lanzado entre el laberinto de sus arboles, y enredandose en
una red de madreselvas, pugnaba en vano por desasirse. Garces le
encaro la ballesta; pero en el mismo punto en que iba a herirla, la
corza se volvio hacia el montero, y con voz clara y aguda detuvo su
accion con un grito, diciendole:--Garces ?que haces?--El joven
vacilo, y despues de un instante de duda, dejo caer al suelo el arma,
espantado a la sola idea de haber podido herir a su amante. Una sonora
y estridente carcajada vino a sacarle al fin de su estupor; la corza
blanca habia aprovechado aquellos cortos instantes para acabarse de
desenredar y huir ligera como un relampago, riendose de la burla hecha
al montero.

--iAh! condenado engendro de Satanas, dijo este con voz espantosa,
recogiendo la ballesta con una rapidez indecible: pronto has cantado
la victoria, pronto te has creido fuera de mi alcance; y esto
diciendo, dejo volar la saeta, que partio silbando y fue a perderse en
la obscuridad del soto, en el fondo del cual sono al mismo tiempo un
grito, al que siguieron despues unos gemidos sofocados.

--iDios mio! exclamo Garces al percibir aquellos lamentos angustiosos.
iDios mio, si sera verdad! Y fuera de si, como loco, sin darse cuenta
apenas de lo que le pasaba, corrio en la direccion en que habia
disparado la saeta, que era la misma en que sonaban los gemidos. Llego
al fin; pero al llegar, sus cabellos se erizaron de horror, las
palabras se anudaron en su garganta, y tuvo que agarrarse al tronco de
un arbol para no caer a tierra.

Constanza, herida por su mano, expiraba alli a su vista, revolcandose
en su propia sangre, entre las agudas zarzas del monte.



LA AJORCA DEL ORO


I

Ella era hermosa, hermosa con esa hermosura que inspira el vertigo;
hermosa con esa hermosura que no se parece en nada a la que sonamos en
los angeles, y que, sin embargo, es sobrenatural; hermosura diabolica,
que tal vez presta el demonio a algunos seres para hacerlos sus
instrumentos en la tierra.

El la amaba: la amaba con ese amor que no conoce freno ni limites; la
amaba con ese amor en que se busca un goce y solo se encuentran
martirios; amor que se asemeja a la felicidad, y que, no obstante,
parece infundir el cielo para la expiacion de una culpa.

Ella era caprichosa, caprichosa y extravagante, como todas las
mujeres[1] del mundo.

  [Footnote 1: This cynical view of women is repeated in some of
  Becquer's verses, and may not unlikely have been caused by a bitter
  personal experience, as the love-story embodied in the poems seems
  to suggest.]

El, supersticioso, supersticioso y valiente, como todos los hombres de
su epoca.

Ella se llamaba Maria Antunez.

El Pedro Alfonso de Orellana.

Los dos eran toledanos[1], y los dos vivian en la misma ciudad que los
vio nacer.

  [Footnote 1: toledanos--'of Toledo.' Toledo is the capital of a
  province of the same name. It is situated on the Tagus not far to
  the south of Madrid. "The city was the ancient capital of the
  Carpetani, and was conquered by the Romans about 193 B.C. It was the
  capital of the West-Gothic realm;... was the second city in the
  country under the Moorish rule; was taken by Alfonso VI of Castile
  and Leon in 1085;... and was the capital of Castile until superseded
  by Madrid in the sixteenth century." _Century Dict_. Population
  (1900) 23,375. Within its walls it presents the appearance of a
  Moorish city with huddled dwellings and narrow, crooked streets,
  which afford but scanty room even for the foot passenger. Viewed
  from without it is unrivaled for stern picturesqueness. "The city
  lies on a swelling granite hill in the form of a horseshoe, cut out,
  as it were, by the deep gorge of the Tagus from the mass of
  mountains to the south. On the north it is connected with the great
  plain of Castile by a narrow isthmus. At all other points the sides
  of the rocky eminence are steep and inaccessible." (Baedeker.)
  "Toledo, on its hillside, with the tawny half-circle of the Tagus at
  its feet, has the color, the roughness, the haughty poverty of the
  sierra on which it is built, and whose strong articulations from the
  very first produce an impression of energy and passion." (Quoted
  from M. Maurice Barres in Hannah Lynch's _Toledo_, London, 1903, p.
  3.)]

La tradicion que refiere esta maravillosa historia, acaecida hace
muchos anos, no dice nada mas acerca de los personajes que fueron sus
heroes.

Yo, en mi calidad de cronista veridico, no anadire ni una sola palabra
de mi cosecha para caracterizarlos mejor.



II


El la encontro un dia llorando y le pregunto:--?Por que lloras?

Ella se enjugo los ojos, le miro fijamente, arrojo un suspiro y volvio
a llorar.

Pero entonces, acercandose a Maria, le tomo una mano, apoyo el codo en
el pretil arabe desde donde la hermosa miraba pasar la corriente del
rio, y torno a decirle:--?Por que lloras?

El Tajo[1] se retorcia gimiendo al pie del mirador[2] entre las rocas
sobre que se asienta la ciudad imperial.[3] El sol trasponia los
montes vecinos, la niebla de la tarde flotaba como un velo de gasa
azul, y solo el monotono ruido del agua interrumpia el alto silencio.

  [Footnote 1: El Tajo = 'The Tagus.' "The longest river in the
  Spanish peninsula.... It rises in the province of Teruel, Spain, in
  the mountain Muela de San Juan; flows west through New Castile and
  Estremadura; forms part of the boundary between Spain and Portugal;
  and empties by two arms into the Bay of Lisbon. The chief city on
  its banks in Spain is Toledo." _Century Dict._]

  [Footnote 2: mirador = 'lookout,' a kind of bow in the wall
  surrounding some of the heights of Toledo.]

  [Footnote 3: imperial. Referring probably to the time of the Roman
  dominion, which, though it lasted some two hundred years, has left
  in the monuments of Toledo very little evidence of its duration. See
  p. 50, note 2.]

Maria exclamo:--No me preguntes por que lloro, no me lo preguntes;
pues ni yo sabre contestarte, ni tu comprenderme. Hay deseos que se
ahogan en nuestra alma de mujer, sin que los revele mas que un
suspiro; ideas locas que cruzan por nuestra imaginacion, sin que ose
formularlas el labio, fenomenos incomprensibles de nuestra naturaleza
misteriosa, que el hombre no puede ni aun concebir. Te lo ruego, no me
preguntes la causa de mi dolor; si te la revelase, acaso te arrancaria
una carcajada.

Cuando estas palabras expiraron, ella torno a inclinar la frente, y el
a reiterar sus preguntas.

La hermosa, rompiendo al fin su obstinado silencio, dijo a su amante
con voz sorda y entrecortada.

--Tu lo quieres, es una locura que te hara reir; pero no importa: te
lo dire, puesto que lo deseas.

Ayer estuve en el templo.[1] Se celebraba la fiesta de la Virgen;[2]
su imagen, colocada en el altar mayor sobre un escabel de oro,
resplandecia como un[3] ascua de fuego; las notas del organo temblaban
dilatandose de eco en eco por el ambito de la iglesia, y en el coro
los sacerdotes entonaban el _Salve, Regina_[4]

  [Footnote 1: templo. Reference is made here to the cathedral of
  Toledo.]

  [Footnote 2: la fiesta de la Virgen. Probably the festival of the
  Assumption, August 15, as this is generally considered the most
  important of the various festivals in honor of the Virgin, such as,
  for example, the Nativity of Mary (September 8), the Purification of
  the Blessed Virgin (February 2), and the Annunciation (March 25).]

  [Footnote 3: un. For _una_. This use is not sanctioned by the
  Spanish Academy, nor, as Knapp says, "by the best modern writers."]

  [Footnote 4: Salve, Regina = 'Hail, Queen (of Mercy).' The first
  words of a Latin antiphon ascribed to Hermannus Contractus (b.
  1013-d. 1054). In mediaeval times it was a great favorite with the
  church, and was appointed for use at compline, from the first
  vespers of Trinity Sunday up to nones on the Saturday before Advent
  Sunday. See John Julian, _Dictionary of Hymnology_, London, 1892, p.
  991.]

Yo rezaba, rezaba absorta en mis pensamientos religiosos, cuando
maquinalmente levante la cabeza y mi vista se dirigio al altar. No se
por que mis ojos se fijaron desde luego en la imagen, digo mal, en la
imagen no; se fijaron en un objeto que hasta entonces no habia visto,
un objeto que, sin poder explicarmelo, llamaba sobre si toda mi
atencion. No te rias ... aquel objeto era la ajorca de oro que tiene
la Madre de Dios en uno de los brazos en que descansa su divino
Hijo.... Yo aparte la vista y torne a rezar.... iImposible! Mis ojos
se volvian involuntariamente al mismo punto. Las luces del altar,
reflejandose en las mil facetas de sus diamantes, se reproducian de
una manera prodigiosa. Millones de chispas de luz rojas y azules,
verdes y amarillas, volteaban alrededor de las piedras como un
torbellino de atomos de fuego, como una vertiginosa ronda de esos
espiritus de las llamas que fascinan con su brillo y su increible
inquietud....

Sali del templo, vine a casa, pero vine con aquella idea fija en la
imaginacion. Me acoste para dormir; no pude.... Paso la noche, eterna
con aquel pensamiento.... Al amanecer se cerraron mis parpados, y, ?lo
creeras? aun en el sueno veia cruzar, perderse y tornar de nuevo una
mujer, una mujer morena y hermosa, que llevaba la joya de oro y de
pedreria; una mujer, si, porque ya no era la Virgen que yo adoro y
ante quien me humillo, era una mujer, otra mujer como yo, que me
miraba y se reia mofandose de mi.--?La ves? parecia decirme,
mostrandome la joya.--iComo brilla! Parece un circulo de estrellas
arrancadas del cielo de una noche de verano. ?La ves? pues no es tuya,
no lo sera nunca, nunca.... Tendras acaso otras mejores, mas ricas, si
es posible; pero esta, esta que resplandece de un modo tan fantastico,
tan fascinador ... nunca ... nunca ...--Desperte; pero con la misma
idea fija aqui, entonces como ahora, semejante a un clavo ardiente,
diabolica, incontrastable, inspirada sin duda por el mismo Satanas....
?Y que?... Callas, callas y doblas la frente.... ?No te hace reir mi
locura?

Pedro, con un movimiento convulsive, oprimio el puno de su espada,
levanto la cabeza, que en efecto habia inclinado, y dijo con voz
sorda:

--?Que Virgen tiene esa presea?

--La del Sagrario,[1] murmuro Maria.

  [Footnote 1: La (Virgen) del Sagrario. A highly venerated figure of
  the Virgin, made of a dark-colored wood and almost covered with
  valuable jewels. It stands now in the chapel of the same name, to
  which visitors are seldom admitted.]

--iLa del Sagrario! repitio el joven con acento de terror: ila del
Sagrario de la catedral!...

Y en sus facciones se retrato un instante el estado de su alma,
espantada de una idea.

--iAh! ?por que no la posee otra Virgen?[1] prosiguio con acento
energico y apasionado; ?por que no la tiene el arzobispo en su mitra,
el rey en su corona, o el diablo entre sus garras? Yo se la arrancaria
para ti, aunque me costase la vida o la condenacion. Pero a la Virgen
del Sagrario, a nuestra Santa Patrona, yo ... yo que he nacido en
Toledo, iimposible, imposible!

  [Footnote 1: otra Virgen. There are several other statues of the
  Virgin in the cathedral, for which, however, less reverence is felt.
  The choice of certain statues of Christ or of the Virgin for special
  veneration is very characteristic of Spanish Catholics. See p. 152,
  note 2.]

--iNunca! murmuro Maria con voz casi imperceptible; inunca!

Y siguio llorando.

Pedro fijo una mirada estupida en la corriente del rio. En la
corriente, que pasaba y pasaba sin cesar ante sus extraviados ojos,
quebrandose al pie del mirador entre las rocas sobre que se asienta la
ciudad imperial.



III


iLa catedral de Toledo![1] Figuraos un bosque de gigantes palmeras de
granito que al entrelazar sus ramas forman una boveda colosal y
magnifica, bajo la que se guarece y vive, con la vida que le ha
prestado el genio, toda una creacion de seres imaginarios y reales.

  [Footnote 1: La catedral de Toledo. The construction of the Toledo
  Cathedral is essentially of the thirteenth century, although it was
  not finished until 1493. The exterior of this vast church, with its
  great doors, rose-windows, and beautiful Gothic towers, the northern
  one of which (295 ft.) has alone been finished, is of surpassing
  grandeur and beauty, and nothing could be more sumptuous or more
  impressive than its interior. "And should time be short for detailed
  inspection, it is this general effect of immense naves, of a forest
  of columns and of jeweled windows that we carry away, feeling too
  small amidst such greatness of form and incomparable loveliness of
  lights for the mere expression of admiration." Hannah Lynch,
  _Toledo_, London, 1903, pp. 150-151.]

Figuraos un caos incomprensible de sombra y luz, en donde se mezclan y
confunden con las tinieblas de las naves los rayos de colores de las
ojivas; donde lucha y se pierde con la obscuridad del santuario el
fulgor de las lamparas.

Figuraos un mundo de piedra, inmenso como el espiritu de nuestra
religion, sombrio como sus tradiciones, enigmatico como sus parabolas,
y todavia no tendreis una idea remota de ese eterno monumento del
entusiasmo y la fe de nuestros mayores, sobre el que los siglos ban
derramado a porfia el tesoro de sus creencias, de su inspiration y de
sus artes.

En su seno viven el silencio, la majestad, la poesia del misticismo, y
un santo horror que defiende sus umbrales contra los pensamientos
mundanos y las mezquinas pasiones de la tierra.

La consuncion material se alivia respirando el aire puro de las
montanas; el ateismo debe curarse respirando su atmosfera de fe.

Pero si grande, si imponente se presenta la catedral a nuestros ojos a
cualquier hora que se penetra en su recinto misterioso y sagrado,
nunca produce una impresion tan profunda como en los dias en que
despliega todas las galas de su pompa religiosa, en que sus
tabernaculos se cubren de oro y pedreria, sus gradas de alfombra y sus
pilares de tapices.

Entonces, cuando arden despidiendo un torrente de luz sus mil lamparas
de plata; cuando flota en el aire una nube de incienso, y las voces
del coro, y la armonia de los organos y las campanas de la torre
estremecen el edificio desde sus cimientos mas profundos hasta las mas
altas agujas que lo coronan, entonces es cuando se comprende, al
sentirla, la tremenda majestad de Dios que vive en el, y lo anima con
su soplo y lo llena con el reflejo de su omnipotencia.

El mismo dia en que tuvo lugar la escena que acabamos de referir, se
celebraba en la catedral de Toledo el ultimo de la magnifica octava de
la Virgen.[1]

  [Footnote 1: octava de la Virgen. The eight days during which is
  solemnized the principal fete of the Virgin, August 15-22. See p.
  52, note 3.]

La fiesta religiosa habia traido a ella una multitud inmensa de
fieles; pero ya esta se habia dispersado en todas direcciones; ya se
habian apagado las luces de las capillas y del altar mayor, y las
colosales puertas del templo habian rechinado sobre sus goznes para
cerrarse detras del ultimo toledano, cuando de entre las sombras, y
palido, tan palido como la estatua de la tumba en que se apoyo un
instante mientras dominaba su emocion, se adelanto un hombre que vino
deslizandose con el mayor sigilo hasta la verja del crucero. Alli la
claridad de una lampara permitia distinguir sus facciones.

Era Pedro.

?Que habia pasado entre los dos amantes para que se arrastrara al fin
a poner por obra una idea que solo el concebirla habia erizado sus
cabellos de horror? Nunca pudo saberse.

Pero el estaba alli, y estaba alli para llevar a cabo su criminal
proposito. En su mirada inquieta, en el temblor de sus rodillas, en el
sudor que corria en anchas gotas por su frente, llevaba escrito su
pensamiento.

La catedral estaba sola, completamente sola, y sumergida en un
silencio profundo.

No obstante, de cuando en cuando se percibian como unos rumores
confusos: chasquidos de madera tal vez, o murmullos del viento, o
?quien sabe? acaso ilusion de la fantasia, que oye y ve y palpa en su
exaltacion lo que no existe, pero la verdad era que ya cerca, ya
lejos, ora a sus espaldas, ora a su lado mismo, sonaban como sollozos
que se comprimen, como roce de telas que se arrastran, como rumor de
pasos que van y vienen sin cesar.

Pedro hizo un esfuerzo para seguir en su camino, llego a la verja, y
subio la primera grada de la capilla mayor.[1] Alrededor de esta
capilla estan las tumbas de los reyes,[2] cuyas imagenes de piedra,
con la mano en la empunadura de la espada, parecen velar noche y dia
por el santuario a cuya sombra descansan todos por una eternidad.

  [Footnote 1: la primera ... mayor. There are three steps that lead
  up to the chapel, which is separated from the transept to-day by a
  magnificent reja (screen or grating), dating from 1548, and is
  filled with treasures of art.]

  [Footnote 2: los reyes. Alfonso VII, the Infante Don Pedro de
  Aguilar (son of Alfonso XI), Sancho III, and Sancho IV are buried
  here.]

--iAdelante! murmuro en voz baja, y quiso andar y no pudo. Parecia que
sus pies se habian clavado en el pavimento. Bajo los ojos, y sus
cabellos se erizaron de horror: el suelo de la capilla lo formaban
anchas y obscuras losas sepulcrales.

Por un momento creyo que una mano fria y descarnada le sujetaba en
aquel punto con una fuerza invencible. Las moribundas lamparas, que
brillaban en el fondo de las naves como estrellas perdidas entre las
sombras, oscilaron a su vista, y oscilaron las estatuas de los
sepulcros y las imagenes del altar, y oscilo el templo todo con sus
arcadas de granito y sus machones de silleria.

--iAdelante! volvio a exclamar Pedro como fuera de si, y se acerco al
ara, y trepando por ella subio hasta el escabel de la imagen. Todo
alrededor suyo se revestia de formas quimericas y horribles; todo era
tinieblas y luz dudosa, mas imponente aun que la obscuridad. Solo la
Reina de los cielos, suavemente iluminada por una lampara de oro,
parecia sonreir tranquila, bondadosa, y serena en medio de tanto
horror.

Sin embargo, aquella sonrisa muda e inmovil que le tranquilizara[1] un
instante, concluyo por infundirle temor; un temor mas extrano, mas
profundo que el que hasta entonces habia sentido.

  [Footnote 1: tranquilizara. See p.16, note 3.]

Torno empero a dominarse, cerro los ojos para no verla, extendio la
mano con un movimiento convulsivo y le arranco la ajorca de oro,
piadosa ofrenda de un santo arzobispo; la ajorca de oro cuyo valor
equivalia a una fortuna.[2]

  [Footnote 2: equivalia a una fortuna. The jewels of this Virgin,
  presents for the most part from crowned heads and high church
  dignitaries, are in fact of immense value.]

Ya la presea estaba en su poder: sus dedos crispados la oprimian con
una fuerza sobrenatural, solo restaba huir, huir con ella: pero para
esto era preciso abrir los ojos, y Pedro tenia miedo de ver, de ver la
imagen, de ver los reyes de las sepulturas, los demonios de las
cornisas, los endriagos de los capiteles, las fajas de sombras y los
rayos de luz que semejantes a blancos y gigantescos fantasmas, se
movian lentamente en el fondo de las naves, pobladas de rumores
temerosos y extranos.

Al fin abrio los ojos, tendio una mirada, y un grito agudo se escapo
de sus labios.

La catedral estaba llena de estatuas, estatuas que, vestidas con
luengos y no vistos ropajes, habian descendido de sus huecos, y
ocupaban todo el ambito de la iglesia, y le miraban con sus ojos sin
pupila.

Santos, monjas, angeles, demonios, guerreros, damas, pajes, cenobitas
y villanos, se rodeaban y confundian en las naves y en el altar. A sus
pies oficiaban, en presencia de los reyes, de hinojos sobre sus
tumbas, los arzobispos de marmol que el habia visto otras veces,
inmoviles sobre sus lechos mortuorios, mientras que arrastrandose por
las losas, trepando por los machones, acurrucados en los doseles,
suspendidos de las bovedas, pululaban como los gusanos de un inmenso
cadaver, todo un mundo de reptiles y alimanas de granito, quimericos,
deformes, horrorosos.

Ya no pudo resistir mas. Las sienes le latieron con una violencia
espantosa; una nube de sangre obscurecio sus pupilas, arrojo un
segundo grito, un grito desgarrador y sobrehumano, y cayo desvanecido
sobre el ara.

Cuando al otro dia los dependientes de la iglesia le encontraron al
pie del altar, tenia aun la ajorca de oro entre sus manos, y al verlos
aproximarse, exclamo con una estridente carcajada:

--iSuya, suya!

El infeliz estaba loco.




EL CRISTO DE LA CALAVERA[1]

  [Footnote 1: See p. 70, note 1.]


El rey de Castilla[1] marchaba a la guerra de moros,[2] y para
combatir con los enemigos de la religion habia apellidado en son de
guerra a todo lo mas florido de la nobleza de sus reinos. Las
silenciosas calles de Toledo[3] resonaban noche y dia con el marcial
rumor de los atabales y los clarines, y ya en la morisca puerta de
Visagra,[4] ya en la del Cambron,[5] en la embocadura del antiguo
puente de San Martin,[6] no pasaba hora sin que se oyese el ronco
grito de los centinelas, anunciando la llegada de algun caballero que,
precedido de su pendon senorial y seguido de jinetes y peones, venia a
reunirse al grueso del ejercito castellano.

  [Footnote 1: See p. 34, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: moros = 'Moors.' The Arabs who conquered Mauritania in
  the Seventh century converted the native race to Mohammedanism, and
  it was this mixed population that entered Spain by Gibraltar in 71.
  There they remained in almost constant warfare with the Christians
  until they were finally defeated at Granada by the armies of
  Ferdinand and Isabella and driven from Spain in 1492.

  Toledo was entered by the Christians under Alfonso VI in 1085. From
  this time on Christian arms began to prevail in the peninsula.]

  [Footnote 3: Toledo. See p. 50, note 2.]

  [Footnote 4: puerta de Visagra. The gate referred to here is the
  _Puerta Visagra Antigua_, an ancient Arab gate of the ninth century,
  a little to the west of the _Puerta Visagra Actual_, which latter
  was not built until 1550. The old _Puerta Visagra_ is now blocked
  up. It was through this gateway that Alfonso VI entered Toledo. "The
  work is entirely Moorish, of the first period, heavy and simple,
  with the triple arches so delightfully curved in horseshoe shape,
  and the upper crenelated apertures." H. Lynch, _Toledo_, London,
  1903, p. 297. Its name is probably from the Arabic, either from _Bab
  Shaqra_ (red gate) or _Bab Shara_ (field-gate).]

  [Footnote 5: la del Cambron. The Puerta del Cambron is one of the
  three open gateways in the outer walls of Toledo to-day. "Entering
  the city by the Bridge of San Martin, you front the gate of the
  Cambron, so called from the brambles that grew about that small,
  charming, pinnacled edifice, which was built upon the spot of
  Wamba's old gate in Alfonso VI's time, and was then completely
  Moorish in style. In 1576 it was restored and took on its present
  half renaissance, half classical aspect." Ib., p. 295.]

  [Footnote 6: Puente de San Martin. "The imposing _Puente de San
  Martin_, which spans the Tagus to the west of the town, was built in
  1212 and renewed in 1390. It consists of five arches, that in the
  center being about 100 ft. in height Each end is guarded by a
  gate-tower.... The gorge of the Tagus here is very imposing."
  Baedeker, _Spain and Portugal_ (1901), p. 150.]

El tiempo que faltaba para emprender el camino de la frontera y
concluir de ordenar las huestes reales, discurria en medio de fiestas
publicas, lujosos convites y lucidos torneos, hasta que, llegada al
fin la vispera del dia senalado de antemano por S.A.[1] para la salida
del ejercito, se dispuso un postrer sarao, con el que debieran
terminar los regocijos.

  [Footnote 1: S. A. Abbreviation for Su Alteza, 'His Highness,' a
  title given to the kings of Spain down to the Austrian dynasty, and
  now applied to princes and regents.]

La noche del sarao, el alcazar[1] de los reyes ofrecia un aspecto
singular. En los anchurosos patios, alrededor de inmensas hogueras, y
diseminados sin orden ni concierto, se veia una abigarrada multitud de
pajes, soldados, ballesteros y gente menuda, quienes, estos aderezando
sus corceles y sus armas y disponiendolos para el combate; aquellos
saludando con gritos o blasfemias las inesperadas vueltas de la
fortuna, personificada en los dados del cubilete, los otros
repitiendo en coro el refran de un romance de guerra, que entonaba un
juglar acompanado de la guzla; los de mas alla comprando a un romero
conchas,[2] cruces y cintas tocadas en el sepulcro de Santiago,[3] o
riendo con locas carcajadas de los chistes de un bufon, o ensayando en
los clarines el aire belico para entrar en la pelea, propio de sus
senores, o refiriendo antiguas historias de caballerias o aventuras de
amor, o milagros recientemente acaecidos, formaban un infernal y
atronador conjunto imposible de pintar con palabras.

  [Footnote 1: el alcazar. The Alcazar (Arab, _al qacr_, 'the castle')
  "stands on the highest ground in Toledo. The site was originally
  occupied by a Roman '_castellum_' which the Visigoths also used as a
  citadel. After the capture of the city by Alfonso VI the Cid resided
  here as 'Alcaide.' Ferdinand the Saint and Alfonso the Learned
  converted the castle into a palace, which was afterwards enlarged
  and strengthened by John II, Ferdinand and Isabella, Charles V, and
  Philip II." (Baedeker, 1901, p. 152) It has been burned and restored
  several times. The magnificent staircase is due to Charles V, whose
  name the Alcazar sometimes bears.]

  [Footnote 2: conchas = 'shells.' During the Middle Ages pilgrims
  often ornamented their clothing with shells, particularly with
  scallop-shells, to indicate doubtless that they had crossed the sea
  to the Holy Shrine in Palestine; for this reason the scallops were
  known as "pilgrim shells." See the _Encyclopedia Americana_
  ("Shell"). According to one of the legends the remains of St. James
  were brought to Spain in a scallop-shell; hence the use of that
  emblem by pilgrims to his sanctuary.]

  [Footnote 3: Santiago = 'St. James,' the patron saint of Spain. A
  legend of about the twelfth century tells us that the remains of St.
  James the Greater, son of Zebedee, after he was beheaded in Judea,
  were miraculously brought to Spain and interred in a spot whose
  whereabouts was not known until in the ninth century a brilliant
  star pointed out the place ('campus stellae'). The cathedral of
  Santiago de Compostela was erected there, and throughout the Middle
  Ages it was one of the most popular pilgrim-resorts in Christendom.]

Sobre aquel revuelto oceano de cantares de guerra, rumor de martillos
que golpeaban los yunques, chirridos de limas que mordian el acero,
piafar de corceles, voces descompuestas, risas inextinguibles, gritos
desaforados, notas destempladas, juramentos y sonidos extranos y
discordes, flotaban a intervalos como un soplo de brisa armoniosa los
lejanos acordes de la musica del sarao.

Este, que tenia lugar en los salones que formaban el segundo cuerpo
del alcazar, ofrecia a su vez un cuadro, si no tan fantastico y
caprichoso, mas deslumbrador y magnifico.

Por las extensas galerias que se prolongaban a lo lejos formando un
intrincado laberinto de pilastras esbeltas y ojivas caladas y ligeras
como el encaje, por los espaciosos salones vestidos de tapices, donde
la seda y el oro habian representado, con mil colores diversos,
escenas de amor, de caza y de guerra, y adornados con trofeos de armas
y escudos, sobre los cuales vertian un mar de chispeante luz un
sinnumero de lamparas y candelabros de bronce, plata y oro, colgadas
aquellas de las altisimas bovedas, y enclavados estos en los gruesos
sillares de los muros; por todas partes a donde se volvian los ojos,
se veian oscilar y agitarse en distintas direcciones una nube de damas
hermosas con ricas vestiduras, chapadas en oro, redes de perlas
aprisionando sus rizos, joyas de rubies llameando sobre su seno,
plumas sujetas en vaporoso cerco a un mango de marfil, colgadas del
puno, y rostrillos de 'blancos encajes, que acariciaban sus mejillas,
o alegres turbas de galanes con talabartes de terciopelo, justillos de
brocado y calzas de seda, borceguies de tafilete, capotillos de mangas
perdidas y caperuza, punales con pomo de filigrana y estoques de
corte, brunidos, delgados y ligeros.

Pero entre esta juventud brillante y deslumbradora, que los ancianos
miraban desfilar con una sonrisa de gozo, sentados en los altos
sitiales de alerce que rodeaban el estrado real llamaba la atencion
por su belleza incomparable, una mujer aclamada reina de la hermosura
en todos los torneos y las cortes de amor de la epoca, cuyos colores
habian adoptado por emblema los caballeros mas valientes; cuyos
encantos eran asunto de las coplas de los trovadores mas versados en
la ciencia del gay saber; a la que se volvian con asombro todas las
miradas; por la que suspiraban en secreto todos los corazones,
alrededor de la cual se veian agruparse con afan, como vasallos
humildes en torno de su senora, los mas ilustres vastagos de la
nobleza toledana, reunida en el sarao de aquella noche. Los que
asistian de continuo a formar el sequito de presuntos galanes de dona
Ines de Tordesillas, que tal era el nombre de esta celebrada
hermosura, a pesar de su caracter altivo y desdenoso, no desmayaban
jamas en sus pretensiones; y este, animado con una sonrisa que habia
creido adivinar en sus labios; aquel, con una mirada benevola que
juzgaba haber sorprendido en sus ojos; el otro, con una palabra
lisonjera, un ligerisimo favor o una promesa remota, cada cual
esperaba en silencio ser el preferido. Sin embargo, entre todos ellos
habia dos que mas particularmente se distinguian por su asiduidad y
rendimiento, dos que al parecer, si no los predilectos de la hermosa,
podrian calificarse de los mas adelantados en el camino de su corazon.
Estos dos caballeros, iguales en cuna, valor y nobles prendas,
servidores de un mismo rey y pretendientes de una misma dama,
llamabanse Alonso de Carrillo el uno, y el otro Lope de Sandoval.

Ambos habian nacido en Toledo; juntos habian hecho sus primeras armas,
y en un mismo dia, al encontrarse sus ojos con los de dona Ines, se
sintieron poseidos de un secreto y ardiente amor por ella, amor que
germino algun tiempo retraido y silencioso, pero que al cabo comenzaba
a descubrirse y a dar involuntarias senales de existencia en sus
acciones y discursos.

En los torneos del Zocodover,[1] en los juegos florales de la corte,
siempre que se les habia presentado coyuntura para rivalizar entre si
en gallardia o donaire, la habian aprovechado con afan ambos
caballeros, ansiosos de distinguirse a los ojos de su dama; y aquella
noche, impelidos sin duda por un mismo afan, trocando los hierros por
las plumas y las mallas por los brocados y la seda, de pie junto al
sitial donde ella se reclino un instante despues de haber dado una
vuelta por los salones, comenzaron una elegante lucha de frases
enamoradas e ingeniosas, o epigramas embozados y agudos.

  [Footnote 1: El Zocodover. A small, quaint, three-cornered plaza,
  with two sides straight and the third curved, surrounded by
  buildings with rough arcades shading the shops on the ground floor.
  It used to be the scene of tournaments and bull-fights, as well as
  being the market-place, as it is to-day. "The life of the city then
  (after the Christian conquest), as now, spread from the Zocodover,
  word of inexplicable charm, said to be Arabian and to signify 'Place
  of the Beasts.' Down the picturesque archway, cut in deep yellow
  upon such a blue as only southern Europe can show at all seasons, a
  few steps lead you to the squalid ruin where Cervantes slept, ate
  and wrote the _Ilustre Fregona_. So exactly must it have been in the
  day Cervantes suffered and smiled, offering to his mild glance just
  such a wretched and romantic front." H. Lynch, _op. cit._, pp.
  119-120]

Los astros menores de esta brillante constelacion, formando un dorado
semicirculo en torno de ambos galanes, reian y esforzaban las
delicadas burlas; y la hermosa, objeto de aquel torneo de palabras,
aprobaba con una imperceptible sonrisa los conceptos escogidos o
llenos de intencion, que, ora salian de los labios de sus adoradores,
como una ligera onda de perfume que halagaba su vanidad, ora partian
como una saeta aguda que iba a buscar para clavarse en el, el punto
mas vulnerable del contrario, su amor propio.

Ya el cortesano combate de ingenio y galanura comenzaba a hacerse de
cada vez mas crudo; las frases eran aun corteses en la forma, pero
breves, secas, y al pronunciarlas, si bien las acompanaba una ligera
dilatacion de los labios, semejante a una sonrisa, los ligeros
relampagos de los ojos imposibles de ocultar, demostraban que la
colera hervia comprimida en el seno de ambos rivales.

La situacion era insostenible. La dama lo comprendio asi, y
levantandose del sitial se disponia a volver a los salones, cuando un
nuevo incidente vino a romper la valla del respetuoso comedimiento en
que se contenian los dos jovenes enamorados. Tal vez con intencion,
acaso por descuido, dona Ines habia dejado sobre su falda uno de los
perfumados guantes, cuyos botones de oro se entretenia en arrancar uno
a uno mientras duro la conversacion. Al ponerse de pie, el guante
resbalo por entre los anchos pliegues de seda, y cayo en la alfombra.
Al verle caer, todos los caballeros que formaban su brillante comitiva
se inclinaron presurosos a recogerle,[1] disputandose el honor de
alcanzar un leve movimiento de cabeza en premio de su galanteria.

  [Footnote 1: le. This use of the accusative _le_ instead of _lo_,
  when the object is not personal, is sanctioned by the Spanish
  Academy. See _Gramatica de La Lengua Castellana por La Real Academia
  Espanola_, nueva edicion, Madrid, 1901, p. 241.]

Al notar la precipitacion con que todos hicieron el ademan de
inclinarse, una imperceptible sonrisa de vanidad satisfecha asomo a
los labios de la orgullosa dona Ines, que despues de hacer un saludo
general a los galanes que tanto empeno mostraban en servirla, sin
mirar apenas y con la mirada alta y desdenosa, tendio la mano para
recoger el guante en la direccion que se encontraban Lope y Alonso,
los primeros que parecian haber llegado al sitio en que cayera.[1] En
efecto, ambos jovenes habian visto caer el guante cerca de sus pies;
ambos se habian inclinado con igual presteza a recogerle,[2] y al
incorporarse cada cual le[2] tenia asido por un extremo. Al verlos
inmoviles, desafiandose en silencio con la mirada, y decididos ambos a
no abandonar el guante que acababan de levantar del suelo, la dama
dejo escapar un grito leve e involuntario, que ahogo el murmullo de
los asombrados espectadores, los cuales presentian una escena
borrascosa, que en el alcazar y en presencia del rey podria
calificarse de un horrible desacato.

  [Footnote 1: _cayera_. See p. 16, note 3.]

  [Footnote 2: le. See p. 66, note 1.]

No obstante, Lope y Alonso permanecian impasibles, mudos, midiendose
con los ojos, de la cabeza a los pies, sin que la tempestad de sus
almas se revelase mas que por un ligero temblor nervioso, que agitaba
sus miembros como si se hallasen acometidos de una repentina fiebre.

Los murmullos y las exclamaciones iban subiendo de punto; la gente
comenzaba a agruparse en torno de los actores de la escena; dona Ines,
o aturdida o complaciendose en prolongarla, daba vueltas de un lado a
otro, como buscando donde refugiarse y evitar las miradas de la gente,
que cada vez acudia en mayor numero. La catastrofe era ya segura; los
dos jovenes habian ya cambiado algunas palabras en voz sorda, y
mientras que con la una mano sujetaban el guante con una fuerza
convulsiva, parecian ya buscar instintivamente con la otra el puno de
oro de sus dagas, cuando se entreabrio respetuosamente el grupo que
formaban los espectadores, y aparecio el Rey.

Su frente estaba serena; ni habia indignacion en su rostro, ni colera
en su ademan.

Tendio una mirada alrededor, y esta sola mirada fue bastante para
darle a conocer lo que pasaba. Con toda la galanteria del doncel mas
cumplido, tomo el guante de las manos de los caballeros que, como
movidas por un resorte, se abrieron sin dificultad al sentir el
contacto de la del monarca, y volviendose a dona Ines de Tordesillas
que, apoyada en el brazo de una duena,[1] parecia proxima a
desmayarse, exclamo, presentandolo, con acento, aunque templado,
firme:

  [Footnote 1: duena = 'duenna,' an elderly woman who occupies a
  position midway between that of governess and companion to young
  Spanish women.]

--Tomad, senora, y cuidad de no dejarle[1] caer en otra ocasion, donde
al devolverosle,[2] os lo devuelvan manchado en sangre.

  [Footnote 1: le. See p. 66, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: le. See p. 66, note 1.]

Cuando el rey termino de decir estas palabras, dona Ines, no
acertaremos a decir si a impulsos de la emocion, o por salir mas
airosa del paso, se habia desvanecido en brazos de los que la
rodeaban.

Alonso y Lope, el uno estrujando en silencio entre sus manos el
birrete de terciopelo, cuya pluma arrastraba por la alfombra, y el
otro mordiendose los labios hasta hacerse brotar la sangre, se
clavaron una mirada tenaz e intensa.

Una mirada en aquel lance equivalia a un bofeton, a un guante arrojado
al rostro, a un desafio a muerte.




II


Al llegar la media noche, los reyes se retiraron a su camara. Termino
el sarao y los curiosos de la plebe que aguardaban con impaciencia
este momento, formando grupos y corrillos en las avenidas del palacio,
corrieron a estacionarse en la cuesta del alcazar,[1] los miradores[2]
y el Zocodover.

  [Footnote 1: la cuesta del alcazar. This is the name of the street
  that leads from the Zocodover up to the height on which is situated
  the Alcazar (see p. 61, note 3).]

  [Footnote 2: miradores. See p. 51 note 2.]

Durante una o dos horas, en las calles inmediatas a estos puntos reino
un bullicio, una animacion y un movimiento indescriptibles. Por todas
partes se veian cruzar escuderos caracoleando en sus corceles
ricamente enjaezados; reyes de armas con lujosas casullas llenas de
escudos y blasones: timbaleros vestidos de colores vistosos, soldados
cubiertos de armaduras resplandecientes, pajes con capotillos de
terciopelo y birretes coronados de plumas, y servidores de a pie que
precedian las lujosas literas y las andas cubiertas de ricos panos,
llevando en sus manos grandes hachas encendidas, a cuyo rojizo
resplandor podia verse a la multitud, que con cara atonita, labios
entreabiertos y ojos espantados, miraba desfilar con asombro a todo lo
mejor de la nobleza castellana, rodeada en aquella ocasion de un
fausto y un esplendor fabulosos.

Luego, poco a poco fue cesando el ruido y la animacion; los vidrios de
colores de las altas ojivas del palacio dejaron de brillar; atraveso
por entre los apinados grupos la ultima cabalgata; la gente del pueblo
a su vez comenzo a dispersarse en todas direcciones, perdiendose entre
las sombras del enmaranado laberinto de calles obscuras, estrechas y
torcidas,[1] y ya no turbaba el profundo silencio de la noche mas que
el grito lejano de vela de algun guerrero, el rumor de los pasos de
algun curioso que se retiraba el ultimo, o el ruido que producian las
aldabas de algunas puertas al cerrarse, cuando en lo alto de la
escalinata que conducia a la plataforma del palacio aparecio un
caballero, el cual, despues de tender la vista por todos lados como
buscando a alguien que debia esperarle, descendio lentamente hasta la
cuesta del alcazar, por la que se dirigie hacia el Zocodover.

  [Footnote 1: torcidas. See p. 50, note 2.]

Al llegar a la plaza de este nombre se detuvo un momento, y volvio a
pasear la mirada a su alrededor. La noche estaba obscura; no brillaba
una sola estrella en el cielo, ni en toda la plaza se veia una sola
luz; no obstante, alla a lo lejos, y en la misma direccion en que
comenzo a percibirse un ligero ruido como de pasos que iban
aproximandose, creyo distinguir el bulto de un hombre: era sin duda el
mismo a quien parecia[1] aguardaba con tanta impaciencia.

  [Footnote 1: parecia is parenthetic in sense as used here.]

El caballero que acababa de abandonar el alcazar para dirigirse al
Zocodover era Alonso Carrillo, que en razon al puesto de honor que
desempenaba cerca de la persona del rey, habia tenido que acompanarle
en su camara hasta aquellas horas. El que saliendo de entre las
sombras de los arcos[1] que rodean la plaza vino a reunirsele, Lope de
Sandoval. Cuando los dos caballeros se hubieron reunido, cambiaron
algunas frases en voz baja.

  [Footnote 1: arcos. See p. 64, note 1.]

--Presumi que me aguardabas, dijo el uno.

--Esperaba que lo presumirias, contesto el otro.

--Y ?a donde iremos?

--A cualquiera parte en que se puedan hallar cuatro palmos de terreno
donde revolverse, y un rayo de claridad que nos alumbre.

Terminado este brevisimo dialogo, los dos jovenes se internaron por
una de las estrechas calles que desembocan en el Zocodover,
desapareciendo en la obscuridad como esos fantasmas de la noche, que
despues de aterrar un instante al que los ve, se deshacen en atomos de
niebla y se confunden en el seno de las sombras.

Largo rato anduvieron dando vueltas a traves de las calles de Toledo,
buscando un lugar a proposito para terminar sus diferencias; pero la
obscuridad de la noche era tan profunda, que el duelo parecia
imposible. No obstante, ambos deseaban batirse, y batirse antes que
rayase el alba; pues al amanecer debian partir las huestes reales, y
Alonso con ellas. Prosiguieron, pues, cruzando al azar plazas
desiertas, pasadizos sombrios, callejones estrechos y tenebrosos,
hasta que por ultimo, vieron brillar a lo lejos una luz, una luz
pequena y moribunda, en torno de la cual la niebla formaba un cerco de
claridad fantastica y dudosa.

Habian llegado a la calle del Cristo,[1] y la luz que se divisaba en
uno de sus extremes parecia ser la del farolillo que alumbraba en
aquella epoca, y alumbra aun, a la imagen que le da su nombre. Al
verla, ambos dejaron escapar una exclamacion de jubilo, y apresurando
el paso en su direccion, no tardaron mucho en encontrarse junto al
retablo en que ardia. Un arco rehundido en el muro, en el fondo del
cual se veia la imagen del Redentor enclavado en la cruz y con una
calavera al pie; un tosco cobertizo de tablas que lo defendia de la
intemperie, y el pequeno farolillo colgado de una cuerda que lo
iluminaba debilmente, vacilando al impulse del aire, formaban todo el
retablo, alrededor del cual colgaban algunos festones de hiedra que
habian crecido entre los obscuros y rotos sillares, formando una
especie de pabellon de verdura.

  [Footnote 1: la calle del Cristo. The street mentioned here is one
  known up to the year 1864 as _la Calle del Cristo de la Calavera_ or
  _la Calle de la Calavera_, but which bears to-day the name of _la
  Cuesta del Pez_. It terminates near a little square which is called
  to-day _Plazuela de Abdon de Paz_, but which earlier bore the name
  of _Plazuela de la Cruz de la Calavera_. Miraculous tales are
  related of several of the images of Christ in Toledo, of the _Cristo
  de la Luz_, of the _Cristo de la Vega_, and others, as well as of
  the image we have to deal with here.]

Los caballeros, despues de saludar respetuosamente la imagen de
Cristo, quitandose los birretes y murmurando en voz baja una corta
oracion, reconocieron el terreno con una ojeada, echaron a tierra sus
mantos, y apercibiendose mutuamente para el combate y dandose la senal
con un leve movimiento de cabeza, cruzaron los estoques. Pero apenas
se habian tocado los aceros y antes que ninguno de los combatientes
hubiese podido dar un solo paso o intentar un golpe, la luz se
apago[1] de repente y la calle quedo sumida en la obscuridad mas
profunda. Como guiados de un mismo pensamiento y al verse rodeados de
repentinas tinieblas, los dos combatientes dieron un paso atras,
bajaron al suelo las puntas de sus espadas y levantaron los ojos hacia
el farolillo, cuya luz, momentos antes apagada, volvio a brillar de
nuevo al punto en que hicieron ademan de suspender la pelea.

  [Footnote 1: la luz se apago. Espronceda describes effectively a
  similar miraculous extinguishing and relighting of a lamp before a
  shrine, in Part IV of his _Estudiante de Salamanca_:

    La moribunda lampara que ardia
    Tremula lanza su postrer fulgor,
    Y en honda obscuridad, noche sombria
    La misteriosa calle encapoto.

    Al pronunciar tan insolente ultraje
    La lampara del Cristo se encendio:
    Y una mujer velada en blanco traje,
    Ante la imagen de rodillas vio.

    Y al rostro la acerca, que el candido lino
    Encubre, con animo asaz descortes;
    Mas la luz apaga viento repentino,
    Y la blanca dama se puso de pie.]

--Sera alguna rafaga de aire que ha abatido la llama al pasar, exclamo
Carrillo volviendo a ponerse en guardia, y previniendo con una voz a
Lope, que parecia preocupado.

Lope dio un paso adelante para recuperar el terreno perdido, tendio el
brazo y los aceros se tocaron otra vez; mas al tocarse, la luz se
torno a apagar por si misma, permaneciendo asi mientras no se
separaron los estoques.

--En verdad que esto es extrano, murmuro Lope mirando al farolillo,
que espontaneamente habia vuelto a encenderse, y se mecia con lentitud
en el aire, derramando una claridad tremula y extrana sobre el
amarillo craneo de la calavera colocada a los pies de Cristo.

--iBah! dijo Alonso, sera que la beata encargada de cuidar del farol
del retablo sisa a los devotos y escasea el aceite, por lo cual la
luz, proxima a morir, luce y se obscurece a intervalos en senal de
agonia; y dichas estas palabras, el impetuoso joven torno a colocarse
en actitud de defensa. Su contrario le imito; pero esta vez, no tan
solo volvio a rodearlos una sombra espesisima e impenetrable, sino que
al mismo tiempo hirio sus oidos el eco profundo de una voz misteriosa,
semejante a esos largos gemidos del vendaval que parece que se queja y
articula palabras al correr aprisionado por las torcidas, estrechas y
tenebrosas calles de Toledo.

Que dijo aquella voz medrosa y sobrehumana, nunca pudo saberse; pero
al oirla ambos jovenes se sintieron poseidos de tan profundo terror,
que las espadas se escaparon de sus manos, el cabello se les erizo, y
por sus cuerpos, que estremecia un temblor involuntario, y por sus
frentes palidas y descompuestas, comenzo a correr un sudor frio como
el de la muerte.

La luz, por tercera vez apagada, por tercera vez volvio a resucitar, y
las tinieblas se disiparon.

--iAh! exclamo Lope al ver a su contrario entonces, y en otros dias su
mejor amigo, asombrado como el, y como el palido e inmovil; Dios no
quiere permitir este combate, porque es una lucha fratricida; porque
un combate entre nosotros ofende al cielo, ante el cual nos hemos
jurado cien veces una amistad eterna. Y esto diciendo se arrojo en los
brazos de Alonso, que le estrecho entre los suyos con una fuerza y una
efusion indecibles.




III


Pasados algunos minutos, durante los cuales ambos jovenes se dieron
toda clase de muestras de amistad y carino, Alonso tomo la palabra, y
con acento conmovido aun por la escena que acabamos de referir,
exclamo, dirigiendose a su amigo:

--Lope, yo se que amas a dona Ines; ignoro si tanto como yo, pero la
amas. Puesto que un duelo entre nosotros es imposible, resolvamonos a
encomendar nuestra suerte en sus manos. Vamos en su busca; que ella
decida con libre albedrio cual ha de ser el dichoso, cual el infeliz.
Su decision sera respetada por ambos, y el que no merezca sus favores
manana saldra con el rey de Toledo, e ira a buscar el consuelo del
olvido en la agitacion de la guerra.

--Pues tu lo quieres, sea; contesto Lope.

Y el uno apoyado en el brazo del otro, los dos amigos se dirigieron
hacia la catedral,[1] en cuya plaza,[2] y en un palacio del que ya no
quedan ni aun los restos, habitaba dona Ines de Tordesillas.

  [Footnote 1: la catedral. See p. 55, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: plaza. There is a small square in front of the
  cathedral, called to-day the _Plaza de_ (or _del_) _Ayuntamiento_.]

Estaba a punto de rayar el alba, y como algunos de los deudos de dona
Ines, sus hermanos entre ellos, marchaban al otro dia con el ejercito
real, no era imposible que en las primeras horas de la manana pudiesen
penetrar en su palacio.

Animados con esta esperanza, llegaron, en fin, al pie de la gotica
torre[1] del templo; mas al llegar a aquel punto, un ruido particular
llamo su atencion, y deteniendose en uno de los angulos, ocultos entre
las sombras de los altos machones que flanquean los muros, vieron, no
sin grande asombro, abrirse el balcon del palacio de su dama, aparecer
en el un hombre que se deslizo hasta el suelo con la ayuda de una
cuerda, y, por ultimo, una forma blanca, dona Ines sin duda, que
inclinandose sobre el calado antepecho, cambio algunas tiernas frases
de despedida con su misterioso galan.

  [Footnote 1: la gotica torre. See p. 55, note i.]

El primer movimiento de los dos jovenes fue llevar las manos al puno
de sus espadas; pero deteniendose como heridos de una idea subita,
volvieron los ojos a mirarse, y se hubieron de encontrar con una cara
de asombro tan comica, que ambos prorrumpieron en una ruidosa
carcajada, carcajada que, repitiendose de eco en el silencio de la
noche, resono en toda la plaza y llego hasta el palacio.

Al oirla, la forma blanca desaparecio del balcon, se escucho el ruido
de las puertas que se cerraron con violencia, y todo volvio a quedar
en silencio.

Al dia siguiente, la reina, colocada en un estrado lujosisimo, veia
desfilar las huestes que marchaban a la guerra de moros, teniendo a su
lado las damas mas principales de Toledo. Entre ellas estaba dona Ines
de Tordesillas, en la que aquel dia, como siempre, se fijaban todos
los ojos; pero segun a ella le parecia advertir, con diversa expresion
que la de costumbre. Diriase que en todas las curiosas miradas que a
ella se volvian, retozaba una sonrisa burlona.

Este descubrimiento no dejaba de inquietarla algo, sobre todo teniendo
en cuenta las ruidosas carcajadas que la noche anterior habia creido
percibir a lo lejos y en uno de los angulos de la plaza, cuando
cerraba el balcon y despedia a su amante; pero al mirar aparecer entre
las filas de los combatientes, que pasaban por debajo del estrado
lanzando chispas de fuego de sus brillantes armaduras, y envueltos en
una nube de polvo, los pendones reunidos de las casas de Carrillo y
Sandoval; al ver la significativa sonrisa que al saludar a la reina le
dirigieron los dos antiguos rivales que cabalgaban juntos, todo lo
adivino, y la purpura de la vergueenza enrojecio su frente, y brillo en
sus ojos una lagrima de despecho.




EL BESO


I


Cuando una parte del ejercito frances se apodero a principios de este
siglo[1] de la historica Toledo,[2] sus jefes, que no ignoraban el
peligro a que se exponian en las poblaciones espanolas diseminandose
en alojamientos separados, comenzaron por habilitar para cuarteles los
mas grandes y mejores edificios de la ciudad.

  [Footnote 1: una parte... siglo. The French armies of Napoleon
  entered Spain in 1808. Joseph Bonaparte was declared king, but the
  opposition of Spain was most heroic, and in 1814 the French were
  expelled. They made great havoc in Toledo, where among other
  desecrations they burned the Alcazar (now restored) and the convent
  church of San Juan de los Reyes.]

  [Footnote 2: Toledo. See p. 50, note 2.]

Despues de ocupado el suntuoso alcazar[1] de Carlos V, [Footnote:2]
echose mano de la casa de Consejos;[3] y cuando esta no pudo contener
mas gente, comenzaron a invadir el asilo de las comunidades
religiosas, acabando a la postre por transformar en cuadras hasta las
iglesias consagradas al culto. En esta conformidad se encontraban las
cosas en la poblacion donde tuvo lugar el suceso que voy a referir,
cuando, una noche, ya a hora bastante avanzada, envueltos en sus
obscures capotes de guerra y ensordeciendo las estrechas y solitarias
calles que conducen desde la Puerta del Sol[4] a Zocodover,[5] con el
choque de sus armas y el ruidoso golpear de los cascos de sus corceles
que sacaban chispas de los pedernales, entraron en la ciudad hasta
unos cien dragones de aquellos altos, arrogantes y fornidos, de que
todavia nos hablan con admiracion nuestras abuelas.

  [Footnote 1: alcazar. See p. 61, note 3.]

  [Footnote 2: Carlos V. Charles V, the son of Philip of Burgundy by
  Joanna (daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella), and grandson of the
  emperor Maximilian 1, was bom at Ghent, Flanders, February 24,1500,
  and died in the monastery of Yuste, Estremadura, Spain, September
  21, 1558. He became king of Spain (as Charles 1) in 1516, and
  emperor in 1520. In 1556 he abdicated the government of the former
  in favor of his son Philip II, and of the latter in favor of his
  brother Ferdinand I.]

  [Footnote 3: la casa de Consejos. The _Casa de_ Consejos ('City
  Hall'), _Casa Consistorial_, or _Ayuntamiento_, by which various
  names it is known, is a building erected in the fifteenth century
  and remodeled in the seventeenth. It has a handsome Greco-Roman
  facade in striking' contrast with the Gothic architecture of the
  cathedral, which stands upon the same plaza (see p. 73, note 2).]

  [Footnote 4: la Puerta del Sol. A charming old Moorish gateway with
  horseshoe arches between two towers, built about 1100, and recently
  restored. It is one of the most impressive and beautiful of Toledo's
  monuments.]

  [Footnote 5: Zocodover. See p. 64, note 1.]

Mandaba la fuerza un oficial bastante joven, el cual iba como a
distancia de unos treinta pasos de su gente hablando a media voz con
otro, tambien militar a lo que podia colegirse por su traje. Este, que
caminaba a pie delante de su interlocutor, llevando en la mano un
farolillo, parecia servirle de guia por entre aquel laberinto de
calles obscuras, enmaranadas y revueltas.

--Con verdad, decia el jinete a su acompanante, que si el alojamiento
que se nos prepara es tal y como me lo pintas, casi casi seria
preferible arrancharnos en el campo o en medio de una plaza.

--?Y que quereis, mi capitan? contestole el guia que efectivamente era
un sargento aposentador; en el alcazar no cabe ya un grano de trigo
cuanto mas un hombre; de San Juan de los Reyes[1] no digamos, porque
hay celda de fraile en la que duermen quince husares. El convento a
donde voy a conduciros no era mal local, pero hara cosa de tres o
cuatro dias nos cayo aqui como de las nubes ima de las columnas
volantes que recorren la provincia, y gracias que hemos podido
conseguir que se amontonen por los claustros y dejen libre la iglesia.

  [Footnote 1: San Juan de los Reyes. This convent was founded in 1476
  by Ferdinand and Isabella, who meant it to be their burial-place,
  and was dedicated to their patron saint John the Baptist. "After the
  capture of Granada in 1492 and the foundation of the royal mausoleum
  there, the chief object of San Juan disappeared and the building was
  protracted till the seventeenth century. Thus the edifice, begun in
  the late Gothic style, shows a strong leaning towards the forms of
  the Renaissance. The interior was much damaged by the French in
  1808." Baedeker's _Spain_ (1901), p. 147.]

--En fin, exclamo el oficial despues de un corto silencio y como
resignandose con el extrano alojamiento que la casualidad le
deparaba,--mas vale incomodo que ninguno. De todas maneras, si llueve,
que no sera dificil segun se agrupan las nubes, estaremos a cubierto y
algo es algo.

Interrumpida la conversacion en este punto, los jinetes, precedidos
del guia, siguieron en silencio el camino adelante hasta llegar a una
plazuela, en cuyo fondo se destacaba la negra silueta del convento con
su torre morisca, su campanario de espadana, su cupula ojival y sus
tejados de crestas desiguales y obscuras.

--He aqui vuestro alojamiento, exclamo el aposentador al divisarle y
dirigiendose al capitan, que despues que hubo mandado hacer alto a la
tropa, echo pie a tierra, tomo el farolillo de manos del guia, y se
dirigio hacia el punto que este le senalaba.

Como quiera que la iglesia del convento estaba completamente
desmantelada, los soldados que ocupaban el resto del edificio habian
creido que las puertas le eran ya poco menos que inutiles, y un
tablero hoy, otro manana, habian ido arrancandolas pedazo a pedazo
para hacer hogueras con que calentarse por las noches.

Nuestro joven oficial no tuvo, pues, que torcer Haves ni descorrer
cerrojos para penetrar en el interior del templo.

A la luz del farolillo, cuya dudosa claridad se perdia entre las
espesas sombras de las naves y dibujaba con gigantescas proporciones
sobre el muro la fantastica sombra del sargento aposentador que iba
precediendole, recorrio la iglesia de arriba abajo y escudrino una por
una todas sus desiertas capillas, hasta que una vez hecho cargo del
local, mando echar pie a tierra a su gente, y hombres y caballos
revueltos, fue acomodandola como mejor pudo.

Segun dejamos dicho, la iglesia estaba completamente desmantelada; en
el altar mayor pendian aun de las alias cornisas los rotos jirones del
velo con que le habian cubierto los religiosos al abandonar aquel
recinto; diseminados por las naves veianse algunos retablos adosados
al muro, sin imagenes en las hornacinas; en el coro se 'dibujaban con
un ribete de luz los extranos perfiles de la obscura silleria de
alerce; en el pavimento, destrozado en varies puntos, distinguianse
aun anchas losas sepulcrales llenas de timbres, escudos y largas
inscripciones goticas; y alla a lo lejos, en el fondo de las
silenciosas capillas y a lo largo del crucero, se destacaban
confusamente entre la obscuridad, semejantes a blancos e inmoviles
fantasmas, las estatuas de piedra que, unas tendidas, otras de hinojos
sobre el marmol de sus tumbas, parecian ser los unicos habitantes del
ruinoso edificio.

A cualquiera otro menos molido que el oficial de dragones, el cual
traia una jornada de catorce leguas en el cuerpo, o menos acostumbrado
a ver estos sacrilegios como la cosa mas natural del mundo, hubieranle
bastado dos adarmes de imaginacion para no pegar los ojos en toda la
noche en aquel obscuro e imponente recinto, donde las blasfemias de
los soldados que se quejaban en alta voz del improvisado cuartel, el
metalico golpe de sus espuelas que resonaban sobre las antes losas
sepulcrales del navimento, el ruido de los caballos que piafaban
impacientes, cabeceando y haciendo sonar las cadenas con que estaban
sujetos a los pilares, formaban un rumor extrano y temeroso que se
dilataba por todo el ambito de la iglesia y se reproducia cada vez mas
confuso repetido de eco en eco en sus alias bovedas.

Pero nuestro heroe, aunque joven, estaba ya tan familiarizado con
estas peripecias de la vida de campana, que apenas hubo acomodado a su
gente, mando colocar un saco de forraje al pie de la grada del
presbiterio, y arrebujandose como mejor pudo en su capote y echando la
cabeza en el escalon, a los cinco minutos roncaba con mas tranquilidad
que el mismo rey Jose[1] en su palacio de Madrid.[2]

  [Footnote 1: rey Jose. Joseph Bonaport. See p. 76, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: Madrid. The capital of Spain and of the province of
  Madrid, situated on the Manzanares, and nearly in the geographical
  center of Spain. Population some 540,000. The royal palace, begun in
  1737, is an imposing rectangular structure on a lofty terrace
  overlooking the Manzanares.]

Los soldados, haciendose almohadas de las monturas, imitaron su
ejemplo, y poco a poco fue apagandose el murmullo de sus voces.

A la media hora solo se oian los ahogados gemidos del aire que entraba
por las rotas vidrieras de las ojivas del templo, el atolondrado
revolotear de las aves nocturnas que tenian sus nidos en el dosel de
piedra de las esculturas de los muros, y el alternado rumor de los
pasos del vigilante que se paseaba envuelto en los anchos pliegues de
su capote, a lo largo del portico.




II


En la epoca a que se remonta la relacion de esta historia, tan
veridica como extraordinaria, lo mismo que al presente, para los que
no sabian apreciar los tesoros del arte que encierran sus muros la
ciudad de Toledo no era mas que un poblacon destartalado, antiguo,
ruinoso e insufrible.

Los oficiales del ejercito frances, que a juzgar por los actos de
vandalismo[1] con que dejaron en ella triste y perdurable memoria de
su ocupacion, de todo tenian menos de artistas o arqueologos, no hay
para que decir que se fastidiaban soberanamente en la vetusta ciudad
de los Cesares.[2]

  [Footnote 1: vandalismo. See p. 76, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: ciudad de los Cesares. See p. 50, note 2, and p. 52,
  note 1.]

En esta situacion de animo, la mas insignificante novedad que viniese
a romper la monotona quietud de aquellos dias eternos e iguales, era
acogida con avidez entre los ociosos; asi es que la promocion al grado
inmediato de uno de sus camaradas, la noticia del movimiento
estrategico de una columna volante, la salida de un correo de
gabinete, o la llegada de una fuerza cualquiera a la ciudad,
convertianse en tema fecundo de conversacion y objeto de toda clase de
comentarios, hasta tanto que otro incidente venia a sustituirle,[1]
sirviendo de base a nuevas quejas, criticas y suposiciones.

  [Footnote 1: sustituirle. See p. 66, note 1.]

Como era de esperar, entre los oficiales que, segun tenian de
costumbre, acudieron al dia siguiente a tomar el sol y a charlar un
rato en el Zocodover, no se hizo platillo de otra cosa que de la
llegada de los dragones, cuyo jefe dejamos en el anterior capitulo
durmiendo a pierna suelta y descansando de las fatigas de su viaje.
Cerca de una hora hacia que la conversacion giraba alrededor de este
asunto, y ya comenzaba a interpretarse de diversos modos la ausencia
del recien venido, a quien uno de los presentes, antiguo companero
suyo de colegio, habia citado para el Zocodover, cuando en una de las
boca-calles de la plaza aparecio al fin nuestro bizarro capitan
despojado de su ancho capoton de guerra, luciendo un gran casco de
metal con penacho de plumas blancas, una casaca azul turqui con
vueltas rojas y un magnifico mandoble con vaina de acero, que resonaba
arrastrandose al compas de sus marciales pasos y del golpe seco y
agudo de sus espuelas de oro.

Apenas le vio su camarada, salio a su encuentro para saludarle, y con
el se adelantaron casi todos los que a la sazon se encontraban en el
corrillo; en quienes habian despertado la curiosidad y la gana de
conocerle, los pormenores que ya habian oido referir acerca de su
caracter original y extrano.

Despues de los estrechos abrazos de costumbre y de las exclamaciones,
placemes y preguntas de rigor en estas entrevistas; despues de hablar
largo y tendido sobre las novedades que andaban por Madrid, la varia
fortuna de la guerra y los amigotes muertos o ausentes, rodando de uno
en otro asunto la conversacion, vino a parar al tema obligado, esto
es, las penalidades del servicio, la falta de distracciones de la
ciudad y el inconveniente de los alojamientos.

Al llegar a este punto, uno de los de la reunion que, por lo visto,
tenia noticia del mal talante con que el joven oficial se habia
resignado a acomodar su gente en la abandonada iglesia, le dijo con
aire de zumba:

--Y a proposito de alojamiento, ?que tal se ha pasado la noche en el
que ocupais?

--Ha habido de todo, contesto el interpelado; pues si bien es verdad
que no he dormido gran cosa, el origen de mi vigilia merece la pena de
la velada. El insomnio junto a una mujer bonita no es seguramente el
peor de los males.

--iUna mujer! repitio su interlocutor como admirandose de la buena
fortuna del recien venido; eso es lo que se llama llegar y besar el
santo.

--Sera tal vez algun antiguo amor de la corte que le sigue a Toledo
para hacerle mas soportable el ostracismo, anadio otro de los del
grupo.

--iOh! no, dijo entonces el capitan; nada menos que eso. Juro, a fe de
quien soy, que no la conocia y que nunca crei hallar tan bella patrona
en tan incomodo alojamiento. Es todo lo que se llama una verdadera
aventura.

--iContadla! icontadla! exclamaron en coro los oficiales que rodeaban
al capitan; y como este se dispusiera a hacerlo asi, todos prestaron
la mayor atencion a sus palabras, mientras el comenzo la historia en
estos terminos:

--Dormia esta noche pasada como duerme un hombre que trae en el cuerpo
trece[1] leguas de camino, cuando he aqui que en lo mejor del sueno me
hizo despertar sobresaltado e incorporarme sobre el codo un estruendo
horrible, un estruendo tal, que me ensordecio un instante para dejarme
despues los oidos zumbando cerca de un minuto, como si un moscardon me
cantase a la oreja.

  [Footnote 1: trece = 'thirteen.' Our author has told us on p. 79
  that it was catorce ('fourteen').]

Como os habras figurado, la causa de mi susto era el primer golpe que
oia de esa endiablada campana gorda,[1] especie de sochantre de
bronce, que los canonigos de Toledo han colgado en su catedral con el
laudable proposito de matar a disgustos a los necesitados de reposo.

  [Footnote 1: campana gorda = 'great bell.' The famous _Campana
  Gorda_, weighing nearly two tons, was cast by Alejandro Gargollo in
  1753. It hangs in the cathedral tower surrounded by eight other
  bells, and surmounted by two more.]

Renegando entre dientes de la campana y del campanero que la toca,
disponiame, una vez apagado aquel insolito y temeroso rumor, a coger
nuevamente el hilo del interrumpido sueno, cuando vino a herir mi
imaginacion y a ofrecerse ante mis ojos una cosa extraordinaria. A la
dudosa luz de la luna que entraba en el templo por el estrecho ajimez
del muro de la capilla mayor, vi una mujer arrodillada junto al altar.

Los oficiales se miraron entre si con expresion entre asombrada e
incredula; el capitan, sin atender al efecto que su narracion
producia, continuo de este modo:

--No podeis figuraros nada semejante a aquella nocturna y fantastica
vision que se dibujaba confusamente en la penumbra de la capilla como
esas virgenes pintadas en los vidrios de colores que habreis visto
alguna vez destacarse a lo lejos, blancas y luminosas, sobre el
obscuro fondo de las catedrales.

Su rostro ovalado, en donde se veia impreso el sello de una leve y
espiritual demacracion, sus armoniosas facciones llenas de una suave y
melancolica dulzura; su intensa palidez, las purisimas lineas de su
contorno esbelto, su ademan reposado y noble, su traje blanco y
flotante, me traian a la memoria esas mujeres que yo sonaba cuando
casi era un nino. iCastas y celestes imagenes, quimerico objeto del
vago amor de la adolescencia! Yo me creia juguete de una alucinacion,
y sin quitarle un punto los ojos, ni aun osaba respirar, temiendo que
un soplo desvaneciese el encanto. Ella permanecia inmovil.

Antojabaseme al verla tan diafana y luminosa que no era una criatura
terrenal, sino un espiritu que, revistiendo por un instante la forma
humana, habia descendido en el rayo de la luna, dejando en el aire y
en pos de si la azulada estela que desde el alto ajimez bajaba
verticalmente hasta el pie del opuesto muro, rompiendo la obscura
sombra de aquel recinto lobrego y misterioso.

--Pero ... exclamo interrumpiendole su camarada de colegio, que,
comenzando por echar a broma la historia, habia concluido
interesandose con su relato: ?como estaba alli aquella mujer? ?No
la[1] dijiste nada? ?No te explico su presencia en aquel sitio?

  [Footnote 1: la. See p. 20, note 2.]

--No me determine a hablarla,[1] porque estaba seguro de que no habia
de contestarme, ni verme ni oirme.

  [Footnote 1: la. See p. 20, note 2.]

--?Era sorda?

--?Era ciega?

--?Era muda? exclamaron a un tiempo tres o cuatro de los que
escuchaban la relacion.

--Lo era todo a la vez, exclamo al fin el capitan despues de un
momento de pausa; porque era... de marmol. Al oir el estupendo
desenlace de tan extraiia aventura, cuantos habia en el corro
prorrumpieron en una ruidosa carcajada, mientras uno de ellos dijo al
narrador de la peregrina historia, que era el unico que permanecia
callado y en una grave actitud:

--iAcabaramos de una vez! Lo que es de ese genero, tengo yo mas de un
millar, un verdadero serrallo, en San Juan de los Reyes; serrallo que
desde ahora pongo a vuestra disposicion, ya que, a lo que parece,
tanto os da de una mujer de carne como de piedra.

--iOh! no ... continuo el capitan, sin alterarse en lo mas minimo por
las carcajadas de sus companeros: estoy seguro de que no pueden ser
como la mia. La mia es una verdadera dama castellana que por un
milagro de la escultura parece que no la han enterrado en un sepulcro,
sino que aun permanece en cuerpo y alma de hinojos sobre la losa que
le cubre, inmovil, con las manos juntas en ademan suplicante,
sumergida en un extasis de mistico amor.

--De tal modo te explicas, que acabaras por probarnos la verosimilitud
de la fabula de Galatea.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Galatea. In the story told by Ovid (_Met._ x. 243)
  Pygmalion, king of Cyprus, conceived an aversion to women, and
  devoted himself to art, but having made in ivory a lovely statue of
  a woman he became enamored of it, and at his request Aphrodite
  endowed it with life. This beautiful woman, Galatea, became his
  wife, and bore him a son called Paphos, founder of the city of that
  name in Cyprus.]

--Por mi parte, puedo deciros que siempre la crei una locura; mas
desde anoche comienzo a comprender la pasion del escultor griego.

--Dadas las especiales condiciones de tu nueva dama, creo que, no
tendras inconveniente en presentarnos a ella. De mi se decir que ya no
vivo hasta ver esa maravilla. Pero ... ?que diantres te pasa? ...
diriase que esquivas la presentacion. iJa! ija! ija! Bonito fuera que
ya te tuvieramos hasta celoso.

--Celoso, se apresuro a decir el capitan, celoso ... de los hombres no
... mas ved, sin embargo, hasta donde llega mi extravagancia. Junto a
la imagen de esa mujer, tambien de marmol, grave y al parecer con vida
como ella, hay un guerrero, ... su marido sin duda.... Pues bien ...
lo voy a decir todo, aunque os mofeis de mi necedad ... si no hubiera
temido que me tratasen de loco, creo que ya lo habria hecho cien veces
pedazos.

Una nueva y aun mas ruidosa carcajada de los oficiales saludo esta
original revelacion del estrambotico enamorado de la dama de piedra.

--Nada, nada; es preciso que la veamos, decian los unos.

--Si, si, es preciso saber si el objeto corresponde a tan alta pasion,
anadian los otros.

--?Cuando nos reuniremos a echar un trago en la iglesia en que os
alojais? exclamaron los demas.

--Cuando mejor os parezca: esta misma noche si quereis, respondio el
joven capitan, recobrando su habitual sonrisa, disipada un instante
por aquel relampago de celos.--A proposito. Con los bagajes he traido
hasta un par de docenas de botellas de _Champagne_, verdadero
_Champagne_, restos de un regalo hecho a nuestro general de brigada,
que, como sabeis, es algo pariente.

iBravo! ibravo! exclamaron los oficiales a una voz, prorrumpiendo en
alegres exclamaciones.

--iSe bebera vino del pais![1]

  [Footnote 1: vino del pais = 'wine from home,' 'wine from our own
  country.']

--iY cantaremos una cancion de Ronsard![1]

  [Footnote 1: Ronsard. A celebrated French poet of the sixteenth
  century (b. 1524, d. 1585) and father of lyric poetry in France.]

--Y hablaremos de mujeres, a proposito de la dama del anfitrion.

--Conque ... ihasta la noche!

--Hasta la noche.




III


Ya hacia largo rato que los pacificos habitantes de Toledo habian
cerrado con llave y cerrojo las pesadas puertas de sus antiguos
caserones; la campana gorda de la catedral anunciaba la hora de la
queda, y en lo alto del alcazar, convertido en cuartel, se oia el
ultimo toque de silencio de los clarines, cuando diez o doce oficiales
que poco a poco habian ido reuniendose en el Zocodover, tomaron el
camino que conduce desde aquel punto al convento en que se alojaba el
capitan, animados mas con la esperanza de apurar las prometidas
botellas, que con el deseo de conocer la-maravillosa escultura.

La noche habia cerrado sombria y amenazadora; el cielo estaba cubierto
de nubes de color de plomo; el aire, que zumbaba encarcelado en las
estrechas y retorcidas calles, agitaba la moribunda luz del farolillo
de los retablos, o hacia girar con un chirrido agudo las veletas de
hierro de las torres.

Apenas los oficiales dieron vista a la plaza en que se hallaba situado
el alojamiento de su nuevo amigo, este, que les aguardaba impaciente,
salio a encontrarles; y despues de cambiar algunas palabras a media
voz, todos penetraron juntos en la iglesia, en cuyo lobrego recinto la
escasa claridad de una linterna luchaba trabajosamente con las
obscuras y espesisimas sombras.

--iPor quien soy! exclamo uno de los convidados tendiendo a su
alrededor la vista, que el local es de los menos aproposito del mundo
para una fiesta.

--Efectivamente, dijo otro; nos traes a conocer a una dama, y apenas
si con mucha dificultad se ven los dedos de la mano.

--Y sobre todo, hace un frio, que no parece sino que estamos en la
Siberia,[1] anadio un tercero arrebujandose en el capote.

  [Footnote 1: Siberia. A vast region in northern and central Asia,
  which forms part of the Russian empire, and which has by far the
  lowest winter temperatures of the known world.]

--Calma, senores, calma, interrumpio el anfitrion; calma, que a todo.
se proveera. iEh, muchacho! prosiguio dirigiendose a uno de sus
asistentes; busca por ahi un poco de lena, y enciendenos una buena
fogata en la capilla mayor.

El asistente, obedeciendo las ordenes de su capitan, comenzo a
descargar golpes en la silleria del coro, y despues que hubo reunido
una gran cantidad de lena que fue apilando al pie de las gradas del
presbiterio, tomo la linterna y se dispuso a hacer un auto de fe con
aquellos fragmentos tallados de riquisimas labores entre los que se
veian por aqui parte de una columnilla salomonica, por alla la imagen
de un santo abad, el torso de una mujer, o la disforme cabeza de un
grifo asomado entre hojarasca.

A los pocos minutos, una gran claridad que de improviso se derramo por
todo el ambito de la iglesia, anuncio a los oficiales que habia
llegado la hora de comenzar el festin.

El capitan, que hacia los honores de su alojamiento con la misma
ceremonia que hubiera hecho los de su casa, exclamo dirigiendose a los
convidados:

--Si gustais, pasaremos al _buffet_.[1]

  [Footnote 1: buffet. A French word meaning 'refreshment-table.' It
  is customary in France at large receptions and dancing-parties to
  install in some room a counter or table from which to serve
  refreshments. This is known as the _buffet_.]

Sus camaradas, afectando la mayor gravedad, respondieron a la
invitacion con un comico salido, y se encaminaron a la capilla mayor
precedidos del heroe de la fiesta, que al llegar a la escalinata se
detuvo un instante, y extendiendo la mano en direccion al sitio que
ocupaba la tumba, les dijo con la finura mas exquisita:

--Tengo el placer de presentaros a la dama de mis pensamientos. Creo
que convendreis conmigo en que no he exagerado su belleza.

Los oficiales volvieron los ojos al punto que les senalaba su amigo, y
una exclamacion de asombro se escapo involuntariamente de todos los
labios.

En el fondo de un arco sepulcral revestido de marmoles negros,
arrodillada delante de un reclinatorio, con las manos juntas y la cara
vuelta hacia el altar, vieron, en efecto, la imagen de una mujer tan
bella, que jamas salio otra igual de manos de un escultor, ni el deseo
pudo pintarla en la fantasia mas soberanamente hermosa.

--En verdad que es un angel, exclamo uno de ellos.

--iLastima que sea de marmol! anadio otro.

--No hay duda que aunque no sea mas que la ilusion de hallarse junto a
una mujer de este calibre, es lo suficiente para no pegar los ojos en
toda la noche.

--?Y no sabeis quien es ella? preguntaron algunos de los que
contemplaban la estatua al capitan, que sonreia satisfecho de su
triunfo.

--Recordando un poco del latin--que en mi ninez supe, he conseguido, a
duras penas, descifrar la inscripcion de la tumba, contesto el
interpelado; y a lo que he podido colegir, pertenece a un titulo de
Castilla,[1] famoso guerrero que hizo la campana con el Gran
Capitan.[2] Su nombre lo he olvidado; mas su esposa, que es la que
veis, se llama dona Elvira de Castaneda, y por mi fe que si la copia
se parece al original, debio ser la mujer mas notable de su siglo.

  [Footnote 1: Castilla. See p. 34, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: el Gran Capitan. Gonzalo Fernandez de Cordoba (b. 1453,
  d. 1515). A famous Spanish general, who served with distinction in
  the wars against Portugal and the Moors, and in several Italian
  campaigns.]

Despues de estas breves explicaciones, los convidados, que no perdian
de vista al principal objeto de la reunion, procedieron a destapar
algunas de las botellas y sentandose alrededor de la lumbre, empezo a
andar el vino a la ronda.

A medida que las libaciones se hacian mas numerosas y frecuentes, y el
vapor del espumoso _Champagne_ comenzaba a trastornar las cabezas,
crecian la animacion, el ruido y la algazara de los jovenes, de los
cuales estos arrojaban a los monjes de granito adosados en los pilares
los cascos de las botellas vacias, y aquellos cantaban a toda voz
canciones baquicas y escandalosas, mientras los de mas alla
prorrumpian en carcajadas, batian las palmas en senal de aplauso, o
disputaban entre si con blasfemias y juramentos.

El capitan bebia en silencio como un desesperado y sin apartar los
ojos de la estatua de dona Elvira.

Iluminada por el rojizo resplandor de la hoguera, y a traves del
confuso velo que la embriaguez habia puesto delante de su vista,
pareciale que la marmorea imagen se transformaba aveces en una mujer
real; pareciale que entreabria los labios como murmurando una oracion;
que se alzaba su pecho' como oprimido y sollozante; que cruzaba las
manos con mas fuerza; que sus mejillas se coloreaban, en fin, como si
se ruborizase ante aquel sacrilego y repugnante espectaculo.

Los oficiales que advirtieron la taciturna tristeza de su camarada, le
sacaron del extasis en que se encontraba sumergido, y presentandole
una copa, exclamaron en coro:

--iVamos, brindad vos, que sois el unico que no lo ha hecho en toda la
noche!

El joven tomo la copa, y poniendose de pie y alzandola en alto, dijo
encarandose con la estatua del guerrero arrodillado junto a dona
Elvira:

--iBrindo por el emperador,[1] y brindo por la fortuna de sus armas,
merced a las cuales hemos podido venir hasta el fondo de Castilla a
cortejarle su mujer, en su misma tumba, a un vencedor de Cerinola![2]

  [Footnote 1: el emperador. Napoleon Bonaparte, born at Ajaccio,
  Corsica, August 15, 1769; died on the island of St. Helena, May 5,
  1821. At this time he was at the height of his power.]

  [Footnote 2: Cerinola. At Cerignola, Italy, on April 28, 1503, the
  Spanish army under Gonzalo de Cordoba defeated the French under the
  Duc de Nemours, and gained for Spain the kingdom of Naples.]

Los militares acogieron el brindis con una salva de aplausos, y el
capitan, balanceandose, dio algunos pasos hacia el sepulcro.

--No... prosiguio dirigiendose siempre a la estatua del guerrero, y
con esa sonrisa estupida propia de la embriaguez ...no creas que te
tengo rencor alguno porque veo en ti un rival... al contrario, te
admiro como un marido paciente, ejemplo de longanimidad y mansedumbre,
y a mi vez quiero tambien ser generoso. Tu serias bebedor a fuer de
soldado... no se ha de decir que te he dejado morir de sed, viendonos
vaciar veinte botellas... itoma!

Y esto diciendo llevose la copa a los labios, y despues de
humedecerselos con el licor que contenia, le arrojo el resto a la
cara, prorrumpiendo en una carcajada estrepitosa al ver como caia el
vino sobre la tumba goteando de las barbas de piedra del inmovil
guerrero.

--iCapitan! exclamo en aquel punto uno de sus camaradas en tono de
zumba, cuidado con lo que haceis.... Mirad que esas bromas con la
gente de piedra suelen costar caras.... Acordaos de lo que acontecio a
los husares del 5 deg. en el monasterio de Poblet.[1] ... Los guerreros
del claustro dicen que pusieron mano una noche a sus espadas de
granito, y dieron que hacer a los que se entretenian en pintarles
bigotes con carbon.

  [Footnote 1: Poblet. A once celebrated Cistercien monastery,
  situated about midway between Lerida and Tarragona. It owes its name
  to a holy hermit, who, after suffering many persecutions at the
  hands of the Moors, was finally granted all the territory of
  Hardeta. "When the Christians reconquered the country in 1149, the
  body of Poblet was revealed to the Church by miraculous lights, in
  consequence of which Ramon Berenguer IV immediately built the
  convent... (which) became the Escorial of Aragon." (Ford,
  _Handbook_.) It was plundered and partly destroyed in 1822-1835, but
  the ruins are still beautiful and imposing. The following incident
  is not one of its well-known legends.]

Los jovenes acogieron con grandes carcajadas esta ocurrencia; pero el
capitan sin hacer caso de sus lisas, continuo siempre fijo en la misma
idea:

--?Creeis que yo le hubiera dado el vino a no saber que se tragaba al
menos el que le cayese en la boca? ... iOh! ... ino! ... yo no creo
como vosotros que esas estatuas son un pedazo de marmol tan inerte hoy
como el dia en que lo arrancaron de la cantera. Indudablemente el
artista, que es casi un dios, da a su obra un soplo de vida que no
logra hacer que ande y se mueva, pero que le infunde una vida
incomprensible y extrana; vida que yo no me explico bien, pero que la
siento, sobre todo cuando bebo un poco.

--iMagnifico! exclamaron sus camaradas, bebe y prosigue. El oficial
bebio, y fijando los ojos en la imagen de dona Elvira, prosiguio con
una exaltacion creciente:

--iMiradla! ... imiradla! ... ?No veis esos cambiantes rojos de sus
carnes morbidas y transparentes? ... ?No parece que por debajo de esa
ligera epidermis azulada y suave de alabastro circula un fluido de luz
de color de rosa? ... ?Quereis mas vida? ... ?Quereis mas realidad?
...

--iOh! si, seguramente, dijo uno de los que le escuchaban; quisieramos
que fuese de carne y hueso.

--iCarne y hueso! ... iMiseria, podredumbre! ... exclamo el capitan.
Yo he sentido en una orgia arder mis labios y mi cabeza; yo he sentido
este fuego que corre por las venas hirviente como la lava de un
volcan, cuyos vapores caliginosos turban y trastornan el cerebro y
hacen ver visiones extranas. Entonces el beso de esas mujeres
materiales me quemaba como un hierro candente, y las apartaba de mi
con disgusto, con horror, hasta con asco; porque entonces, como ahora,
necesitaba un soplo de 'brisa del mar para mi frente calurosa, beber
hielo y besar nieve... nieve tenida de suave luz, nieve coloreada por
un dorado rayo de sol... una mujer blanca, hermosa y fria, como esa
mujer de piedra que parece incitarme con su fantastica hermosura, que
parece que oscila al compas de la llama, y me provoca entreabriendo
sus labios y ofreciendome un tesoro de amor.... iOh!... si... un
beso... solo un beso tuyo podra calmar el ardor que me consume.

--iCapitan! exclamaron algunos de los oficiales al verle dirigirse
hacia la estatua como fuera de si, extraviada la vista y con pasos
inseguros... ?que locura vais a hacer? iBasta de broma y dejad en paz
a los muertos!

El joven ni oyo siquiera las palabras de sus amigos, y tambaleando y
como pudo llego a la tumba y aproximose a la estatua; pero al tenderle
los brazos resono un grito de horror en el templo. Arrojando sangre
por ojos, boca y nariz habia caido desplomado y con la cara deshecha
al pie del sepulcro.

Los oficiales, mudos y espantados, ni se atrevian a dar un paso para
prestarle socorro.

En el momento en que su camarada intento acercar sus labios ardientes
a los de dona Elvira, habian visto al inmovil guerrero levantar la
mano y derribarle con una espantosa bofetada de su guantelete de
piedra.




MAESE[1] PEREZ EL ORGANISTA

  [Footnote 1: maese. Obsolete for _maestro_, 'master,' a title of
  respect.]


En Sevilla[1] en el mismo atrio de Santa Ines,[2] y mientras esperaba
que comenzase la Misa del Gallo,[3] oi esta tradicion a una
demandadera del convento.

  [Footnote 1: Sevilla. Seville, the capital of the province of
  Seville, is a city of some 148,000 inhabitants situated in the
  southwestern part of Spain on the Guadalquivir River. In the
  sixteenth century, during the reign of Philip II (1556-1598), at
  which time the events of this story are supposed to take place,
  Seville reached the height of its prosperity.]

  [Footnote 2: Santa Ines. A convent church founded about 1374 by Dona
  Maria Coronel, its first abbess, and situated in the street named
  after her. The architecture is semi-Gothic.]

  [Footnote 3: la Misa del Gallo. The midnight mass preceding
  Christmas day. The introduction of the word _gallo_ has reference to
  the early cockcrowing. Compare the expression _al primer gallo_, at
  midnight.]

Como era natural, despues de oirla, aguarde impaciente que comenzara
la ceremonia, ansioso de asistir a un prodigio.

Nada menos prodigioso, sin embargo, que el organo de Santa Ines, ni
nada mas vulgar que los insulsos motetes que nos regalo su organista
aquella noche.

Al salir de la Misa, no pude por menos de decirle a la demandadera con
aire de burla:

--?En que consiste que el organo de maese Perez suena ahora tan mal?

--iToma! me contesto la vieja, en que ese no es el suyo.

--?No es el suyo? ?Pues que ha sido de el?

--Se cayo a pedazos de puro viejo, hace una porcion de anos.

--?Y el alma del organista?

--No ha vuelto a aparecer desde que colocaron el que ahora le
sustituye. Si a alguno de mis lectores se le ocurriese hacerme la
misma pregunta, despues de leer esta historia, ya sabe el por que no
se ha continuado el milagroso portento hasta nuestros dias.




I


--?Veis ese de la capa roja y la pluma blanca en el fieltro, que
parece que trae sobre su justillo todo el oro de los galeones de
Indias;[1] aquel que baja en este momento de su litera para dar la
mano a esa otra senora, que despues de dejar la suya, se adelanta
hacia aqui, precedida de cuatro pajes con hachas? Pues ese es el
marques de Moscoso,[2] galan de la condesa viuda de Villapineda. Se
dice que antes de poner sus ojos sobre esta dama, habia pedido en
matrimonio a la hija de un opulento senor; mas el padre de la
doncella, de quien se murmura que es un poco avaro ... pero, icalle!
en hablando del ruin de Roma, catale aqui que asoma.[3] ?Veis aquel
que viene por debajo del arco de San Felipe,[4] a pie, embozado en una
capa obscura, y precedido de un solo criado con una linterna? Ahora
llega frente al retablo.

  [Footnote 1: los galeones de Indias. The galleons from the West
  Indies brought much gold to Spain in the sixteenth century.]

  [Footnote 2: Moscoso ... Villapineda. Well-known Sevillian titles,
  but created much later than the epoch of our story, the former in
  1780, and the latter in 1738 (see Guia _oficial de Espana_, Madrid,
  1905). These anachronisms on the part of the author, however, in no
  way affect the artistic merit of the work. Nor are they the only
  ones to be found in this same legend. See note 4, below; also p. 98,
  note 2; p. 99, note 3.]

  [Footnote 3: en hablando del ruin de Roma, catale aqui que asoma. A
  colloquial expression worded in various ways, as, for example, _en
  nombrando al ruin de Roma, luego asoma_. Compare the English
  expression "speak of the devil and he will appear," used under
  similar circumstances. By _Roma_ was probably meant originally the
  Catholic church or its officers.]

  [Footnote 4: arco de San Felipe. This is another anachronism on the
  part of Becquer, for the arch and church of San Felipe were not
  constructed until the eighteenth century. Neither exists at present.
  The arch traversed a narrow street between the church of the same
  name and the convent of Santa Ines. Below the arch was a picture in
  _azulejos_ representing Christ fallen with the cross and aided by
  Simon the Cyrenian.]

?Reparasteis, al desembozarse para saludar a la imagen, la encomienda
que brilla en su pecho?

A no ser por ese noble distintivo, cualquiera le creeria un lonjista
de la calle de Culebras.[1] ... Pues ese es el padre en cuestion;
mirad como la gente del pueblo le abre paso y le saluda.

  [Footnote 1: calle de Culebras. One of the ancient commercial
  streets of Seville, known to-day as the Calle de Villegas. It
  connects the Plaza de San Salvador and the Calle de Francos.]

Toda Sevilla le conoce por su colosal fortuna. El solo tiene mas
ducados de oro en sus arcas que soldados mantiene nuestro senor el rey
Don Felipe;[1] y con sus galeones podria formar una escuadra
suficiente a resistir a la del Gran Turco....[2]

  [Footnote 1: Don Felipe. Evidently Philip II, born at Valladolid,
  Spain, May 21, 1527; king of Spain 1556-98; died at the Escorial,
  Spain, September 13, 1598. Son of the emperor Charles V and Isabella
  of Portugal. The recluse king made his first visit to Seville in
  1570 at the time of the preparations for the great war with the
  Turks.]

  [Footnote 2: el Gran Turco = 'the Grand Turk,' that is to say the
  Sultan of Turkey. Selim II was sultan at this time, and his navy was
  considered the most powerful of Europe. On October 7, 1571, however,
  it was defeated in the battle of Lepanto by the united fleets of
  Spain and several of the Italian states, commanded by Don Juan of
  Austria.]

Mirad, mirad ese grupo de senores graves: esos son los caballeros
veinticuatros.[1] iHola, hola! Tambien esta aqui el flamencote,[2] a
quien se dice que no han echado ya el guante los senores de la cruz
verde,[3] merced a su influjo con los magnates [4] de Madrid.[5] ...
Este no viene a la iglesia mas que a oir musica.... No, pues si maese
Perez no le arranca con su organo lagrimas como punos, bien se puede
asegurar que no tiene su alma en su armario, sino friendose en las
calderas de Pero Botero.[6] ... iAy, vecina! Malo... malo... presumo
que vamos a tener jarana; yo me refugio en la iglesia, pues por lo que
veo, aqui van a andar mas de sobra los cintarazos que los _Pater
Noster_.[7] Mirad, mirad; las gentes del duque de Alcala[8] doblan la
esquina de la plaza de San Pedro,[9] y por el callejon de las
Duenas[10] se me figura que he columbrado a las del de
Medinasidonia.[11] ... ?No os lo dije?

  [Footnote 1: veinticuatros. Magistrates of certain cities of
  Andalusia, whose duties, according to the ancient municipal regime,
  were much the same as those of the modern _regidores_ or aldermen.
  As the name indicates, there were twenty-four of these city
  councilors.]

  [Footnote 2: el flamencote = 'the big (_or_ great) Fleming.' During
  the reign of Philip II, owing to his religious persecutions in the
  Netherlands, several eminent Flemish noblemen were sent to Spain to
  treat with him on this question. Among the most famous were Egmont
  (Lamoral, count of Egmont), who was in Spain from January to April,
  1565, and Montigny (Floris de Montmorency), who made two trips to
  Spain, one in 1562, and the other in 1566, on which occasion he
  remained until 1570, when he was murdered at the king's bidding.
  Philip received both of these envoys with a show of great cordiality
  and affection. The Spanish nobles, on the contrary, were cold in
  their reception, and would gladly have given them over to the
  Inquisition had there been no fear of Philip's anger. Either of
  these envoys, if they were ever in Seville, may be referred to here,
  or some other influential Fleming who may have been there under
  similar conditions, or this may be mere fiction.]

  [Footnote 3: los senores de la cruz verde. The officers of the
  Inquisition. The arms of this body were a green cross surmounted by
  a crown, with a drawn sword to the right and an olive branch to the
  left, upon a field of sable. See Emmanuel Delorme, _les Emblemes de
  L'Inquisition d'Espagne_, Toulouse, 1905.]

  [Footnote 4: los magnates. Doubtless Philip II and his court are
  meant.]

  [Footnote 5: Madrid. See p. 80, note 2.]

  [Footnote 6: Pero Botero. See vocabulary.]

  [Footnote 7: Pater Noster. See p. 33, note 1.]

  [Footnote 8: El duque de Alcala. In 1558 Philip II bestowed this
  title upon D. Pedro Afan o Enriquez de Ribera y Portocarrero, second
  Marquis of Tarifa, sixth Count of los Molares, and bearer of other
  titles as well. He was made viceroy of Naples in 1559, at about the
  age of fifty, and died some dozen years later. His wife was Dona
  Leonor Ponce de Leon, by whom he had no children. This is probably
  the duke referred to here, if we presume that the author had some
  definite duke in mind. The beautiful family mansion, known as _la
  Casa de Pilatos_, is still standing, a mixture of Gothic, Moorish,
  and Renaissance designs.]

  [Footnote 9: San Pedro. The church of San Pedro, a Gothic structure
  of the fourteenth century, built on the site of a mosque, is
  situated near the modern market and not far from the University. The
  little square in front of the church bears the same name.]

  [Footnote 10: callejon de las Duenas. A short street called to-day
  _Calle de Gerona_. It connects the Plaza del Espiritu Santo and that
  of Sta. Catalina. This street received its name from the Cistercian
  nuns whose convent, destroyed in the revolution of 1868, was
  situated here.]

  [Footnote 11: las del de Medinasidonia= 'those of the (Duke) of
  Medinasidonia.' In the fifteenth century Seville was the scene of
  many bloody frays between the hostile houses of Medinasidonia and
  Ponce de Leon, but through the intervention of Ferdinand and
  Isabella this enmity was happily terminated before the close of that
  century, long before the creation of the title of Duke of Alcala.
  The dukedom of Medinasidonia was created in 1445 by Juan II, and the
  best-known duke of this name during the reign of Philip II was
  commander of the celebrated Armada (1588).]

Ya se han visto, ya se detienen unos y otros, sin pasar de
sus puestos... los grupos se disuelven... los ministriles, a
quienes en estas ocasiones apalean amigos y enemigos, se retiran ... hasta
el senor asistente,[1] con su vara y todo, se refugia
en el atrio... y luego dicen que hay justicia.

  [Footnote 1: asistente. A magistrate in Seville, and certain other
  cities, whose duties and prerogatives corresponded with those of the
  _corregidor_ elsewhere. This office came into existence in Seville
  about the middle of the fifteenth century, and was filled during the
  reign of Philip II by some fifteen asistentes in succession, most of
  them counts.]

Para los pobres....

Vamos, vamos, ya brillan los broqueles en la obscuridad.... iNuestro
Senor del Gran Poder[1] nos asista! Ya comienzan los golpes ivecina!
ivecina! aqui... antes que cierren las puertas. Pero icalle! ?Que es
eso? Aun no ban comenzado, cuando lo dejan. ?Que resplandor es aquel?
iHachas encendidas! iLiteras! Es el senor obispo.[2]

  [Footnote 1: Nuestro Senor del Gran Poder. An epithet applied to
  Christ.]

  [Footnote 2: obispo. Of course the archbishop is meant here. The
  Seville Archbishops during the reign of Philip II were D. Fernando
  Valdes, Inquisitor General (d. 1568), D. Gaspar de Zuniga y
  Avellaneda (d. 1571), D. Cristohal de Roxas y Sandoval (d. 1580),
  and D. Rodrigo de Castro (d. 1600). See Fermin Arana de Varflora,
  _Compendio descriptivo de ... Sevilla_, 1789, za parte, p. 13.]

La Virgen Santisima del Amparo,[1] a quien invocaba ahora mismo con el
pensamiento, lo trae en mi ayuda.... iAy! iSi nadie sabe lo que yo
debo a esta Senora![2] ... iCon cuanta usura me paga las candelillas
que le enciendo los sabados!... Vedlo, que hermosote esta con sus
habitos morados y su birrete rojo.... Dios le conserve en su silla
tantos siglos como yo deseo de vida para mi. Si no fuera por el, media
Sevilla hubiera ya ardido con estas disensiones de los duques. Vedlos,
vedlos, los hipocritones, como se acercan ambos a la litera del
Prelado para besarle el anillo.... Como le siguen y le acompanan,
confundiendose con sus familiares. Quien diria que esos dos que
parecen tan amigos, si dentro de media hora se encuentran en una calle
obscura ... es decir, iellos ... ellos! ... Libreme Dios de creerlos
cobardes; buena muestra han dado de si, peleando en algunas ocasiones
contra los enemigos de Nuestro Senor.... Pero es la verdad, que si se
buscaran ... y si se buscaran con ganas de encontrarse, se
encontrarian, poniendo fin de una vez a estas continuas reyertas, en
las cuales los que verdaderamente baten el cobre de firme son sus
deudos, sus allegados y su servidumbre.

  [Footnote 1: La Virgen Santisima del Amparo. An appellation that
  recalls the frequent role of the Virgin as protector in the
  mediaeval legends.]

  [Footnote 2: esta Senora--this Lady,' referring to the Virgin.]

Pero vamos, vecina, vamos a la iglesia, antes que se ponga de bote en
bote ... que algunas noches como esta suele llenarse de modo que no
cabe ni un grano de trigo.... iBuena ganga tienen las monjas con su
organista!... ?Cuando se ha visto el convento tan favorecido como
ahora?...[1] De las otras comunidades, puedo decir que le han hecho a
maese Perez proposiciones magnificas, verdad que nada tiene de
extrano, pues hasta el senor arzobispo le ha ofrecido montes de oro
por llevarle a la catedral... pero el, nada.... Primero dejaria la
vida que abandonar su organo favorito.... ?No conoceis a maese Perez?
Verdad es que sois nueva en el barrio.... Pues es un santo varon;
pobre si, pero limosnero cual no otro.... Sin mas parientes que su
hija ni mas amigo que su organo, pasa su vida entera en velar por la
inocencia de la una y componer los registros del otro.... iCuidado que
el ergano es viejo!... Pues nada, el se da tal mana en arreglarlo y
cuidarlo, que suena, que es una maravilla.... Como que le conoce de
tal modo, que a tientas... porque no se si os lo he dicho, pero el
pobre senor es ciego de nacimiento.... Y icon que paciencia lleva su
desgracia!... Cuando le preguntan que[2] cuanto daria por ver,
responde: mucho, pero no tanto como creels, porque tengo
esperanzas.--?Esperanzas de ver?--Si, y muy pronto, anade sonriendose
como un angel; ya cuento setenta y seis anos; por muy larga que sea mi
vida, pronto vere a Dios....

  [Footnote 1: In women's convents the organ is played by the nuns
  themselves, and in Sta. Ines it is in the choir and not in a gallery
  apart, as Becyuer puts it.]

  [Footnote 2: que. A redundant use of the conjunction quite
  frequently found in Spanish.]

iPobrecito! Y si lo vera ... porque es humilde como las piedras de la
calle, que se dejan pisar de todo el mundo.... Siempre dice que no es
mas que un pobre organista de convento, y puede dar lecciones de solfa
al mismo maestro de capilla de la Primada;[1] como que echo los
dientes en el oficio. Su padre tenia la misma profesion que el; yo no
le conoci, pero mi senora madre, que santa gloria haya,[2] dice que le
llevaba siempre al organo consigo para darle a los fuelles. Luego, el
muchacho mostro tales disposiciones que, como era natural, a la muerte
de su padre heredo el cargo. iY que manos tiene! Dios se las bendiga.
Merecia que se las llevaran a la calle de Chicarreros[3] y se las
engarzasen en oro.... Siempre toca bien, siempre; pero en semejante
noche como esta, es un prodigio.... El tiene una gran devocion por
esta ceremonia de la Misa del Gallo, y cuando levantan la Sagrada
Forma[4] al punto y hora de las doce, que es cuando vino al mundo
Nuestro Senor Jesucristo ... las voces de su organo son voces de
angeles....

  [Footnote 1: la Primada =:'the primatical church.' Here the
  cathedral of Seville.]

  [Footnote 2: que santa gloria haya. In speaking of one who has died,
  it is customary in Spain to express some similar hope for the
  welfare of his soul. Notice the use of _haya_ instead of tenga,
  although possession is indicated.]

  [Footnote 3: la calle de Chicarreros. A street in Seville connecting
  the Plaza de San Francisco and the Calle de Francos. It was famous
  at this time for its jewelry-shops.]

  [Footnote 4: la Sagrada Forma = 'the consecrated host.' It is at the
  moment of the elevation of the host that the miracle of
  transubstantiation is believed by the Roman Catholic Church to take
  place. See p. 106, 1. 4.]

En fin, ?para que tengo de ponderarle lo que esta noche oira? baste el
ver como todo lo mas florido de Sevilla, hasta el mismo senor
arzobispo, vienen a un humilde convento para escucharle; y no se crea
que solo la gente sabida y a la que se le alcanza esto de la solfa
conocen su merito, sino que hasta el populacho. Todas esas bandadas
que veis llegar con teas encendidas entonando villancicos con gritos
desaforados al compas de los panderos, las sonajas y las zambombas,
contra su costumbre, que es la de alborotar las iglesias, callan como
muertos cuando pone maese Perez las manos en el organo... y cuando
alzan ... no se siente una mosca ... de todos los ojos caen lagrimones
tamanos, y al concluir se oye como un suspiro inmenso, que no es otra
cosa que la respiracion de los circunstantes contenida mientras dura
la musica.... Pero vamos, vamos, ya han dejado de tocar las campanas,
y va a comenzar la Misa; vamos adentro....

Para todo el mundo es esta noche Noche-Buena,[1] pero para nadie mejor
que para nosotros.

  [Footnote 1: Noche-Buena = 'Christmas eve.' It is impossible to
  render in English the play upon the words _Buena_ and _mejor_.]

Esto diciendo, la buena mujer que habia servido de cicerone a su
vecina, atraveso el atrio del convento de Santa Ines,[1] y codazo en
este, empujon en aquel, se interno en el templo, perdiendose entre la
muchedumbre que se agolpaba en la puerta.

  [Footnote 1: Santa Ines. See p. 94, note 3.]




II


La iglesia estaba iluminada con una profusion asombrosa. El torrente
de luz que se desprendia de los altares para llenar sus ambitos,
chispeaba en los ricos joyeles de las damas que, arrodillandose sobre
los cojines de terciopelo que tendian los pajes y tomando el libro de
oraciones de manos de las duenas,[1] vinieron a formar un brillante
circulo alrededor de la verja del presbiterio. Junto a aquella verja,
de pie, envueltos en sus capas de color galoneadas de oro, dejando
entrever con estudiado descuido las encomiendas rojas y verdes, en la
una mano el fieltro, cuyas plumas besaban los tapices, la otra sobre
los brunidos gavilanes del estoque o acariciando el pomo del cincelado
punal, los caballaros veinticuatros,[2] con gran parte de lo mejor de
la nobleza sevillana, parecian formar un muro, destinado a defender a
sus hijas y sus esposas del contacto de la plebe. Esta, que se agitaba
en el fondo de las naves, con un rumor parecido al del mar cuando se
alborota, prorrumpie en una aclamacion de jubilo, acompanada del
discordante sonido de las sonajas y los panderos, al mirar aparecer al
arzobispo, el cual, despues de sentarse junto al altar mayor bajo un
solio de grana que rodearon sus familiares, echo por tres veces la
bendicion al pueblo.

  [Footnote 1: duenas. See p.67, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: veinticuatros. See p. 96, note 4.]

Era la hora de que comenzase la Misa.

Trascurrieron, sin embargo, algunos minutos sin que el celebrante
apareciese. La multitud comenzaba a rebullirse, demostrando su
impaciencia; los caballeros cambiaban entre si algunas palabras a
media voz, y el arzobispo mando a la sacristia uno de sus familiares a
inquirir el por que no comenzaba la ceremonia.

--Maese Perez se ha puesto malo, muy malo, y sera imposible que asista
esta noche a la Misa de media noche. Esta fue la respuesta del
familiar.

La noticia cundio instantaneamente entre la muchedumbre. Pintar el
efecto desagradable que causo en todo el mundo, seria cosa imposible;
baste decir que comenzo a notarse tal bullicio en el templo, que el
asistente se puso de pie y los alguaciles entraron a imponer silencio,
confundiendose entre las apinadas olas de la multitud.

En aquel momento, un hombre mal trazado, seco, huesudo y bisojo por
anadidura, se adelanto hasta el sitio que ocupaba el prelado.

--Maese Perez esta enfermo, dijo: la ceremonia no puede empezar. Si
quereis, yo tocare el organo en su ausencia; que ni maese Perez es el
primer organista del mundo, ni a su muerte dejara de usarse este
instrumento por falta de inteligente.... El arzobispo hizo una senal
de asentimiento con la cabeza, y ya algunos de los fieles que conocian
a aquel personaje extrano por un organista envidioso, enemigo del de
Santa Ines, comenzaban a prorrumpir en exclamaciones de disgusto,
cuando de improviso se oyo en el atrio un ruido espantoso.

--iMaese Perez esta aqui!... iMaese Perez esta aqui!... A estas voces
de los que estaban apinados en la puerta, todo el mundo volvio la
cara.

Maese Perez, palido y desencajado, entraba en efecto en la iglesia,
conducido en un sillon, que todos se disputaban el honor de llevar en
sus hombros.

Los preceptos de los doctores, las lagrimas de su hija, nada habia
sido bastante a detenerle en el lecho.

--No, habia dicho; esta es la ultima, lo conozco, lo conozco, y no
quiero morir sin visitar mi organo, y esta noche sobre todo, la
Noche-Buena. Vamos, lo quiero, lo mando; vamos a la iglesia.

Sus deseos se habian cumplido; los concurrentes le subieron en brazos
a la tribuna, y comenzo la Misa.

En aquel punto sonaban las doce en el reloj de la catedral.

Paso el introito[1] y el Evangelio[2] y el ofertorio,[3] y llego el
instante solemne en que el sacerdote, despues de haberla consagrado,
toma con la extremidad de sus dedos la Sagrada Forma y comienza a
elevarla.

  [Footnote 1: introito. "In the ancient Church a psalm was sung or
  chanted immediately before the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel. As this
  took place while the priest was entering within the septum or rails
  of the altar, it acquired the name of Introitus or Introit." Walter
  F. Hook, _Church Dict._, London, Murray, 1887, p. 407.]

  [Footnote 2: Evangelio = Gospel.' "The First Council of Orange in
  441, and that of Valentia in Spain, ordered the Gospel to be read
  after the Epistle and before the offertory." Addis and Arnold,
  '_Catholic Dict._, London, 1884, p. 380.]

  [Footnote 3: ofertorio. The offertory or "service of song while the
  oblations were collected and received is of ancient date. St.
  Augustine speaks of the singing of hymns at the oblation." Walter F.
  Hook, _Church Dict._, p. 540. The offertory is said immediately
  after the _Creed_, and before the Preface and Sanctus.]

Una nube de incienso que se desenvolvia en ondas azuladas lleno el
ambito de la iglesia; las campanillas repicaron con un sonido
vibrante, y maese Perez puso sus crispadas manos sobre las teclas del
organo.

Las cien voces de sus tubos de metal resonaron en un acorde majestuoso
y prolongado, que se perdio poco a poco, como si una rafaga de aire
hubiese arrebatado sus ultimos ecos.

A este primer acorde, que parecia una voz que se elevaba desde la
tierra al cielo, respondio otro lejano y suave que fue creciendo,
creciendo hasta convertirse en un torrente de atronadora armonia.

Era la voz de los angeles, que atravesando los espacios, llegaba al
mundo.

Despues comenzaron a oirse como unos himnos distantes que entonaban
las jerarquias de serafines; mil himnos a la vez, que al confundirse
formaban uno solo, que, no obstante, era no mas el acompanamiento de
una extrana melodia, que parecia flotar sobre aquel oceano de
misteriosos ecos, como un jiron de niebla sobre las olas del mar.

Luego fueron perdiendose unos cantos, despues otros; la combinacion se
simplificaba. Ya no eran mas que dos voces, cuyos ecos se confundian
entre si; luego quedo una aislada, sosteniendo una nota brillante como
un hilo de luz.... El sacerdote inclino la frente, y por encima de su
cabeza cana y como a traves de una gasa azul que fingia el humo del
incienso, aparecio la Hostia a los ojos de los fieles. En aquel
instante la nota que maese Perez sostenia trinando, se abrio, se
abrio, y una explosion de armonia gigante estremecio la iglesia, en
cuyos angulos zumbaba el aire comprimido, y cuyos vidrios de colores
se estremecian en sus angostos ajimeces.

De cada una de las notas que formaban aquel magnifico acorde, se
desarrollo un tema; y unos cerca, otros lejos, estos brillantes,
aquellos sordos, diriase que las aguas y los pajaros, las brisas y las
frondas, los hombres y los angeles, la tierra y los cielos, cantaban
cada cual en su idioma un himno al nacimiento del Salvador.

La multitud escuchaba atonita y suspendida. En todos los ojos habia
una lagrima, en todos los espiritus un profundo recogimiento.

El sacerdote que oficiaba sentia temblar sus manos, porque Aquel que
levantaba en ellas, Aquel a quien saludaban hombres y arcangeles era
su Dios; era su Dios, y le parecia haber visto abrirse los cielos y
trasfigurarse la Hostia.[1]

  [Footnote 1: trasfigurarse la Hostia. See p. 101, note 2.]

El organo proseguia sonando; pero sus voces se apagaban gradualmente,
como una voz que se pierde de eco en eco, y se aleja, y se debilita al
alejarse, cuando de pronto sono un grito en la tribuna, un grito
desgarrador, agudo, un grito de mujer.

El organo exhalo un sonido discorde y extrano, semejante a un sollozo,
y quedo mudo.

La multitud se agolpo a la escalera de la tribuna, hacia la que,
arrancados de su extasis religiose, volvieron la mirada con ansiedad
todos los fieles.

--?Que ha sucedido? ?que pasa? se decian unos a otros, y nadie sabia
responder, y todos se empenaban en adivinarlo, y crecia la confusion,
y el alboroto comenzaba a subir de punto, amenazando turbar el orden y
el recogimiento propios de la iglesia.

--?Que ha sido eso? preguntaban las damas al asistente, que, precedido
de los ministriles, fue uno de los primeros a subir a la tribuna, y
que, palido y con muestras de profundo pesar, se dirigia al puesto en
donde le esperaba el arzobispo, ansioso, como todos, por saber la
causa de aquel desorden.

--?Que hay?

--Que maese Perez acaba de morir.

En efecto, cuando los primeros fieles, despues de atropellarse por la
escalera, llegaron a la tribuna, vieron--al pobre organista caido de
boca sobre las teclas de su viejo instrumento, que aun vibraba
sordamente, mientras su hija, arrodillada a sus pies, le llamaba en
vano entre suspiros y sollozos.




III


--Buenas noches, mi senora dona Baltasara; ?tambien usarced[1] viene
esta noche a la Misa del Gallo? Por mi parte tenia hecha intencion de
irla a oir a la parroquia; pero lo que sucede... ?Donde va Vicente?
Donde va la gente.[2] Y eso que, si he de decir la verdad, desde que
murio maese Perez, parece que me echan una losa sobre el corazon
cuando entro en Santa Ines... iPobrecito! iEra un santo!... Yo de mi
se decir, que conservo un pedazo de su jubon como una reliquia, y lo
merece... pues en Dios y en mi anima, que si el senor arzobispo tomara
mano en ello, es seguro que nuestros nietos le verian en los
altares.[3] ... Mas icomo ha de ser!... A muertos y a idos, no hay
amigos.[4] ... Ahora lo que priva es la novedad... ya me entiende
usarced. iQue! ?No sabe nada de lo que pasa? Verdad que nosotras nos
parecemos en eso; de nuestra casita a la iglesia, y de la iglesia a
nuestra casita, sin cuidarnos de lo que se dice o dejase de decir...
solo que yo, asi... al vuelo... una palabra de aca, otra de aculla...
sin ganas de enterarme siquiera, suelo estar al corriente de algunas
novedades.... Pues, si senor; parece cosa hecha que el organista de
San Roman,[5] aquel bisojo, que siempre esta echando pestes de los
otros organistas; aquel perdulariote, que mas parece jifero de la
puerta de la Carne[6] que maestro de solfa, va a tocar esta
Noche-Buena en lugar de maese Perez. Ya sabra usarced, porque esto lo
ha sabido todo el mundo y es cosa publica en Sevilla, que nadie queria
comprometerse a hacerlo. Ni aun su hija que es profesora, y despues de
la muerte de su padre entro en el convento de novicia. Y era natural:
acostumbrados a oir aquellas maravillas, cualquiera otra cosa habia de
parecernos mala, por mas que quisieran evitarse las comparaciones.
Pues cuando ya la comunidad habra decidido que, en honor del difunto y
como muestra de respeto a su memoria, permaneceria callado el organo
en esta noche, hate aqui que se presenta nuestro hombre, diciendo que
el se atreve a tocarlo.... No hay nada mas atrevido que la
ignorancia.... Cierto que la culpa no es suya, sino de los que le
consienten esta profanacion... pero, asi va el mundo... y digo, no es
cosa la gente que acude...[7] cualquiera diria que nada ha cambiado
desde un ano a otro. Los mismos personajes, el mismo lujo, los mismos
empellones en la puerta, la misma animacion en el atrio, la misma
multitud en el templo... iAy, si levantara la cabeza el muerto! se
volvia[8] a morir por no oir su organo tocado por manos semejantes. Lo
que tiene que,[9] si es verdad lo que me han dicho las gentes del
barrio, le preparan una buena al intruso. Cuando llegue el momento de
poner la mano sobre las teclas, va a comenzar una algarabia de
sonajas, panderos, y zambombas, que no haya mas que oir... pero
icalle! ya entra en la iglesia el heroe de la funcion. iJesus, que
ropilla de colorines, que gorguera de canutos, que aires de personaje!
Vamos, vamos, que ya hace rato que llego el arzobispo, y va a comenzar
la misa... vamos, que me parece que esta noche va a darnos que contar
para muchos dias.

  [Footnote 1: usarced. Contraction of _vues(tr)a merced_, 'your
  grace.']

  [Footnote 2: ?Donde va Vicente? Donde va la gente. See vocabulary.
  Note the two senses in which the adverb of place, _donde_, is used.]

  [Footnote 3: en los altares. That is to say canonized.]

  [Footnote 4: A muertos y a idos, no hay amigos = 'The dead and
  departed have no friends (_or_ are soon forgotten)'.]

  [Footnote 5: San Roman. A church, originally a mosque, situated in
  the northern part of Seville, on the Plaza de San Roman. It was
  reconstructed by D. Pedro I. Its facade is very plain, the chief
  decorative features being an ogival doorway in the center and a
  window of similar form to the right. It contains some fine statuary
  by Montanes. The fifteenth-century painter Juan Sanchez de Castro is
  buried here.]

  [Footnote 6: la puerta de la Carne. One of the ancient gates of
  Seville, situated in the north wall near the _Matadero_
  ('slaughter-house'). Hence its name. It was once called the _Puerta
  Judia_. But little remains now of the old walls of Seville, which
  had a circumference of upwards of ten miles, and were pierced by
  fifteen gates and strengthened by one hundred and sixty-six towers.]

  [Footnote 7: no es cosa la gente que acude = 'the crowd in
  attendance is not small' or 'what a lot of persons have come!' The
  expression _no es cosa_ is used familiarly in the sense of _es
  mucha_.]

  [Footnote 8: volvia. A Common use of the imperfect indicative
  instead of the conditional.]

  [Footnote 9: Lo que tiene que = 'the fact is.']

Esto diciendo la buena mujer, que ya conocen nuestros lectores por sus
exabruptos de locuacidad, penetro en Santa Ines, abriendose segun
costumbre, un camino entre la multitud a fuerza de empellones y
codazos.

Ya se habia dado principio a la ceremonia.

El templo estaba tan brillante como el ano anterior.

El nuevo organista, despues de atravesar por en medio de los fieles
que ocupaban las naves para ir a besar el anillo del prelado, habia
subido a la tribuna, donde tocaba unos tras otros los registros del
organo; con una gravedad tan afectada como ridicula.

Entre la gente menuda que se apinaba a los pies de la iglesia, se oia
un rumor sordo y confuso, cierto presagio de que la tempestad
comenzaba a fraguarse y no tardaria mucho en dejarse sentir.

--Es un truhan, que por no hacer nada bien, ni aun mira a derechas,
decian los unos.

--Es un ignoranton, que despues de haber puesto el organo de su
parroquia peor que una carraca, viene a profanar el de maese Perez,
decian los otros.

Y mientras este se desembarazaba del capote para prepararse a darle de
firme a su pandero, y aquel apercibia sus sonajas, y todos se
disponian a hacer bulla a mas y mejor, solo alguno que otro se
aventuraba a defender tibiamente al extrano personaje, cuyo porte
orgulloso y pedantesco hacia tan notable contraposicion con la modesta
apariencia y la afable bondad del difunto maese Perez.

Al fin llego el esperado momento, el momento solemne en que el
sacerdote, despues de inclinarse y murmurar algunas palabras santas,
tomo la Hostia en sus manos.... Las campanillas repicaron, semejando
su repique una lluvia de notas de cristal; se elevaron las diafanas
ondas del incienso, y sono el organo.

Una estruendosa algarabia lleno los ambitos de la iglesia en aquel
instante y ahogo su primer acorde.

Zamponas, gaitas, sonajas, panderos, todos los instrumentos del
populacho, alzaron sus discordantes voces a la vez; pero la confusion
y el estrepito solo duro algunos segundos. Todos a la vez como habian
comenzado, enmudecieron de pronto.

El segundo acorde, amplio, valiente, magnifico, se sostenia aun
brotando de los tubos de metal del organo, como una cascada de armonia
inagotable y sonora.

Cantos celestes como los que acarician 'los oidos en los momentos de
extasis; cantos que percibe el espiritu y no los puede repetir el
labio; notas sueltas de una melodia lejana, que suenan a intervalos,
traidas en las rafagas del viento, rumor de hojas que se besan en los
arboles con un murmullo semejante al de la lluvia, trinos de alondras
que se levantan gorjeando de entre las flores como una saeta despedida
a las nubes; estruendo sin nombre, imponente como los rugidos de una
tempestad; coro de serafines sin ritmos ni cadencia, ignota musica del
cielo que solo la imaginacion comprende; himnos alados, que parecian
remontarse al trono del Senor como una tromba de luz y de sonidos...
todo lo expresaban las cien voces del organo, con mas pujanza, con mas
misteriosa poesia, con mas fantastico color que los habian expresado
nunca .....

Cuando el organista bajo de la tribuna, la muchedumbre que se agolpo a
la escalera fue tanta, y tanto su afan por verle y admirarle, que el
asistente temiendo, no sin razon, que le ahogaran entre todos, mando a
algunos de sus ministriles para que, vara en mano, le fueran abriendo
camino hasta llegar al altar mayor, donde el prelado le esperaba.

--Ya veis, le dijo este ultimo cuando le trajeron a su presencia;
vengo desde mi palacio aqui solo por escucharos. ?Sereis tan cruel
como maese Perez, que nunca quiso excusarme el viaje, tocando la
Noche-Buena en la Misa de la catedral?

--El ano que viene, respondio el organista, prometo daros gusto, pues
por todo el oro de la tierra no volveria a tocar este organo.

--?Y por que? interrumpio el prelado.

--Porque... anadio el organista, procurando dominar la emocion que se
revelaba en la palidez de su rostro; porque es viejo y malo, y no
puede expresar todo lo que se quiere. El arzobispo se retiro, seguido
de sus familiares. Unas tras otras, las literas de los senores fueron
desfilando y perdiendose en las revueltas[1] de las calles vecinas;
los grupos del atrio se disolvieron, dispersandose los fieles en
distintas direcciones; y ya la demandadera se disponia a cerrar las
puertas de la entrada del atrio, cuando se divisaban aun dos mujeres
que, despues de persignarse y murmurar una oracion ante el retablo del
arco de San Felipe,[2] prosiguieron su camino, internandose en el
callejon de las Duenas.[3]

  [Footnote 1: revueltas= 'turns.' The streets of Seville are many of
  them crooked like those of Toledo and other Moorish cities in
  Spain.]

  [Footnote 2: San Felipe. See p.95, note 4.]

  [Footnote 3: el callejon de las Duenas. See p.98, note 1.]

--?Que quiere usarced? mi senora dona Baltasara, decia la una, yo soy
de este genial. Cada loco con su tema.... Me lo habian de asegurar
capuchinos[1] descalzos y no lo creeria del todo.... Ese hombre no
puede haber tocado lo que acabamos de escuchar.... Si yo lo he oido
mil veces en San Bartolome,[2] que era su parroquia, y de donde tuvo
que echarle el senor cura por malo, y era cosa de taparse los oidos
con algodones.... Y luego, si no hay mas que mirarle al rostro, que
segun dicen, es el espejo del alma.... Yo me acuerdo, pobrecito, como
si lo estuviera viendo, me acuerdo de la cara de maese Perez, cuando
en semejante noche como esta bajaba de la tribuna, despues de haber
suspendido al auditorio con sus primores.... iQue sonrisa tan
bondadosa, que color tan animado!... Era viejo y parecia un angel...
no que este ha bajado las escaleras a trompicones, como si le ladrase
un perro en la meseta, y con un color de difunto y unas... Vamos, mi
senora dona Baltasara, creame usarced, y creame con todas veras... yo
sospecho que aqui hay busilis....

  [Footnote 1: capuchinos= 'Capuchins.' An order of mendicant friars
  founded in 1528 by Matteo di Bassi, and named from the pointed
  capouch or cowl that distinguishes their dress. Honesty, as well as
  poverty and humility, is supposed to be one of their crowning
  virtues.]

  [Footnote 2: San Bartolome. The church of St. Bartholomew is
  situated on the Plaza de San Bartolome in the northeastern part of
  the city. It was built on the site of a Jewish synagogue, after the
  expulsion of the Jews by the Christian kings of Spain. Its present
  architecture is Doric and dates only from the eighteenth century.]

Comentando las ultimas palabras, las dos mujeres doblaban la esquina
del callejon y desaparecian.

Creemos inutil decir a nuestros lectores quien era una de ellas.




IV


Habia transcurrido un ano mas. La abadesa del convento de Santa Ines y
la hija de maese Perez hablaban en voz baja, medio ocultas entre las
sombras del coro de la iglesia. El esquilon llamaba a voz herida a los
fieles desde la torre, y alguna que otra rara persona atravesaba el
atrio silencioso y desierto esta vez, y despues de tomar el agua
bendita en la puerta, escogia un puesto en un rincon de las naves,
donde unos cuantos vecinos del barrio esperaban tranquilamente que
comenzara la Misa del Gallo.

--Ya lo veis, decia la superiora, vuestro temor es sobremanera pueril;
nadie hay en el templo; toda Sevilla acude en tropel a la catedral
esta noche, Tocad vos el organo y tocadle sin desconfianza de ninguna
clase; estaremos en comunidad... pero... proseguis callando sin que
cesen vuestros suspiros. ?Que os pasa? ?Que teneis?

--Tengo... miedo, exclamo la joven con un acento profundamente
conmovido.

--iMiedo! ?de que?

--No se... de una cosa sobrenatural.... Anoche, mirad, yo os habia
oido decir que teniais empeno en que tocase el organo en la Misa, y
ufana con esta distincion pense arreglar sus registros y templarle,[1]
a fin de que hoy os sorprendiese... Vine al coro... sola... abri la
puerta que conduce a la tribuna.... En el reloj de la catedral sonaba
en aquel momento una hora... no se cual.... Pero las campanadas eran
tristisimas y muchas... muchas... estuvieron sonando todo el tiempo
que yo permaneci como clavada en el dintel y aquel tiempo me parecio
un siglo.

  [Footnote 1: templarle. See p. 66, note 1.]

La iglesia estaba desierta y obscura.... Alla lejos, en el fondo,
brillaba como una estrella perdida en el cielo de la noche, una luz
moribunda, la luz de la lampara que arde en el altar mayor.... A sus
reflejos debilisimos, que solo contribuian a hacer mas visible todo el
profundo horror de las sombras, vi... le vi, madre, no lo dudeis, vi
un hombre que en silencio y vuelto de espaldas hacia el sitio en que
yo estaba, recorria con una mano las teclas del organo, mientras
tocaba con la otra a sus registros... y el organo sonaba; pero sonaba
de una manera indescriptible. Cada una de sus notas parecia un sollozo
ahogado dentro del tubo de metal, que vibraba con el aire comprimido
en su hueco, y reproducia el tono sordo, casi imperceptible, pero
justo.

Y el reloj, de la catedral continuaba dando la hora, y el hombre aquel
proseguia recorriendo las teclas. Yo oia hasta su respiracion.

El horror habia helado la sangre de mis venas; sentia en mi cuerpo
como un frio glacial, y en mis sienes fuego.... Entonces quise gritar,
pero no pude. El hombre aquel habia vuelto la cara y me habia
mirado... digo mal, no me habia mirado, porque era ciego.... iEra mi
padre!

--iBah! hermana, desechad esas fantasias con que el enemigo malo[1]
procura turbar las imaginaciones debiles.... Rezad un _Pater
Noster_[2] y un _Ave Maria_[3] al arcangel San Miguel,[4] jefe de las
milicias celestiales, para que os asista contra los malos espiritus.
Llevad al cuello un escapulario tocado en la reliquia de San
Pacomio,[5] abogado contra las tentaciones, y marchad, marchad a
ocupar la tribuna del organo; la Misa va a comenzar y ya esperan con
impaciencia los fieles.... Vuestro padre esta en el cielo, y desde
alli, antes que a daros sustos, bajara a inspirar a su hija en esta
ceremonia solemne para el objeto de tan especial devocion.

  [Footnote 1: el enemigo malo. That is to say, the devil.]

  [Footnote 2: Pater Noster. See p. 33, note 1.]

  [Footnote 3: Ave Maria. "A form of devotion used in the Church of
  Rome, comprising the salutation addressed by the angel Gabriel to
  the Blessed Virgin Mary. (Luke i. 28.) The words Ave Maria are the
  first two, in Latin, of the form as it appears in the manuals of the
  Roman Church, thus: ' Hail Mary (Ave Maria), full of grace, the Lord
  is with thee, etc.' To which is appended the following petition:
  'Holy Mary, mother of God, pray for us sinners now, and in the hour
  of our death. Amen.'... It was not used before the Hours, until the
  sixteenth century, in Romish offices." Hook's _Church Dict._,
  London, 1887, p. 72. Some say earlier.]

  [Footnote 4: San Miguel = 'St. Michael.' "An archangel mentioned in
  the Bible. He is regarded as the leader of the whole host of
  angels... He is spoken of five times in the Bible, always [or to be
  more exact _usually_ as fighting] John mentions him as fighting at
  the head of the angels against the dragon and his host." _Century
  Dict._]

  [Footnote 5: San Pacomio = 'St. Pachomius.' "Born probably in Lower
  Egypt, about 292: died about 349. One of the founders of
  monasticism. He established a monastery on the island of Tabenna in
  the Nile, and was the first thus to collect the monks under one roof
  and establish strict rules of government for the community."
  _Century Diet_.]

La priora fue a ocupar su sillon en el coro en medio de la comunidad.
La hija de maese Perez abrio con mano temblorosa la puerta de la
tribuna para sentarse en el banquillo del organo, y comenzo la Misa.

Comenzo la Misa, y prosiguio sin que ocurriese nada de notable hasta
que llego la consagracion.[1] En aquel momento sono el organo, y al
mismo tiempo que el organo un grito de la hija de maese Perez....

  [Footnote 1: consagracion = 'consecration.' "The form of words by
  which the bread and wine in the Mass are changed into Christ's body
  and blood." Addis and Arnold, _Catholic Diet_, London, 1884, p. 216.
  See also p. 101, note 2.]

La superiora, las monjas y algunos de los fieles corrieron a la
tribuna.

--iMiradle, miradle! decia la joven fijando sus desencajados ojos en
el banquillo, de donde se habia levantado asombrada para agarrarse con
sus manos convulsas al barandal de la tribuna.

Todo el mundo fijo sus miradas en aquel punto. El organo estaba solo,
y no obstante, el organo seguia sonando ... sonando como solo los
arcangeles podrian imitarlo en sus raptos de mistico
alborozo...............

--iNo os lo dije yo una y mil veces, mi senora dona Baltasara, no os
lo dije yo!... iAqui hay busilis!... Oidlo; que, ?no estuvisteis
anoche en la Misa del Gallo? Pero, en fin ya sabreis lo que paso. En
toda Sevilla no se habla de otra cosa.... El senor arzobispo esta
hecho, y con razon, una furia.... Haber dejado de asistir a Santa
Ines; no haber podido presenciar el portento... ?y para que? para oir
una cencerrada; porque personas que lo oyeron dicen que lo que hizo el
dichoso organista de San Bartolome en la catedral no fue otra cosa....
Si lo decia yo. Eso no puede haberlo tocado el bisojo, mentira ...
aqui hay busilis, y el busilis era, en efecto, el alma de maese Perez.




LA CRUZ DEL DIABLO


Que lo creas o no, me importa bien poco. Mi abuelo se lo narro a mi
padre; mi padre me lo ha referido a mi, y yo te lo cuento ahora,
siquiera no sea mas que por pasar el rato.[1]
***

  [Footnote 1: por pasar el rato = 'to while away the time.']


I


El crepusculo comenzaba a extender sus ligeras alas de vapor sobre las
pintorescas orillas del Segre,[1] cuando despues de una fatigosa
jornada llegamos a Bellver,[2] termino de nuestro viaje.

  [Footnote 1: Segre. A river of the province of Lerida in northern
  Spain. It rises in the Pyrenees, and joins the Ebro twenty-two miles
  southwest of Lerida. Its chief tributary is the Cinca. Length about
  250 miles. See _Century Diet_.]

  [Footnote 2: Bellver. A little town of some 650 inhabitants,
  situated in the valley of the Segre, in the diocese of Urgel,
  province of Lerida, Spain. Its situation is very picturesque. It
  contains an ancient castle.]

Bellver es una pequena poblacion situada a la falda de una colina, por
detras de la cual se ven elevarse, como las gradas de un colosal
anfiteatro de granito, las empinadas y nebulosas crestas de los
Pirineos.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Pirineos = 'Pyrenees.' A mountain range which separates
  France from Spain, and extends from the Bay of Biscay to the
  Mediterranean. The highest points are about 11,000 feet. A visit to
  the Eastern Pyrenees from the Spanish side is much more difficult
  than from France, as both traveling and hotel accommodations are
  sadly lacking.]

Los blancos caserios que la rodean, salpicados aqui y alla sobre una
ondulante sabana de verdura, parecen a lo lejos un bando de palomas
que han abatido su vuelo para apagar su sed en las aguas de la ribera.

Una pelada roca, a cuyos pies tuercen estas su curso, y sobre cuya
cima se notan aun remotos vestigios de construccion, senala la antigua
linea divisoria entre el condado de Urgel[1] y el mas importante de
sus feudos.

  [Footnote 1: el condado de Urgel = 'the earldom (_or_ county) of
  Urgel.' The town of this name (2800 inhabitants) is situated on the
  Segre, seventy-four miles northwest of Barcelona, in the province of
  Lerida, Spain. It has been the see of a bishop since 840, and
  possesses a Gothic cathedral. The earldom was of considerable
  importance in the fourteenth century, Count Jaime (James) de Urgel
  (d. 1433) being a most dangerous claimant of the crown of Aragon.]

A la derecha del tortuoso sendero que conduce a este punto, remontando
la corriente del rio, y siguiendo sus curvas y frondosas margenes, se
encuentra una cruz.

El asta y los brazos son de hierro; la redonda base en que se apoya,
de marmol, y la escalinata que a ella conduce, de obscuros y mal
unidos fragmentos de silleria.

La destructora accion de los anos, que ha cubierto de orin el metal,
ha roto y carcomido la piedra de este monumento, entre cuyas
hendiduras crecen algunas plantas trepadoras que suben enredandose
hasta coronarlo, mientras una vieja y corpulenta encina le sirve de
dosel.

Yo habia adelantado algunos minutos a mis companeros de viaje, y
deteniendo mi escualida cabalgadura, contemplaba en silencio aquella
cruz, muda y sencilla expresion de las creencias y la piedad de otros
siglos.

Un mundo de ideas se agolpo a mi imaginacion en aquel instante. Ideas
ligerisimas, sin forma determinada, que unian entre si, como un
invisible hilo de luz, la profunda soledad de aquellos lugares, el
alto silencio de la naciente noche y la vaga melancolia de mi
espiritu.

Impulsado de un pensamiento religioso, espontaneo e indefinible, eche
maquinalmente pie a tierra, me descubri, y comence a buscar en el
fondo de mi memoria una de aquellas oraciones que me ensenaron cuando
nino; una de aquellas oraciones que, cuando mas tarde se escapan
involuntarias de nuestros labios, parece que aligeran el pecho
oprimido, y semejantes a las lagrimas, alivian el dolor, que tambien
toma estas formas para evaporarse.

Ya habia comenzado a murmurarla, cuando de improviso senti que me
sacudian con violencia por los hombros.

Volvi la cara: un hombre estaba al lado mio.

Era uno de nuestros guias, natural del pais, el cual, con una
indescriptible expresion de terror pintada en el rostro, pugnaba por
arrastrarme consigo y cubrir mi cabeza con el fieltro que aun tenia en
mis manos.

Mi primera mirada, mitad de asombro, mitad de colera, equivalia a una
interrogacion energica, aunque muda.

El pobre hombre, sin cejar en su empeno de alejarme de aquel sitio,
contesto a ella con estas palabras, que entonces no pude comprender,
pero en las que habia un acento de verdad que me sobrecogio:--iPor la
memoria de su madre! iPor lo mas sagrado que tenga en el mundo,
senorito, cubrase usted la cabeza, y alejese mas que de prisa de esta
cruz! iTan desesperado esta usted, que no bastandole la ayuda de Dios,
recurre a la del demonio!

Yo permaneci un rato mirandole en silencio. Francamente, crei que
estaba loco, pero el prosiguio con igual vehemencia:

--Usted busca la frontera; pues bien, si delante de esa cruz le pide
usted al cielo que le preste ayuda, las cumbres de los monies vecinos
se levantaran en una sola noche hasta las estrellas invisibles, solo
porque no encontremos la raya en toda nuestra vida.

Yo no pude menos de sonreir.

--?Se burla usted?... ?cree acaso que esa es una cruz santa como la
del porche de nuestra iglesia?...

--?Quien lo duda?

--Pues se engana usted de medio a medio, porque esa cruz, salvo lo que
tiene de Dios, esta maldita... esa cruz pertenece a un espiritu
maligno, y por eso la llaman _La cruz del diablo_.

--iLa cruz del diablo! repeti cediendo a sus instancias, sin darme
cuenta a mi mismo del involuntario temor que comenzo a apoderarse de
mi espiritu, y que me rechazaba como una fuerza desconocida de aquel
lugar; ila cruz del diablo! iNunca ha herido mi imaginacion una
amalgama mas disparatada de dos ideas tan absolutamente enemigas!...
iUna cruz... y del diablo!!! iVaya, vaya! Fuerza sera que en llegando
a la poblacion me expliques este monstruoso absurdo.

Durante este corto dialogo, nuestros camaradas, que habian picado sus
cabalgaduras, se nos reunieron al pie de la cruz; yo les explique en
breves palabras lo que acababa de suceder; monte nuevamente en mi
rocin, y las campanas de la parroquia llamaban lentamente a la
oracion, cuando nos apeamos en lo mas escondido y lobrego de los
paradores de Bellver.



II


Las llamas rojas y azules se enroscaban chisporroteando a lo largo del
grueso tronco de encina que ardia en el ancho hogar; nuestras sombras,
que se proyectaban temblando sobre los ennegrecidos muros, se
empequenecian o tomaban formas gigantescas, segun la hoguera despedia
resplandores mas o menos brillantes; el vaso de sauco, ora vacio, ora
lleno y no de agua, como cangilon de noria, habia dado tres veces la
vuelta en derredor del circulo que formabamos junto al fuego, y todos
esperaban con impaciencia la historia de _La cruz del diablo_, que a
guisa de postres de la frugal cena que acababamos de consumir, se nos
habia prometido, cuando nuestro guia tosio por dos veces, se echo al
coleto un ultimo trago de vino, limpiose con el reves de la mano la
boca, y comenzo de este modo:

--Hace mucho tiempo, mucho tiempo, yo no se cuanto, pero los moros
ocupaban aun la mayor parte de Espana, se llamaban condes[1] nuestros
reyes, y las villas y aldeas pertenecian en feudo a ciertos senores,
que a su vez prestaban homenaje a otros mas poderosos, cuando acaecio
lo que voy a referir a ustedes.[2]

  [Footnote 1: condes = 'counts,' 'earls.' The word conde comes from
  the Latin _comes, comitem_, 'companion,' and during the Roman empire
  in Spain was a title of honor granted to certain officers who had
  jurisdiction over war and peace. During the reign of the Goths it
  was likewise an official and not a nobiliary title. Later, with the
  growth of the feudal system, the counts became not merely royal
  officers, but hereditary rulers, with coronets and arms and an
  assumption of absolute authority in their counties. In some of these
  counties the title developed later into that of king.]

  [Footnote 2: The epoch referred to is doubtless in the eleventh
  century before the first crusade. See p. 122, note 1.]

Concluida esta breve introduccion historica, el heroe de la fiesta
guardo silencio durante algunos segundos como para coordinar sus
recuerdos, y prosiguio asi:

--Pues es el caso, que en aquel tiempo remote, esta villa y algunas
otras formaban parte del patrimonio de un noble baron, cuyo castillo
senorial se levanto por muchos siglos sobre la cresta de un penasco
que bana el Segre, del cual toma su nombre.

Aun testifican la verdad de mi relacion algunas informes ruinas que,
cubiertas de jaramago y musgo, se alcanzan a ver sobre su cumbre desde
el camino que conduce a este pueblo.

No se si por ventura o desgracia quiso la suerte que este senor, a
quien por crueldad detestaban sus vasallos, y por sus malas cualidades
ni el rey admitia en la corte, ni sus vecinos en el hogar, se
aburriese de vivir solo con su mal humor y sus ballesteros en lo alto
de la roca en que sus antepasados colgaron su nido de piedra.

Devanabase noche y dia los sesos en busca de alguna distraccion propia
de su caracter, lo cual era bastante dificil, despues de haberse
cansado como ya lo estaba, de mover guerra a sus vecinos, apalear a
sus servidores y ahorcar a sus subditos.

En esta ocasion cuentan las cronicas que se le ocurrio, aunque sin
ejemplar, una idea feliz.

Sabiendo que los cristianos de otras poderosas naciones, se aprestaban
a partir juntos en una formidable armada[1] a un pais maravilloso para
conquistar el sepulcro de Nuestro Senor Jesucristo, que los moros
tenian en su poder,[2] se determino a marchar en su seguimiento.

  [Footnote 1: armada = 'fleet.' The reference is probably to the
  first crusade under Godfrey of Bouillon (1096-1099), which resulted
  in the capture of Jerusalem and the temporary establishment of a
  Christian kingdom in Palestine.]

  [Footnote 2: que los moros tenian en su poder. See p. 35, note 4.]

Si realizo esta idea con objeto de purgar sus culpas, que no eran
pocas, derramando su sangre en tan justa empresa, o con el de
transplantarse a un punto donde sus malas manas no se conociesen, se
ignora; pero la verdad del caso es que, con gran contentamiento de
grandes y chicos, de vasallos y de iguales, allego cuanto dinero pudo,
redimio a sus pueblos del senorio, mediante una gruesa cantidad, y no
conservando de propiedad suya mas que el penon del Segre y las cuatro
torres del castillo, herencia de sus padres, desaparecio de la noche a
la manana.

La comarca entera respiro en libertad durante algun tiempo, como si
despertara de una pesadilla.

Ya no colgaban de los arboles de sus sotos, en vez de frutas, racimos
de hombres: las muchachas del pueblo no temian al salir con su cantaro
en la cabeza a tomar agua de la fuente del camino, ni los pastores
llevaban sus rebanos al Segre por sendas impracticables y ocultas,
temblando encontrar a cada revuelta de la trocha a los ballesteros de
su muy amado senor.

Asi transcurrio el espacio de tres anos; la historia del _mal
caballero_, que solo por este nombre se le conocia, comenzaba a
pertenecer al exclusivo dominio de las viejas, que en las eternas
veladas del invierno las[1] relataban con voz hueca y temerosa a los
asombrados chicos; las madres asustaban a los pequenuelos
incorregibles o llorones diciendoles: _ique viene el senor del
Segre!_[2] cuando he aqui que no se si un dia o una noche, si caido
del cielo o abortado de los profundos, el temido senor aparecio
efectivamente, y como suele decirse, en carne y hueso, en mitad de sus
antiguos vasallos.

  [Footnote 1: las. See vocabulary.]

  [Footnote 2: ique viene el senor del Segre! Compare the familiar
  English expression used to frighten children: "The boogy-man is
  coming."]

Renuncio a describir el efecto de esta agradable sorpresa. Ustedes se
lo podran figurar mejor que yo pintarlo, solo con decirles que tornaba
reclamando sus vendidos derechos, que si malo se fue, peor volvio, y
si pobre y sin credito se encontraba antes de partir a la guerra, ya
no podia contar con mas recursos que su despreocupacion, su lanza y
una media docena de aventureros tan desalmados y perdidos como su
jefe.

Como era natural, los pueblos se resistieron a pagar tributes, que a
tanta costa habian redimido; pero el senor puso fuego a sus heredades,
a sus alquerias y a sus mieses.

Entonces apelaron a la justicia del rey; pero el senor se burlo de las
cartas-leyes de los Condes soberanos;[1] las clavo en el postigo de
sus torres, y colgo a los farsantes de una encina.

  [Footnote 1: Condes soberanos. See p. 121, Note 1.]

Exasperados, y no encontrando otra via de salvacion, por ultimo, se
pusieron de acuerdo entre si, se encomendaron a la Divina Providencia
y tomaron las armas; pero el senor reunio a sus secuaces, llamo en su
ayuda al diablo, se encaramo a su roca y se preparo a la lucha. Esta
comenzo terrible y sangrienta. Se peleaba con todas armas, en todos
sitios y a todas horas, con la espada y el fuego, en la montana y en
la llanura, en el dia y durante la noche.

Aquello no era pelear para vivir; era vivir para pelear.

Al cabo triunfo la causa de la justicia. Oigan ustedes como.

Una noche obscura, muy obscura, en que no se oia ni un rumor en la
tierra ni brillaba un solo astro en el cielo, los senores de la
fortaleza, engreidos por una reciente victoria, se repartian el botin,
y ebrios con el vapor de los licores en mitad de la loca y estruendosa
orgia, entonaban sacrilegos cantares en loor de su infernal patrono.

Como dejo dicho, nada se oia en derredor del castillo, excepto el eco
de las blasfemias, que palpitaban, perdidas en el sombrio seno de la
noche, como palpitan las almas de los condenados envueltas en los
pliegues del huracan de los infiernos.[1]

  [Footnote 1: huracan de los infiernos. The idea is taken from
  Dante's _Inferno,_ v.

    I came into a place mute of all light,
      Which bellows as the sea does in a tempest,
      If by opposing winds 't is combated.

    The infernal hurricane that never rests
      Hurtles the spirits onward in its rapine;
      Whirling them round; and smiting, it molests them.

                    _Longfellow's translation_

  It is to this realm, where the carnal sinners are punished, that
  Dante relegates the lovers Paolo and Francesca da Rimini.]

Ya los descuidados centinelas habian fijado algunas veces sus ojos en
la villa que reposaba silenciosa, y se habian dormido sin temor a una
sorpresa, apoyados en el grueso tronco de sus lanzas, cuando he aqui
que algunos aldeanos, resueltos a morir y protegidos por la sombra,
comenzaron a escalar el cubierto penon del Segre, a cuya cima tocaron
a punto de la media noche.

Una vez en la cima, lo que faltaba por hacer fue obra de poco tiempo:
los centinelas salvaron de un solo salto el valladar que separa al
sueno de la muerte;[1] el fuego aplicado con teas de resina al puente
y al rastrillo, se comunico con la rapidez del relampago a los muros;
y los escaladores, favorecidos por la confusion y abriendose paso
entre las llamas, dieron fin con los habitantes de aquella guarida en
un abrir y cerrar de ojos.

  [Footnote 1: That is to say, they passed suddenly from sleep to
  death. Tasso uses much the same figure, when he says, in his
  _Gerusalemme Liberata_, ix. 18:

    _Dal sonno a la marts e un picciol varco._
    Small is the gulf that lies 'twixt sleep and death.]

Todos perecieron.

Cuando el cercano dia comenzo a blanquear las altas copas de los
enebros, humeaban aun los calcinados escombros de las desplomadas
torres, y a traves de sus anchas brechas, chispeando al herirla la luz
y colgada de uno de los negros pilares de la sala del festin, era
facil divisar la armadura del temido jefe, cuyo cadaver, cubierto de
sangre y polvo, yacia entre los desgarrados tapices y las calientes
cenizas, confundido con los de sus obscuros companeros.

El tiempo paso; comenzaron los zarzales a rastrear por los desiertos
patios, la hiedra a enredarse en los obscuros machones, y las
campanillas azules a mecerse colgadas de las mismas almenas. Los
desiguales soplos de la brisa, el graznido de las aves nocturnas y el
rumor de los reptiles, que se deslizaban entre las altas hierbas,
turbaban solo de vez en cuando el silencio de muerte de aquel lugar
maldecido; los insepultos huesos de sus antiguos moradores blanqueaban
al rayo de la luna, y aun podia verse el haz de armas del senor del
Segre, colgado del negro pilar de la sala del festin.

Nadie osaba tocarle; pero corrian mil fabulas acerca de aquel objeto,
causa incesante de hablillas y terrores para los que le miraban
llamear durante el dia, herido por la luz del sol, o creian percibir
en las altas horas de la noche el metalico son de sus piezas, que
chocaban entre si cuando las movia el viento, con un gemido prolongado
y triste.

A pesar de todos los cuentos que aproposito de la armadura se
fraguaron, y que en voz baja se repetian unos a otros los habitantes
de los alrededores, no pasaban de cuentos, y el unico mas positivo que
de ellos resulto, se redujo entonces a una dosis de miedo mas que
regular, que cada uno de por si se esforzaba en disimular lo posible,
haciendo, como decirse suele, de tripas corazon.

Si de aqui no hubiera pasado la cosa, nada se habria perdido. Pero el
diablo, que a lo que parece no se encontraba satisfecho de su obra,
sin duda. Con el permiso de Dios y a fin de hacer purgar a la comarca
algunas culpas, volvio a tomar cartas en el asunto.

Desde este momento las fabulas, que hasta aquella epoca no pasaron de
un rumor vago y sin viso alguno de verosimilitud, comenzaron a tomar
consistencia y a hacerse de dia en dia mas probables.

En efecto, hacia algunas noches que todo el pueblo habia podido
observar un extrano fenomeno.

Entre las sombras, a lo lejos, ya subiendo las retorcidas cuestas del
penon del Segre, ya vagando entre las ruinas del castillo, ya
cerniendose al parecer en los aires, se veian correr, cruzarse,
esconderse y tornar a aparecer para alejarse en distintas direcciones
unas luces misteriosas y fantasticas cuya procedencia nadie sabia
explicar.

Esto se repitio por tres o cuatro noches durante el intervalo de un
mes; y los confusos aldeanos esperaban inquietos el resultado de
aquellos conciliabulos, que ciertamente no se hizo aguardar mucho,
cuando tres o cuatro alquerias incendiadas, varias reses desaparecidas
y los cadaveres de algunos caminantes despenados en los precipicios,
pusieron en alarma todo el territorio en diez leguas a la redonda.

Ya no quedo duda alguna. Una banda de malhechores se albergaba en los
subterraneos del castillo.

Estos, que solo se presentaban al principio muy de tarde en tarde y en
determinados puntos del bosque que, aun en el dia, se dilata a lo
largo de la ribera, concluyeron por ocupar casi todos los desfiladeros
de las montanas, emboscarse en los caminos, saquear los valles y
descender como un torrente a la llanura, donde a este quiero a este no
quiero, no dejaban titere con cabeza.

Los asesinatos se multiplicaban; las muchachas desaparecian, y los
ninos eran arrancados de las cunas a pesar de los lamentos de sus
madres, para servirlos[1] en diabolicos festines, en que, segun la
creencia general, los vasos sagrados[2] sustraidos de las profanadas
iglesias servian de copas.

  [Footnote 1: servirlos. The sacrifice of children has always been
  considered by popular superstition as an essential part in practices
  of black magic or in compacts with the devil.]

  [Footnote 2: los vasos sagrados. The sacred vessels of the church
  are said to play an important part in demonolatry. The consecrated
  wafers too are believed to be put to improper uses.]

El terror llego a apoderarse de los animos en un grado tal, que al
toque de oraciones nadie se aventuraba a salir de su casa, en la que
no siempre se creian seguros de los bandidos del penon.

Mas ?quienes eran estos? ?De donde habian venido? ?Cual era el nombre
de su misterioso jefe? He aqui el enigma que todos querian explicar y
que nadie podia resolver hasta entonces, aunque se observase desde
luego que la armadura del senor feudal habia desaparecido del sitio
que antes ocupara,[1] y posteriormente varios labradores hubiesen
afirmado que el capitan de aquella desalmada gavilla marchaba a su
frente, cubierto con una, que de no ser la misma, se le asemejaba en
un todo.

  [Footnote 1: ocupara See p. 16, note 3.]

Cuanto queda repetido, si se le despoja de esa parte de fantasia con
que el miedo abulta y completa sus creaciones favoritas, nada tiene en
si de sobrenatural y extrano. ?Que cosa mas corriente en unos bandidos
que las ferocidades con que estos se distinguian, ni mas natural que
el apoderarse su jefe de las abandonadas armas del senor del Segre?

Sin embargo, algunas revelaciones hechas antes de morir por uno de sus
secuaces, prisionero en las ultimas refriegas, acabaron de colmar la
medida, preocupando el animo de los mas incredulos. Poco mas o menos,
el contenido de su confesion fue este:--Yo, dijo, pertenezco a una
noble familia. Los extravios de mi juventud, mis locas prodigalidades
y mis crimenes por ultimo atrajeron sobre mi cabeza la colera de mis
deudos y la maldicion de mi padre, que me desheredo al expirar.
Hallandome solo y sin recursos de ninguna especie, el diablo sin duda
debio sugerirme la idea de reunir algunos jovenes que se encontraban
en una situacion identica a la mia, los cuales, seducidos con las
promesas de un porvenir de disipacion, libertad, y abundancia, no
vacilaron un instante en suscribir a mis designios.

Estos se reducian a formar una banda de jovenes de buen humor,
despreocupados y poco temerosos del peligro, que desde alli en
adelante vivirian alegremente del producto de su valor y a costa del
pais, hasta tanto que Dios se sirviera disponer de cada uno de ellos
conforme a su voluntad, segun hoy a mi me sucede.

Con este objeto senalamos esta comarca para teatro de nuestras
expediciones futuras, y escogimos como punto el mas a proposito para
nuestras reuniones el abandonado castillo del Segre, lugar seguro, no
tanto por su posicion fuerte y ventajosa, como por hallarse defendido
contra el vulgo por las supersticiones y el miedo.

Congregados una noche bajo sus ruinosas arcadas, alrededor de una
hoguera que iluminaba con su rojizo resplandor las desiertas galerias,
trabose una acalorada disputa sobre cual de nosotros habia de ser
elegido jefe.

Cada uno alego sus meritos; yo expuse mis derechos: ya los unos
murmuraban entre si con ojeadas amenazadoras; ya los otros con voces
descompuestas por la embriaguez habian puesto la mano sobre el pomo de
sus punales para dirimir la cuestion, cuando de repente oimos un
extrano crujir de armas, acompanado de pisadas huecas y sonantes, que
de cada vez se hacian mas distintas. Todos arrojamos a nuestro
alrededor una inquieta mirada de desconfianza; nos pusimos de pie y
desnudamos nuestros aceros, determinados a vender caras las vidas;
pero no pudimos por menos de permanecer inmoviles al ver adelantarse
con paso firme e igual un hombre de elevada estatura, completamente
armado de la cabeza al pie y cubierto el rostro con la visera del
casco, el cual, desnudando su montante, que dos hombres podrian apenas
manejar, y poniendole[1] sobre uno de los carcomidos fragmentos de las
rotas arcadas, exclamo con una voz hueca y profunda, semejante al
rumor de una caida de aguas subterraneas:

  [Footnote 1: poniendole. See p. 66, note 1.]

--Si alguno de vosotros se atreve a ser el primero, mientras yo habite
en el castillo del Segre, que tome esa espada, signo del poder.

Todos guardamos silencio, hasta que, transcurrido el primer momento de
estupor, le proclamamos a grandes voces nuestro capitan, ofreciendole
una copa de nuestro vino, la cual rehuso por senas, acaso por no
descubrirse la faz, que en vano procuramos distinguir a traves de las
rejillas de hierro que la ocultaban a nuestros ojos.

No obstante, aquella noche pronunciamos el mas formidable de los
juramentos, y a la siguiente dieron principio nuestras nocturnas
correrias. En ellas nuestro misterioso jefe marchaba siempre delante
de todos. Ni el fuego le ataja, ni los peligros le intimidan, ni las
lagrimas le conmueven: Nunca despliega sus labios; pero cuando la
sangre humea en nuestras manos, como cuando los templos se derrumban
calcinados por las llamas: cuando las mujeres huyen espantadas entre
las ruinas, y los ninos arrojan gritos de dolor, y los ancianos
perecen a nuestros golpes, contesta con una carcajada de feroz alegria
a los gemidos, a las imprecaciones y a los lamentos.

Jamas se desnuda de sus armas ni abate la visera de su casco despues
de la victoria, ni participa del festin, ni se entrega al sueno. Las
espadas que le hieren se hunden entre las piezas de su armadura, y ni
le causan la muerte, ni se retiran tenidas en sangre; el fuego
enrojece su espaldar y su cota, y aun prosigue impavido entre las
llamas, buscando nuevas victimas; desprecia el oro, aborrece la
hermosura, y no le inquieta la ambicion.

Entre nosotros, unos le creen un extravagante; otros un noble
arruinado, que por un resto de pudor se tapa la cara; y no falta quien
se encuentra convencido de que es el mismo diablo en persona.

El autor de esas revelaciones murio con la sonrisa de la mofa en los
labios y sin arrepentirse de sus culpas; varios de sus iguales le
siguieron en diversas epocas al suplicio; pero el temible jefe, a
quien continuamente se unian nuevos proselitos, no cesaba en sus
desastrosas empresas.

Los infelices habitantes de la comarca, cada vez mas aburridos y
desesperados, no acertaban ya con la determinacion que deberia tomarse
para concluir de un todo con aquel orden de cosas, cada dia mas
insoportable y triste.

Inmediato a la villa, y oculto en el fondo de un espeso bosque, vivia
a esta sazon, en una pequena ermita dedicada a San Bartolome[1] un
santo hombre, de costumbres piadosas y ejemplares, a quien el pueblo
tuvo siempre en olor de santidad, merced a sus saludables consejos y
acertadas predicciones.

  [Footnote 1: San Bartolome. See p. 29, note 2.]

Este venerable ermitano, a cuya prudencia y proverbial sabiduria
encomendaron los vecinos de Bellver la resolucion de este dificil
problema, despues de implorar la misericordia divina por medio de su
santo Patrono, que, como ustedes no ignoran, conoce al diablo muy de
cerca, y en mas de una ocasion le ha atado bien corto,[1] les aconsejo
que se emboscasen durante la noche al pie del pedregoso camino que
sube serpenteando por la roca, en cuya cima se encontraba el castillo,
encargandoles al mismo tiempo que ya alli, no hiciesen uso de otras
armas para aprehenderlo que de una maravillosa oracion que les hizo
aprender de memoria, y con la cual aseguraban las cronicas que San
Bartolome habia hecho al diablo su prisionero.'

  [Footnote 1: le ha atado bien corto... su prisionero. See p. 29,
  note 2.]

Pusose en planta el proyecto, y su resultado excedio a cuantas
esperanzas se habian concebido; pues aun no iluminaba el sol del otro
dia la alta torre de Bellver, cuando sus habitantes, reunidos en
grupos en la plaza Mayor,[1] se contaban unos a otros con aire de
misterio, como aquella noche fuertemente atado de pies y manos y a
lomos de una poderosa mula, habia entrado en la poblacion el famoso
capitan de los bandidos del Segre.

  [Footnote 1: la plaza Mayor. The name of the principal square of the
  town.]

De que arte se valieron los acometedores de esta empresa para llevarla
a termino, ni nadie se lo acertaba a explicar, ni ellos mismos podian
decirlo; pero el hecho era que, gracias a la oracion del santo o al
valor de sus devotos, la cosa habia sucedido tal como se referia.

Apenas la novedad comenzo a extenderse de boca en boca y de casa en
casa, la multitud se lanzo a las calles con ruidosa algazara, y corrio
a reunirse a las puertas de la prision. La campana de la parroquia
llamo a concejo, y los vecinos mas respetables se juntaron en
capitulo, y todos aguardaban ansiosos la hora en que el reo habia de
comparecer ante sus improvisados jueces.

Estos, que se encontraban autorizados por los condes de Urgel[1] para
administrarse por si mismos pronta y severa justicia sobre aquellos
malhechores, deliberaron un momento, pasado el cual, mandaron
comparecer al delincuente a fin de notificarle su sentencia.

  [Footnote 1: condes de Urgel. See p. 118, note 1.]

Como dejo dicho, asi en la plaza Mayor, como en las calles por donde
el prisionero debia atravesar para dirigirse al punto en que sus
jueces se encontraban, la impaciente multitud hervia como un apinado
enjambre de abejas. Especialmente en la puerta de la carcel, la
conmocion popular tomaba cada vez mayores proporciones, y ya los
animados dialogos, los sordos murmullos y los amenazadores gritos
comenzaban a poner en cuidado a sus guardas, cuando afortunadamente
llego la orden de sacar al reo.

Al aparecer este bajo el macizo arco de la portada de su prision,
completamente vestido de todas armas y cubierto el rostro con la
visera, un sordo y prolongado murmullo de admiracion y de sorpresa se
elevo de entre las compactas masas del pueblo, que se abrian con
dificultad para dejarle paso.

Todos habian reconocido en aquella armadura la del senor del Segre;
aquella armadura, objeto de las mas sombrias tradiciones mientras se
la via suspendida de los arruinados muros de la fortaleza maldita.

Las armas eran aquellas, no cabia duda alguna; todos habian visto
flotar el negro penacho de su cimera en los combates, que en un
tiempo[1] trabaran[2] contra su senor; todos le habian visto agitarse
al soplo de la brisa del crepusculo, a par de la hiedra del calcinado
pilar en que quedaron colgadas a la muerte de su dueno. Mas ?quien
podria ser el desconocido personaje que entonces las llevaba? Pronto
iba a saberse: al menos asi se creia. Los sucesos diran como esta
esperanza quede frustrada, a la manera de otras muchas, y porque de
este solemne acto de justicia, del que debia aguardarse el completo
esclarecimiento de la verdad, resultaran nuevas y mas inexplicables
confusiones.

  [Footnote 1: en un tiempo = 'once upon a time.']

  [Footnote 2: See p. 16, note 3.]

El misterioso bandido penetro al fin en la sala del concejo, y un
silencio profundo sucedio a los rumores que se elevaran[1] de entre
los circunstantes, al oir resonar bajo las altas bovedas de aquel
recinto el metalico son de sus acicates de oro. Uno de los que
componian el tribunal con voz lenta e insegura, le pregunto su nombre,
y todos prestaron el oido con ansiedad para no perder una sola palabra
de su respuesta; pero el guerrero se limito a encoger sus hombros
ligeramente con un aire de desprecio e insulto, que no pudo menos de
irritar a sus jueces, los que se miraron entre si sorprendidos.

  [Footnote 1: elevaran, dirigiera. See p. 16, note 3.]

Tres veces volvio a repetirle la pregunta, y otras tantas obtuvo
semejante o parecida contestacion.

--iQue se levante la visera! iQue se descubra! iQue se descubra!
comenzaron a gritar los vecinos de la villa presentes al acto. iQue se
descubra! iVeremos si se atreve entonces a insultarnos con su desden,
como ahora lo hace protegido por el incognito!

--Descubrios, repitio el mismo que anteriormente le dirigiera[1] la
palabra.

  [Footnote 1: elevaran, dirigiera. See p. 16, note 3.]

El guerrero permanecio impasible.

--Os lo mando en el nombre de nuestra autoridad.

La misma contestacion.

--En el de los condes soberanos.'[1]

  [Footnote 1: condes soberanos. See p. 121, note i, and p. 123,
  1.22.]

Ni por esas.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Ni por esas = 'Nor did these (threats) avail.']

La indignacion llego a su colmo, hasta el punto que uno de sus
guardas, lanzandose sobre el reo, cuya pertinacia en callar bastaria
para apurar la paciencia a un santo, le abrio violentamente la visera.
Un grito general de sorpresa se escapo del auditorio, que permanecio
por un instante herido de un inconcebible estupor.

La cosa no era para menos.

El casco, cuya ferrea visera se veia en parte levantada hasta la
frente, en parte caida sobre la brillante gola de acero, estaba
vacio...completamente vacio.

Cuando pasado ya el primer momento de terror quisieron tocarle, la
armadura se estremecio ligeramente, y descomponiendose en piezas, cayo
al suelo con un ruido sordo y extrano.

La mayor parte de los espectadores, a la vista del nuevo prodigio,
abandonaron tumultuosamente Ia habitacion y salieron despavoridos a la
plaza.

La nueva se divulgo con la rapidez del pensamiento entre la multitud,
que aguardaba impaciente el resultado-del juicio; y fue tal la alarma,
la revuelta y la voceria, que ya a nadie cupo duda sobre lo que de
publica voz se aseguraba, esto es, que el diablo, a la muerte del
senor del Segre, habia heredado los feudos de Bellver.

Al fin se apaciguo el tumulto, y decidiose volver a un calabozo la
maravillosa armadura.

Ya en el[1] despacharonse cuatro emisarios, que en representacion de
la atribulada villa hiciesen presente el caso al conde de Urgel y al
arzobispo, los que no tardaron muchos dias en tornar con la resolucion
de estos personajes, resolucion que, como suele decirse, era breve y
compendiosa.

  [Footnote 1: Ya en el. A bold ellipsis which would be inconsistent
  with common usage in English.]

--Cuelguese, les dijeron, la armadura en la plaza Mayor de la villa;
que si el diablo la ocupa, fuerza le sera el abandonarla o ahorcarse
con ella.

Encantados los habitantes de Bellver con tan ingeniosa solucion,
volvieron a reunirse en concejo, mandaron levantar una altisima horca
en la plaza, y cuando ya la multitud ocupaba sus avenidas, se
dirigieron a la carcel por la armadura, en corporacion y con toda la
solemnidad que la importancia del caso requeria.

Cuando la respetable comitiva llego al macizo arco que daba entrada al
edificio, un hombre palido y descompuesto se arrojo al suelo en
presencia de los aturdidos circunstantes, exclamando con las lagrimas
en los ojos:

--Perdon, senores, perdon!

--Perdon!; ?Para quien? dijeron algunos; ?para, el diablo, que habita
dentro de la armadura del senor del Segre?

--Para mi, prosiguio con voz tremula el infeliz, en quien todos
reconocieron al alcaide de las prisiones; para mi... porque las
armas... han desaparecido.

Al oir estas palabras, el asombro se pinto en el rostro de cuantos se
encontraban en el portico, que, mudos e inmoviles, hubieran
permanecido en la posicion en que se encontraban, Dios sabe hasta
cuando, si la siguiente relacion del aterrado guardian no les hubiera
hecho agruparse en su alrededor para escuchar con avidez:

Perdonadme, senores, decia el pobre alcaide; y yo no os ocultare nada,
siquiera sea en contra mia.

Todos guardaron silencio, y el prosiguio asi:

--Yo no acertare nunca a dar la razon; pero es el caso que la historia
de las armas vacias me parecio siempre una fabula tejida en favor de
algun noble personaje, a quien tal vez altas razones de conveniencia
publica no permitian ni descubrir ni castigar.

En esta creencia estuve siempre, creencia en que no podia menos de
confirmarme la inmovilidad en que se encontraban desde que por segunda
vez tornaron a la carcel traidas del concejo. En vano una noche y
otra, deseando sorprender su misterio, si misterio en ellas habia, me
levantaba poco a poco y aplicaba el oido a los intersticios de la
ferrada puerta de su calabozo; ni un rumor se percibia.

En vano procure observarlas a traves de un pequenio agujero producido
en el muro; arrojadas sobre un poco de paja y en uno de los mas
obscuros rincones, permanecian un dia y otro descompuestas e
inmoviles.

Una noche, por ultimo, aguijoneado por la curiosidad y deseando
convencerme por mi mismo de que aquel objeto de terror nada tenia de
misterioso, encendi una linterna, baje a las prisiones, levante sus
dobles aldabas, y no cuidando siquiera--tanta era mi fe en que todo no
pasaba de un cuento--de cerrar las puertas tras mi, penetre en el
calabozo. Nunca lo hubiera hecho; apenas anduve algunos pasos, la luz
de mi linterna se apago por si sola, y mis dientes comenzaron a
chocar, y mis cabellos a erizarse. Turbando el profundo silencio que
me rodeaba, habia oido como un ruido de hierros, que se removian y
chocaban al unirse entre las sombras.

Mi primer movimiento fue arrojarme a la puerta para cerrar el paso,
pero al asir sus hojas, senti sobre mis hombros una mano formidable
cubierta-con un guantelete, que despues de sacudirme con violencia me
derribo sobre el dintel. Alli permaneci hasta la manana siguiente, que
me encontraron mis servidores falto de sentido, y recordando solo que
despues de mi caida, habia creido percibir confusamente como unas
pisadas sonoras, al compas de las cuales resonaba un rumor de
espuelas, que poco a poco se fue alejando hasta perderse.

Cuando concluyo el alcaide, reino un silencio profundo, al que siguio
luego un infernal concierto de lamentaciones, gritos y amenazas.

Trabajo costo a los mas pacificos el contener al pueblo que, furioso
con la novedad, pedia a grandes voces la muerte del curioso autor de
su nueva desgracia.

Al cabo logrose apaciguar el tumulto, y comenzaron a disponerse a una
nueva persecucion. Esta obtuvo tambien un resultado satisfactorio.

Al cabo de algunos dias, la armadura volvio a encontrarse en poder de
sus perseguidores. Conocida la formula, y mediante la ayuda de San
Bartolome,[1] la cosa no era ya muy dificil.

  [Footnote 1: San Bartolome. See p. 29, note 2.]

Pero aun quedaba algo por hacer: pues en vano, a fin de sujetarlo, lo
colgaron de una horca; en vano emplearon la mas exquisita vigilancia
con el objeto de quitarle toda ocasion de escaparse por esos mundos.
En cuanto las desunidas armas veian dos dedos de luz, se encajaban, y
pian pianito volvian a tomar el trote y emprender de nuevo sus
excursiones por montes y llanos, que era una bendicion del cielo.

Aquello era el cuento de nunca acabar.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Aquello era el cuento de nunca acabar = 'It was a
  never-ending story.' One of the sort that seems to reach a climax
  only to begin over again.]

En tan angustiosa situacion, los vecinos se repartieron entre si las
piezas de la armadura, que acaso por la centesima vez se encontraba en
sus manos, y rogando[1] al piadoso eremita, que un dia los ilumino con
sus consejos, decidiera lo que debia hacerse de ella.

  [Footnote 1: y rogando. A careless and incorrect construction which
  leaves the sentence incomplete. Better y rogaron. Notice the
  omission of the conjunction que before the subjunctive decidiera.
  This is a frequent Spanish usage.]

El santo varon ordeno al pueblo una penitencia general. Se encerro por
tres dias en el fondo de una caverna que le servia de asilo, y al cabo
de ellos dispuso que se fundiesen las diabolicas armas, y con ellas y
algunos sillares del castillo del Segre, se levantase una cruz.

La operacion se llevo a termino, aunque no sin que nuevos y
aterradores prodigios llenasen de pavor el animo de los consternados
habitantes de Bellver.

En tanto que las piezas arrojadas a las llamas comenzaban a
enrojecerse, largos y profundos gemidos parecian escaparse de la ancha
hoguera, de entre cuyos troncos saltaban[1] como si estuvieran vivas y
sintiesen la accion del fuego. Una tromba de chispas rojas, verdes y
azules danzaba en la cuspide de sus encendidas lenguas, y se retorcian
crujiendo como si una legion de diablos, cabalgando sobre ellas,
pugnasen por libertar a su senor de aquel tormento.

  [Footnote 1: saltaban. The antecedent must be piezas, although it is
  too remote to be obvious. Such loose constructions are not to be
  recommended. ]

Extrana, horrible fue la operacion, en tanto que la candente armadura
perdia su forma para tomar la de una cruz.

Los martillos, caian resonando con un espantoso estruendo sobre el
yunque, al que veinte trabajadores vigorosos sujetaban las barras del
hirviente metal, que palpitaba y gemia al sentir los golpes.

Ya se extendian los brazos del signo de nuestra redencion, ya
comenzaba a formarse la cabecera, cuando la diabolica y encendida masa
se retorcia de nuevo como en una convulsion espantosa, y rodeandose al
cuerpo de los desgraciados, que pugnaban por desasirse de sus brazos
de muerte, se enroscaba en anillas como una culebra, o se contraia en
zigzag como un relampago.

El constante trabajo, la fe, las oraciones y el agua bendita
consiguieron, por ultimo, vencer el espiritu infernal y la armadura se
convirtio en cruz.

Esa cruz es la que hoy habeis visto, y a la cual se encuentra sujeto
el diablo que le presta su nombre; ante ella, ni las jovenes colocan
en el mes de Mayo[1] ramilletes de lirios, ni los pastores se
descubren al pasar, ni los ancianos se arrodillan, bastando apenas las
severas amonestaciones del clero para que los muchachos no la
apedreen.

  [Footnote 1: en el mes de Mayo. To celebrate the festival of
  May-day.]

Dios ha cerrado sus oidos a cuantas plegarias se le dirijan en su
presencia. En el invierno los lobos se reunen en manadas junto al
enebro que la protege, para lanzarse sobre las reses; los bandidos
esperan a su sombra a los caminantes, que entierran a su pie despues
que los asesinan; y cuando la tempestad se desata, los rayos tuercen
su camino para liarse, silbando, al asta de esa cruz y romper los
sillares de su pedestal.




CREED EN DIOS




CANTIGA PROVENZAL


Yo fui el verdadero Teobaldo de Montagut, baron de Fortcastell.[1]
Noble o villano, senor o pechero, tu, cualquiera que seas, que te
detienes un instante al borde de mi sepultura, cree en Dios, como yo
he creido, y ruegale por mi.

  [Footnote 1: Teobaldo de Montagut, baron de Fortcastell. The name of
  Teobaldo, does not figure in mediaeval Catalonia, nor the barony of
  Fortcastell. This inscription is probably a literary fiction.]



I


Nobles aventureros, que puesta la lanza en la cuja, caida la visera
del casco y jinetes sobre un corcel poderoso, recorreis la tierra sin
mas patrimonio que vuestro nombre clarisimo y vuestro montante,
buscando honra y prez en la profesion de las armas; si al atravesar el
quebrado valle de Montagut [Foonote: 1] os han sorprendido en el la
tormenta y la noche, y habeis encontrado un refugio en las ruinas del
monasterio que aun se ve en su fondo, oidme.

  [Footnote 1: Montagut. The mountains of Montagut, which rise to a
  height of 3125 teet, are situated in the province of Tarragona,
  Spain.]



II


Pastores, que seguis con lento paso vuestras ovejas que pacen
derramadas por las colinas y las llanuras; si al conducirlas al borde
del transparente riachuelo que corre, forcejea y salta por entre los
peiiascos del valle de Montagut en el rigor del verano, y en una
siesta de fuego habeis encontrado la sombra y el reposo al pie de las
derruidas arcadas del monasterio, cuyos musgosos pilares besan las
ondas, oidme.



III


Ninas de las cercanas aldeas, lirios silvestres que creceis felices al
abrigo de vuestra humildad; si en la manana del santo Patrono de estos
lugares, al bajar al valle de Montagut a coger treboles y margaritas
con que embellecer su retablo, venciendo el temor que os inspira el
sombrio monasterio que se alza en sus penas, habeis penetrado en su
claustro mudo y desierto para vagar entre sus abandonadas tumbas, a
cuyos bordes crecen las margaritas mas dobles y los jacintos mas
azules, oidme.



IV


Tu, noble caballero, tal vez al resplandor de un relampago; tu, pastor
errante, calcinado por los rayos del sol; tu, en fin, hermosa nina,
cubierta aun con gotas de rocio semejantes a lagrimas, todas habreis
visto en aquel santo lugar una tumba, una tumba humilde. Antes la
componian una piedra tosca y una cruz de palo; la cruz ha
desaparecido, y solo queda la piedra. En esa tumba, cuya inscripcion
es el mote de mi canto, reposa en paz el ultimo baron de Fortcastell,
Teobaldo de Montagut,[1] del cual voy a referiros la peregrina
historia.

  [Footnote 1: Teobaldo de Montagut. See p, 140, note I.]

       *       *       *       *       *


I


Cuando la noble condesa de Montagut estaba en cinta de su primogenito
Teobaldo, tuvo un ensueno misterioso y terrible. Acaso un aviso de
Dios; tal vez una vana fantasia, que el tiempo realizo mas adelante.
Sono que en su seno engendraba una serpiente, una serpiente monstruosa
que, arrojando agudos silbidos, y ora arrastrandose entre la menuda
hierba, ora replegandose sobre si misma para saltar, huyo de su vista,
escondiendose al fin entre unas zarzas.

--iAlli esta! ialli esta! gritaba la condesa en su horrible pesadilla,
senalando a sus servidores la zarza en que se habia escondido el
asqueroso reptil.

Cuando sus servidores llegaron presurosos al punto que la noble dama,
inmovil y presa de un profundo terror, les senalaba aun con el dedo,
una blanca paloma se levanto de entre las brenas y se remonto a las
nubes.

La serpiente habia desaparecido.



II


Teobaldo vino al mundo, su madre murio al darlo a luz, su padre
perecio algunos anos despues en una emboscada, peleando como bueno
contra los enemigos de Dios.[1]

  [Footnote 1: los enemigos de Dios. The Moors are meant here.]

Desde este punto la juventud del primogenito de Fortcastell solo puede
compararse a un huracan. Por donde pasaba se veia senalando su camino
un rastro de lagrimas y de sangre. Ahorcaba a sus pecheros, se batia
con sus iguales, perseguia a las doncellas, daba de palos a los
monjes, y en sus blasfemias y juramentos ni dejaba Santo en paz ni
cosa sagrada que no maldijese.



III


Un dia en que salio de caza, y que, como era su costumbre, hizo entrar
a guarecerse de la lluvia a toda su endiablada comitiva de pajes
licenciosos, arqueros desalmados y siervos envilecidos, con perros,
caballos y gerifaltes, en la iglesia de una aldea de sus dominios, un
venerable sacerdote, arrostrando su colera y sin temer los violentos
arranques de su caracter impetuoso, le conjuro en nombre del cielo y
llevando una hostia consagrada en sus manos, a que abandonase aquel
lugar y fuese a pie y con un bordon de romero a pedir al Papa la
absolucion de sus culpas.

--iDejame en paz, viejo loco! exclamo Teobaldo al oirle; dejame en
paz; o ya que no he encontrado una sola pieza durante el dia, te
suelto mis perros y te cazo como a un jabali para distraerme.




IV


Teobaldo era hombre de hacer lo que decia. El sacerdote, sin embargo,
se limito a contestarle:--Haz lo que quieras, pero ten presente que
hay un Dios que castiga y perdona, y que si muero a tus manos borrara
mis culpas del libro de su indignacion, para escribir tu nombre y
hacerte expiar tu crimen.

--iUn Dios que castiga y perdona! prorrumpio el sacrilego baron con
una carcajada. Vo no creo en Dios, y para darte una prueba voy a
cumplirte lo que te he prometido; porque aunque poco rezador, soy
amigo de no faltar a mis palabras. iRaimundo! iGerardo! iPedro! Azuzad
la jauria, dadme el venablo, tocad el _alali_ en vuestras trompas, que
vamos a darle caza a este imbecil, aunque se suba a los retablos de
sus altares.



V


Ya despues de dudar un instante y a una nueva orden de su senor,
comenzaban los pajes a desatar los lebreles, que aturdian la iglesia
con sus ladridos; ya el baron habia armado su ballesta riendo con una
risa de Satanas, y el venerable sacerdote, murmurando una plegaria,
elevaba sus ojos al cielo y esperaba tranquilo la muerte, cuando se
oyo fuera del sagrado recinto una voceria horrible, bramidos de
trompas que hacian senales de ojeo, y gritos de _iAl jabali!--iPor Zas
brenas!--iHacia el monte!_ Teobaldo, al anuncio de la deseada res,
corrio a las puertas del santuario, ebrio de alegria; tras el fueron
sus servidores, y con sus servidores los caballos y los lebreles.



VI


--iPor donde va el jabali? pregunto el baron subiendo a su corcel, sin
apoyarse en el estribo ni desarmar la ballesta.--Por la canada que se
extiende al pie de esas colinas, le respondieron. Sin escuchar la
ultima palabra, el impetuoso cazador hundio su acicate de oro en el
ijar del caballo, que partio al escape. Tras el partieron todos.

Los habitantes de la aldea, que fueron los primeros en dar la voz de
alarma, y que al aproximarse el terrible animal se habian guarecido en
sus chozas, asomaron timidamente la cabeza a los quicios de sus
ventanas; y cuando vieron desaparecer la infernal comitiva por entre
el follaje de la espesura, se santiguaron en silencio.



VII


Teobaldo iba delante de todos. Su corcel, mas ligero o mas castigado
que los de sus servidores, seguia tan de cerca a la res, que dos o
tres veces, dejandole la brida sobre el cuello al fogoso bruto, se
habia empinado sobre los estribos, y echadose al hombro la ballesta
para herirlo. Pero el jabali, al que solo divisaba a intervalos entre
los espesos matorrales, tomaba a desaparecer de su vista para
mostrarsele de nuevo fuera del alcance de su armas.

Asi corrio muchas horas, atraveso las canadas del valle y el pedregoso
lecho del rio, e internandose en un bosque inmenso, se perdio entre
sus sombrias revueltas, siempre fijos los ojos en la codiciada res,
siempre creyendo alcanzarla, siempre viendose burlado por su agilidad
maravillosa.



VIII


Por ultimo, pudo encontrar una ocasion propicia; tendio el brazo y
volo la saeta, que fue a clavarse temblando en el lomo del terrible
animal, que dio un salto y un espantoso bufido.--iMuerto esta! exclama
con un grito de alegria el cazador, volviendo a hundir por la
centesima vez el acicate en el sangriento ijar de su caballo; imuerto
esta! en balde huye. El rastro de la sangre que arroja marca su
camino. Y esto diciendo, comenzo a hacer en la bocina la senal del
triunfo para que la oyesen sus servidores.

En aquel instante el corcel se detuvo, flaquearon sus piernas, un
ligero temblor agito sus contraidos musculos, cayo al suelo
desplomado, arrojando por la hinchada nariz cubierta de espuma un cano
de sangre.

Habia muerto de fatiga, habia muerto cuando la carrera del herido
jabali comenzaba a acortarse; cuando bastaba un solo esfuerzo mas para
alcanzarlo.



IX


Pintar la ira del colerico Teobaldo, seria imposible. Repetir sus
maldiciones y sus blasfemias, solo repetirlas, fuera escandaloso e
impio. Llamo a grandes voces a sus servidores, y unicamente le
contesto el eco en aquellas inmensas soledades, y se arranco los
cabellos y se meso las barbas, presa de la mas espantosa
desesperacion.--Le seguire a la carrera, aun cuando haya de
reventarme, exclamo al fin, armando de nuevo su ballesta y
disponiendose a seguir a la res; pero en aquel momento sintio ruido a
sus espaldas; se entreabrieron las ramas de la espesura, y se presento
a sus ojos un paje que traia del diestro un corcel negro como la
noche.

--El cielo me lo envia, dijo el cazador, lanzandose sobre sus lomos
agil como un gamo. El paje, que era delgado, muy delgado, y amarillo
como la muerte, se sonrio de una manera extrana al presentarle la
brida.



X


El caballo relincho con una fuerza que hizo estremecer el bosque, dio
un bote increible, un bote en que se levanto mas de diez varas del
suelo, y el aire comenzo a zumbar en los oidos del jinete, como zumba
una piedra arrojada por la honda. Habia partido al escape; pero a un
escape tan rapido, que temeroso de perder los estribos y caer a tierra
turbado por el vertigo, tuvo que cerrar los ojos y agarrarse con ambas
manos a sus[1] flotantes crines.

  [Footnote 1: sus. The antecedent is logically, but not grammatically
  evident.]

Y sin agitar sus riendas, sin herirle con el acicate ni animarlo con
la voz, el corcel corria, corria sin detenerse. ?Cuanto tiempo corrio
Teobaldo con el, sin saber por donde, sintiendo que las ramas le
abofeteaban el rostro al pasar, y los zarzales desgarraban sus
vestidos, y el viento silbaba a su alrededor? Nadie lo sabe.



XI


Cuando recobrando el animo, abrio los ojos un instante para arrojar en
torno suyo una mirada inquieta, se encontro lejos, muy lejos de
Montagut, y en unos lugares, para el completamente extranos. El corcel
corria, corria sin detenerse, y arboles, rocas, castillos y aldeas
pasaban a su lado como una exhalacion. Nuevos y nuevos horizontes se
abrian ante su vista; horizontes que se borraban para dejar lugar a
otros mas y mas desconocidos. Valles angostos, erizados de colosales
fragmentos de granito que las tempestades habian arrancado de la
cumbre de las montanas, alegres campinas, cubiertas de un tapiz de
verdura y sembradas de blancos caserios; desiertos sin limites, donde
hervian las arenas calcinadas por los rayos de un sol de fuego; vastas
soledades, llanuras inmensas, regiones de eternas nieves, donde los
gigantescos tempanos asemejaban, destacandose sobre un cielo gris y
obscuro, blancos fantasmas que extendian sus brazos para asirle por
los cabellos al pasar; todo esto, y mil y mil otras cosas que yo no
podre deciros, vio en su fantastica carrera, hasta tanto que envuelto
en una niebla obscura; dejo de percibir el ruido que producian los
cascos del caballo al herir la tierra.

       *       *       *       *       *



I


Nobles caballeros, sencillos pastores, hermosas ninas que escuchais mi
relato, si os maravilla lo que os cuento, no creais que es una fabula
tejida a mi antojo para sorprender vuestra credulidad; de boca en boca
ha llegado hasta mi esta tradicion, y la leyenda del sepulcro[1] que
aun subsiste en el monasterio de Montagut, es un testimonio
irrecusable de la veracidad de mis palabras.

  [Footnote 1: la leyenda del sepulcro. See p. 140, note 1.]

Creed, pues, lo que he dicho, y creed lo que aun me resta por decir,
que es tan cierto como lo anterior, aunque mas maravilloso. Yo podre
acaso adornar con algunas galas de la poesia el desnudo esqueleto de
esta sencilla y terrible historia, pero nunca me apartare un punto de
la verdad a sabiendas.



II


Cuando Teobaldo dejo de percibir las pisadas de su corcel y se sintio
lanzado en el vacio, no pudo reprimir un involuntario estremecimiento
de terror. Hasta entonces habia creido que los objetos que se
representaban a sus ojos eran fantasmas de su imaginacion, turbada por
el vertigo, y que su corcel corria desbocado, es verdad, pero corria,
sin salir del termino de su senorio. Ya no le quedaba duda de que era
el juguete de un poder sobrenatural que le arrastraba sin que supiese
a donde, a traves de aquellas nieblas obscuras, de aquellas nubes de
formas caprichosas y fantasticas, en cuyo seno, que se iluminaba a
veces con el resplandor de un relampago, creia distinguir las
hirvientes centellas, proximas a desprenderse.

El corcel corria, o mejor dicho nadaba en aquel oceano de vapores
caliginosos y encendidos, y las maravillas del cielo ro comenzaron a
desplegarse unas tras otras ante los espantados ojos de su jinete.



III


Cabalgando sobre las nubes, vestidos de luengas tunicas con orlas de
fuego, suelta al huracan la encendida cabellera, y blandiendo sus
espadas que relampagueaban arrojando chispas de cardena luz, vio a los
angeles, ministros de la colera del Senor, cruzar como un formidable
ejercito sobre alas de la tempestad.

Y subio mas alto, y creyo divisar a lo lejos las tormentosas nubes
semejantes a un mar de lava, y oyo mugir el trueno a sus pies como
muge el oceano azotando la roca desde cuya cima le contempla el
atonito peregrino.



IV


Y vio el arcangel, blanco como la nieve, que sentado sobre un inmenso
globo de cristal,[1] lo dirige por el espacio en las noches serenas,
como un bajel de plata sobre la superficie de un lago azul.

  [Footnote 1: globo de cristal. The moon. Longfellow thus translates
  Dante's description of the sphere of the moon in canto II of the
  _Paradiso:_

    It seemed to me a cloud encompassed us,
    Luminous, dense, consolidate and bright
    As adamant on which the sun is striking.
    Into itself did the eternal pearl
    Receive us...]

Y vio el sol volteando encendido sobre ejes de oro en una atmosfera de
colores y de fuego, y en su foco a los igneos espiritus[1] que habitan
incolumes entre las llamas, y desde su ardiente seno entonan al
Criador himnos de alegria.

  [Footnote 1: igneos espiritus. These are not elemental spirits (see
  p.47, note 1), but are either angelic beings of a fiery nature, or
  the spirits of the blessed in the sphere of the sun, of whom Dante
  speaks as follows:

    Lights many saw, vivid and triumphant,
      Make us a center and themselves a circle,
      More sweet in voice than luminous in aspect,

    Within the court of Heaven, whence I return,
      Are many jewels found, so fair and precious
      They cannot be transported from the realm;

    And of them was the singing of these lights.
                    _Dante's Paradiso, canto X, Longfellow's translation._]

Vio los hilos de luz imperceptibles que atan los hombres a las
estrellas,[1] y vio el arco iris, echado como un puente colosal sobre
el abismo que separa al primer cielo del segundo.[2]

  [Footnote 1: A reference doubtless to the power of the stars to
  influence the destiny of man, with which subject astrology concerns
  itself. Compare--

    That which Timasus argues of the soul
      Doth not resemble that which here is seen,
      Because it seems that as he speaks he thinks.

    He says the soul unto its star returns,
      Believing it to have been severed thence
      Whenever nature gave it as a form.

    Perhaps his doctrine is of other guise
      Than the words sound, and possibly may be
      With meaning that is not to be derided.

    If he doth mean that to these wheels return
      The honor of their influence and the blame,
      Perhaps his bow doth hit upon some truth.

    O glorious stars, O light impregnated
      With mighty virtue, from which I acknowledge
      All my genius, whatso'er it be.

                    _Idem, canto's IV and XXII._]

  [Footnote 2: primer cielo, segundo. Belief in a series of heavenly
  spheres, such as Dante describes, has characterized most mystical
  philosophies.]



V


Por una escala[1] misteriosa vio bajar las almas a la tierra; vio
bajar muchas, y subir pocas.[2] Cada una de aquellas almas inocentes
iba acompanada de un arcangel purisimo que le cubria con la sombra de
sus alas. Los que tornaban solos, tornaban en silencio y con lagrimas
en los ojos; los que no, subian cantando como suben las alondras en
las mananas de Abril?[3]

  [Footnote 1: escala. Dante mentions a similar stairway in canto XXII
  of the _Paradiso_, and intimates that the vision of it is disclosed
  only to true mystics.

    He thereupon: "Brother, thy high desire
      In the remotest sphere shall be fulfilled,
      Where are fulfilled all others and my own.

    There perfect is, and ripened, and complete,
      Every desire; within that one alone
      Is every part where it has always been;

    For it is not in space, nor turns on poles,
      And unto it our stairway reaches up,
      thus from out thy sight it steals away.

    Up to that height the Patriarch Jacob saw it
      Extending its supernal part, whst time
      So thronged with angels it appeared to him.

    But to ascend it now no one uplifts
      His feet from off the earth...."

                    _Longfellow's translation_.]

  [Footnote 2: pocas. Because, in comparison with the number of souls
  born into earthly bodies, but few escape the snares of evil and rise
  again to their original state of innocence.]

  [Footnote 3: Though the idea is somewhat different, there is a
  certain parallelism in the picture evoked by the closing verses of
  Rossetti's poem "The Blessed Damozel." The Damozel is represented as
  waiting for her lover on the ramparts of heaven.

    She gazed and listened and then said,
      Less sad of speech than mild,--

    "All this is when he comes." She ceased.
      The light thrilled towards her, fill'd

    With angels in strong level flight.
      Her eyes prayed, and she smiled.

    (I saw her smile.) But soon their path
      Was vague in distant spheres:

    And then she cast her arms along
      The golden barriers,

    And laid her face between her hands,
      And wept. (I heard her tears.)]

Despues las tinieblas rosadas y azules que flotaban en el espacio,
como cortinas de gasa transparente, se rasgaron como el dia de
gloria[1] se rasga en nuestros templos el velo de los altares, y el
paraiso de los justos se ofrecio a sus miradas deslumbrador y
magnifico.[2]

  [Footnote 1: el dia de gloria. Called also _Sabado de gloria_, 'Holy
  Saturday.' "During the last two weeks of Lent, the pictures and
  statues throughout the Catholic Church are covered by a purple cloth
  and uncovered on Holy Saturday. In parts of Spain this unveiling is
  effected suddenly by rending them with a spear or lance, so as to
  reveal all the pictures and statues at the same time." Hence the
  comparison.]

  [Footnote 2: Read Dante's description in canto XXXII of the
  _Paradiso_]



VI


Alli estaban los santos profetas que habreis visto groseramente
esculpidos en las portadas de piedra de nuestras catedrales; alli las
virgenes luminosas,[1] que intenta en vano copiar de sus suenos el
pintor en los vidrios de colores de las ojivas; alli los
querubines,[2] con sus largas y flotantes vestidura? y sus nimbos de
oro, como los de las tablas de los altares; alli, en fin, coronada de
estrellas, vestida de luz, rodeada de todas las jerarquias celestes, y
hermosa sobre toda ponderacion, Nuestra Senora de Monserrat,[3] la
Madre de Dios, la Reina de los arcangeles, el amparo de los pecadores
y el consuelo de los afligidos.[4]

  [Footnote 1: las virgenes luminosas. _Virgin_ is "one of the titles
  and grades given by the church, by which are distinguished the
  choirs of sainted women who have preserved their integrity and
  purity." _Diccionario Enciclopedico Hispano-Americano_. Compare--

    ... de humildes y penitentes confesores, y de aquel coro-mas
    blanco que la nieve, de _virgenes_ purisimas.

                Rivadeneira.

    ... los estados de los martires, confesores y _virgenes_ cantaron
    unos los triunfos de los otros.

                P. Martin de Roa.

  By _luminosas_ is suggested the halo of light that surrounds them,
  proceeding from their own sanctity and represented in the
  stained-glass windows.]

  [Footnote 2: querubines. Read Dante's description of the heavenly
  hierarchy in canto XXVIII of the _Paradiso_. See also p. 47, note
  1.]

  [Footnote 3: Nuestra Senora de Monserrat = 'Our Lady of Montserrat,'
  the Virgin as venerated in the famous monastery of this name. "The
  monastery owes its foundation to the miraculous image of the Virgin,
  the handiwork of Luke the Apostle, which was brought to Barcelona in
  the year of our Lord 50, by St. Peter himself. At the time of the
  Moorish invasion, in 717, the Goths hid it in the hill, where it
  remained until 880, when Some shepherds were attracted to the spot
  by heavenly lightd, etc., whereupon Gondemar Bishop of Vique (guided
  also by a _sweet smell_) found the image in a cave. Accompanied by
  his clergy, the good bishop set out on his return to Manresa
  carrying the holy image with him, but on reaching a certain spot the
  Virgin obstinately refused to proceed farther; thereupon a small
  chapel was built over her, where she remained 160 years. The spot
  where the image first refused to move is still marked by a cross
  with an appropriate inscription.... A chapel where the image now
  rests was founded in 1592, and later opened by Philip II in person."
  Ford, _Handbook for Travellers in Spain_. The monastery is one of
  the most picturesquely situated in all Christendom. It stands high
  up upon the jagged mountain _Mons Serratus_, or Montserrat, which
  gives to the monastery its name. See p. 54, note 2.]

  [Footnote 4: Compare--

    And at that center, with their wings expanded,
      More than a thousand jubilant Angels saw I,
      Each differing in effolgence and in kind.

    I saw there at their sports and at their songs
      A Beauty[*] smiling, which the gladness was
      Within the eyes of all the other saints;

    And if I had in speaking as much wealth
      As in imagining, I should not dare
      To attempt the smallest part of its delight.

        [Footnote *: The Virgin]

                _Dante's Paradiso, canto XXXI, Longfellow's Translation._]

Mas alla el paraiso de los justos, mas alla el trono donde se asienta
la Virgen Maria.[1] El animo de Teobaldo se sobrecogio temeroso, y un
hondo pavor se apodero de su alma. La eterna soledad, el eterno
silencio viven en aquellas regiones, que conducen al misterioso
santuario del Senor. De cuando en cuando azotaba su frente una rafaga
de aire, frio como la hoja de un punal, que crispaba sus cabellos de
horror y penetraba hasta la medula de sus huesos; rafagas semejantes a
las que anunciaban a los profetas la aproximacion del espiritu
divino.[2] Al fin llego a un punto donde creyo percibir un rumor
sordo, que pudiera compararse al zumbido lejano de un enjambre de
abejas, cuando, en las tardes del otono, revolotean en derredor de las
ultimas flores.

  [Footnote 1: Is there confusion here between the Virgin Mary and the
  Virgin of Montserrat, or is the throne her ementioned vacant?]

  [Footnote 2: Compare "And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great
  and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks
  before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind: and after the
  wind an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the earthquake: and
  after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire: and
  after the fire a still small voice. And it was so, when Elijah heard
  it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood
  in the entering in of the cave." I Kings, xix, part of verses 11-13.
  "And I looked, and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a
  great cloud, and a fire.... And when I saw it, I fell upon my face,
  and I heard a voice of one that spake." Ezekiel, i. 4 and 28.]



VIII


Atravesaba esa fantastica region adonde van todos los acentos de la
tierra, los sonidos que decimos que se desvanecen, las palabras que
juzgamos que se pierden en el aire, los lamentos que creemos que nadie
oye.

Aqui, en un circulo armonico,[1] flotan las plegarias de los ninos,
las, oraciones de las virgenes, los salmos de los piadosos eremitas,
las peticiones de los humildes, las castas palabras de los limpios de
corazon, las resignadas quejas de los que padecen, los ayes de los que
sufren y los himnos de los que esperan. Teobaldo oyo entre aquellas
voces que palpitaban aun en el eter luminoso, la voz de su santa
madre, que pedia a Dios por el; pero no oyo la suya.

  [Footnote 1: circulo armonico = 'melodious circle.' A rhythmic
  circling accompanied by song is characteristic of all of the
  heavenly choirs in Dante's _Paradiso_. Compare--

    Soon as the blessed flame had taken up
      The final word to give it utterance
      Began the holy millstone to revolve,

    And in its gyre had not turned wholly round,
      Before another in a ring enclosed it,
      And motion joined to motion, song to song;

    Song that as greatly doth transcend our muses,
      Our Sirens, in those dulcet clarions,
      As primal splendor that which is reflected.

                    _canto XII, Longfellow's translation._

    As by a greater gladness urged and drawn
      They who are dancing in a ring sometimes
      Uplift their voices and their motions quicken;

    So, at that orison devout and prompt,
      The holy circles a new joy displayed
      In their revolving and their wondrous Song.

                    _Idem, canto XIV._]



IX


Mas alla hirieron sus oidos con un estrepito discordante mil y mil
acentos asperos y roncos, blasfemias, gritos de venganzas, cantares de
orgias, palabras lubricas, maldiciones de la desesperacion, amenazas
de impotencia y juramentos sacrileges de la impiedad.[1]

  [Footnote 1: This conception of two distinct places in the other
  world to which all good words and all evil words go and echo
  eternally seems to be original with Becquer.]

Teobaldo atraveso el segundo circulo con la rapidez que el meteoro
cruza el cielo en una tarde de verano, por no oir su voz que vibraba
alli sonante y atronadora, sobreponiendose a las otras voces en media
de aquel concierto infernal.

--_i No creo en Dios! i No creo en Dios!_ decia aun su acento
agitandose en aquel oceano de blasfemias; y Teobaldo comenzaba a
creer.



X


Dejo atras aquellas regiones y atraveso otras inmensidades llenas de
visiones terribles, que ni el pudo comprender ni yo acierto a
concebir, y llego al cabo al ultimo circulo[1] de la espiral de los
cielos, donde los serafines[2] adoran al Senor, cubierto el rostro con
las triples alas[3] y postrados a sus pies.

  [Footnote 1: ultimo circulo. Becquer follows no particular
  metaphysical system in his description of the various heavenly
  spheres.]

  [Footnote 2: serafines. The seraphim ('burning' _or_ 'flaming ones')
  are the highest order in the hierarchy of angels. They are mentioned
  by Isaiah (vi. 2).

Dante speaks of the seraph as "that soul in Heaven which is most
enlightened." _Paradiso_, canto XXI, Charles Eliot Norton's
translation. See p. 47, note 1, and also p. 152, note 1.]

  [Footnote 3: cubierto el rostro con las triples alas. Becquer does
  not follow exactly the Biblical description. "Above it stood the
  seraphim: each one had six wings; with twain he covered his face,
  and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly."
  Isaiah vi. 2.

  In the famous vision of St. Francis of Assisi, at the time that he
  received his stigmata, the Seraph appeared to him with two wings
  raised above his head, with two wings stretched out for flight, and
  with two wings covering his whole body. See Mrs. Oliphant, Francis
  _of Assisi_, London, Macmillan & Co., 1871, pp. 253-255.]

El quiso mirarlo.

Un aliento de fuego abraso su cara, un mar de luz obscurecio sus ojos,
un trueno gigante retumbo en sus oidos, y arrancado del corcel y
lanzado al vacio como la piedra candente que arroja un volcan, se
sintio bajar, y bajar sin caer nunca, ciego, abrasado y ensordecido,
como cayo el angel rebelde cuando Dios derribo el pedestal de su
orgullo con un soplo de sus labios.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Compare--

    Nine days they fell; confounded Chaos roared,
    And felt tenfold confusion in their fall
    Through his wild anarchy; so huge a rout
    Encumbered him with ruin. Hell at last,
    Yawning, received them whole, and on them closed--
    Hell, their fit habitation, fraught with fire
    Unquenchable, the house of woe and pain.
                    Milton, _Paradise Lost_, book vi.]


       *       *       *       *       *



I


La noche habia cerrado, y el viento gemia agitando las hojas de los
arboles, por entre cuyas frondosas ramas se deslizaba un suave rayo de
luna, cuando Teobaldo, incorporandose sobre el codo y restregandose
los ojos como si despertara de un profundo sueno, tendio alrededor una
mirada y se encontro en el mismo bosque donde hirio al jabali, donde
cayo muerto su corcel; donde le dieron aquella fantastica cabalgadura
que le habia arrastrado a unas regiones desconocidas y misteriosas.

Un silencio de muerte reinaba a su alrededor; un silencio que solo
interrumpia el lejano bramido de los ciervos, el temeroso murmullo de
las hojas, y el eco de una campana distante que de vez en cuando traia
el viento en sus rafagas.

--Habre sonado, dijo el baron: y emprendio su camino al traves del
bosque, y salio al fin a la llanura.



II


En lontananza, y sobre las rocas de Montagut, vio destacarse la negra
silueta de su castillo, sobre el fondo azulado y transparente del
cielo de la noche.--Mi castillo esta lejos y estoy cansado, murmuro;
esperare el dia en un lugar cercano, y se dirigio al lugar.--Llamo a
la puerta.--?Quien sois? le preguntaron.--El baron de Fortcastell,
respondio, y se le rieron en sus barbas.--Llamo a otra.--?Quien sois y
que quereis? tornaron a preguntarle.--Vuestro senor, insistio el
caballero, sorprendido de que no le conociesen; Teobaldo de
Montagut.[1]--iTeobaldo de Montagut! dijo colerica su interlocutora,
que no era una vieja; iTeobaldo de Montagut el del cuento!... iBah!...
Seguid vuestro camino, y no vengais a sacar de su sueno a las gentes
honradas para decirles chanzonetas insulsas.

  [Footnote 1: Teobaldo de Montagut. See p. 140, note 1.]



III


Teobaldo, lleno de asombro, abandono la aldea y se dirigio al
castillo, a cuyas puertas llego cuando apenas clareaba el dia. El foso
estaba cegado con los sillares de las derruidas almenas; el puente
levadizo, inutil ya, se pudria colgado aun de sus fuertes tirantes de
hierro, cubiertos de orin por la accion de los anos; en la torre del
homenaje tania lentamente una campana; frente al arco principal de la
fortaleza y sobre un pedestal de granito se elevaba una cruz; en los
muros no se veia un solo soldado; y confuso, y sordo, parecia que de
su seno se elevaba como un murmullo lejano, un himno religioso, grave,
solemne y magnifico.

--iY este es mi castillo, no hay duda! decia Teobaldo, paseando su
inquieta mirada de un punto a otro, sin acertar a comprender lo que le
pasaba. iAquel es mi escudo, grabado aun sobre la clave del arco! iEse
es el valle de Montagut! Estas tierras que domina, el senorio de
Fortcastell....

En aquel instante las pesadas hojas de la puerta giraron sobre sus
goznes y aparecio en su dintel un religioso.



IV


--?Quien sois y que haceis aqui? pregunto Teobaldo al monje.

--Yo soy, contesto este, un humilde servidor de Dios, religioso del
monasterio de Montagut.

--Pero ... interrumpio el baron, Montagut ?no es un senorio?

--Lo fue, prosiguio el monje ... hace mucho tiempo. ... A su ultimo
senor, segun cuentan, se le llevo el diablo; y como no tenia a nadie
que le sucediese en el feudo, los condes soberanos[1] hicieron
donacion de estas tierras a los religiosos de nuestra regla, que estan
aqui desde hara cosa de ciento a ciento veinte anos. Y vos ?quien
sois?

  [Footnote 1: condes soberanos. See p. 121, note 1, and p. 123, l.
  22.]

--Yo ... balbuceo el baron de Fortcastell, despues de un largo rato de
silencio; yo soy ... un miserable pecador, que arrepentido de sus
faltas, viene a confesarlas a vuestro abad, y 15 a pedirle que le
admita en el seno de su religion.




LAS HOJAS SECAS


El sol se habia puesto: las nubes, que cruzaban hechas jirones sobre
mi cabeza, iban a amontonarse unas sobre otras en el horizonte lejano.
El viento frio de las tardes de otono arremolinaba las hojas secas a
mis pies.

Yo estaba sentado al borde de un camino,[1] por donde siempre vuelven
menos de los que van.

  [Footnote 1: un camino. The road to the cemetery.]

No se en que pensaba, si en efecto pensaba entonces en alguna cosa. Mi
alma temblaba a punto de lanzarse al espacio, como el pajaro tiembla y
agita ligeramente las alas antes de levantar el vuelo.

Hay momentos en que, merced a una serie de abstracciones, el espiritu
se sustrae a cuanto le rodea, y replegandose en si mismo analiza y
comprende todos los misteriosos fenomenos de la vida interna del
hombre.

Hay otros en que se desliga de la carne, pierde su personalidad y se
confunde con los elementos de la naturaleza, se relaciona con su modo
de ser, y traduce su incomprensible lenguaje.

Yo me hallaba en uno de estos ultimos momentos, cuando solo y en medio
de la escueta llanura, oi hablar cerca de mi.

Eran dos hojas secas las que hablaban, y este, poco mas o menos, su
extrano dialogo:

?De donde vienes, hermana?

--Vengo de rodar con el torbellino, envuelta en la nube del polvo y de
las hojas secas nuestras companeras, a lo largo de la interminable
llanura. ?Y tu?

--Yo he seguido algun tiempo la corriente del rio, hasta que el
vendaval me arranco de entre el legamo y los juncos de la orilla.

--?Y adonde vas?

--No lo se[1]: ?lo sabe acaso el viento que me empuja?

  [Footnote 1: ?Y adonde vas?--No lo se. Compare these well-known
  verses by the French poet Arnault:

    De ta tige detachee,
    Pauvre feuille dessechee,
    Oh vas-tu?--Je n'en sais rien.
    L'orage a brise le chene
    Qui seul etait mon soutien;
    De son inconstante haleine
    Le zephyr ou l'aquilon
    Depuis ce jour me promene
    De la foret a la plaine,
    De la montagne au vallon.
    Je vais oh le vent me mene,
    Sans me plaindre ou m'effrayer;
    Je vais ou va toute chose,
    Oh va la fenille de rose
    Et la feuille de laurier.]

--iAy! ?Quien diria que habiamos de acabar 'amarillas y secas
arrastrandonos por la tierra, nosotras que vivimos vestidas de color y
de luz meciendonos en el aire?

--Te acuerdas de los hermosos dias en que brotamos; de aquella
apacible manana en que, roto el hinchado boton que nos servia de cuna,
nos desplegamos al templado beso del sol como un abanico de
esmeraldas?

--iOh! iQue dulce era sentirse balanceada por la brisa a aquella
altura, bebiendo por todos los poros el aire y la luz!

--iOh! iQue hermoso era ver correr el agua del rio que lamia las
retorcidas raices del anoso tronco que nos sustentaba, aquel agua
limpia y trasparente que copiaba como un espejo el azul del cielo, de
modo que creiamos vivir suspendidas entre dos abismos azules!

--iCon que placer nos asomabamos por cima de las verdes frondas para
vernos retratadas en la temblorosa corriente!

--iComo cantabamos juntas imitando el rumor de la brisa y siguiendo el
ritmo de las ondas!

--Los insectos brillantes revoloteaban desplegando sus alas de gasa a
nuestro alrededor.

--Y las mariposas blancas y las libelulas azules, que giran por el
aire en extranos circulos, se paraban un momento en nuestros
dentellados bordes a contarse los secretos de ese misterioso amor que
dura un instante y les consume la vida.[1]

  [Footnote 1: y les consume la vida. This is strictly true of the
  honey-bee, but not to my knowledge of butterflies or dragon-flies.]

--Cada cual de nosotras era una nota en el concierto de los bosques.

--Cada cual de nosotras era un tono en la armonia de su color.

--En las noches de luna, cuando su plateada luz resbalaba sobre la
cima de los montes, ?te acuerdas como charlabamos en voz baja entre
las diafanas sombras?

--Y referiamos con un blando susurro las historias de los silfos que
se columpian en los hilos de oro que cuelgan las aranas entre los
arboles.

--Hasta que suspendiamos nuestra monotona charla para oir embebecidas
las quejas del ruisenor, que habia escogido nuestro tronco por
escabel.

--Y eran tan tristes y tan suaves sus lamentos que, aunque lenas de
gozo al oirle,[1] nos amanecia llorando.

  [Footnote 1: oirle. See p. 66, note 1.]

--iOh! iQue dulces eran aquellas lagrimas que nos prestaba el rocio de
la noche y que resplandecian con todos los colores del iris a la
primera luz de la aurora!

--Despues vino la alegre banda de jilgueros a llenar de vida y de
ruidos el bosque con la alborozada y confusa algarabia de sus cantos.

--Y una enamorada pareja, colgo junto a nosotras su redondo nido de
aristas y de plumas.

--Nosotras serviamos de abrigo a los pequenuelos contra las molestas
gotas de la lluvia en las tempestades de verano.

--Nosotras les serviamos de dosel y los defendiamos de los importunos
rayos del sol.

--Nuestra vida pasaba como un sueno de oro, del que no sospechabamos
que se podria despertar.

--Una hermosa tarde en que todo parecia sonreir a nuestro alrededor,
en que el sol poniente encendia el ocaso y arrebolaba las nubes, y de
la tierra ligeramente humeda se levantaban efluvios de vida y perfumes
de flores, dos amantes se detuvieron a la orilla del agua y al pie del
tronco que nos sostenia.

--iNunca se borrara ese recuerdo de mi memoria! Ella era joven, casi
una nina, hermosa y palida. El le decia con ternura:--?Por que
lloras?--Perdona este involuntario sentimiento de egoismo, le
respondio ella enjugandose una lagrima; lloro por mi. Lloro la vida
que me huye: cuando el cielo se corona de rayos de luz, y la tierra se
viste de verdura y de flores, y el viento trae perfumes y cantos de
pajaros y armonias distantes, y se ama y se siente una amada ila vida
es buena!--?Y por que no has de vivir? insistio el estrechandole las
manos conmovido.--Porque es imposible. Cuando caigan secas--esas hojas
que murmuran armoniosas sobre nuestras cabezas, yo morire tambien, y
el viento llevara algun dia su polvo y el mio ?quien sabe adonde?

--Yo lo oi y tu lo oiste, y nos estremecimos y callamos. iDebiamos
secarnos! iDebiamos morir y girar arrastradas por los remolinos del
viento! Mudas y llenas de terror permaneciamos aun cuando llego la
noche. iOh! iQue noche tan horrible!

--Por la primera vez falto a su cita el enamorado ruisenor que la
encantaba con sus quejas.

--A poco volaron los pajaros, y con ellos sus pequenuelos ya vestidos
de plumas; y quedo el nido solo, columpiandose lentamente y triste,
como la cuna vacia de un nino muerto.

--Y huyeron las mariposas blancas y las libelulas azules, dejando su
lugar a los insectos obscuros que venian a roer nuestras fibras y a
depositar en nuestro seno sus asquerosas larvas.

--iOh! iY como nos estremeciamos encogidas al helado contacto de las
escarchas de la noche!

--Perdimos el color y la frescura.

--Perdimos la suavidad y las formas, y lo que antes al tocarnos era
como rumor de besos, como murmullo de palabras de enamorados, luego se
convirtio en aspero ruido, seco, desagradable y triste.

--iY al fin volamos desprendidas!

--Hollada bajo el pie de indiferente pasajero, sin cesar arrastrada de
un punto a otro entre el polvo y el fango, me he juzgado dichosa
cuando podia reposar un instante en el profundo surco de un camino.

--Yo he dado vueltas sin cesar arrastrada por la turbia corriente, y
en mi larga peregrinacion vi, solo, enlutado y sombrio, contemplando
con una mirada distraida las aguas que pasaban y las hojas secas que
marcaban su movimiento, a uno de los dos amantes cuyas palabras nos
hicieron presentir la muerte.

--iElla tambien se desprendio de la vida y acaso dormira en una fosa
reciente, sobre la que yo me detuve un momento!

--iAy! Ella duerme y reposa al fin; pero nosotras, cuando acabaremos
este large viaje?...

--iNunca!...Ya el viento que nos dejo reposar un punto vuelve a
soplar, y ya me siento estremecida para levantarme de la tierra y
seguir con el. iAdios, hermana!

--iAdios!...

Silbo el aire que habia permanecido un momento callado, y las hojas se
lavantaron en confuso remolino, perdiendose a 10 lejos entre las
tineblas de la noche.

Y yo pense entonces algo que no puedo recordar, y que, aunque lo
recordase, no encontraria palabras para decirlo.





RIMAS



I[1]


      Yo se un himno gigante y extrano
  Que anuncia en la noche del alma una aurora,
  Y estas paginas son de ese himno
  Cadencias que el aire dilata en las sombras.

      Yo quisiera escribirle,[2] del hombre
  Domando el rebelde, mezquino idioma,
  Con palabras que fuesen a un tiempo
  Suspiros y risas, colores y notas.

      Pero en vano es luchar; que no hay cifra
  Capaz de encerrarlo, y apenas ioh hermosa!
  Si, teniendo en mis manos las tuyas,
  Pudiera, al oirlo, cantartelo a solas.

    [Footnote 1: This poem is made up of alternate decasyllabic
    anapests and dodecasyllabic amphibrachs, thus:

      -- -- /  | -- -- /  | -- -- /  | --
      -- /  -- | -- /  -- | -- /  -- | -- / --

    The even verses have the same assonance throughout.]

    [Footnote 2: escribirle. Le refers to _himno_. See p. 66, note 1.]




IV[1]

    No digais que agotado su tesoro,
  De asuntos falta,[2] enmudecio la lira:
  Podra no haber poetas; pero siempre
      Habra poesia.

  Mientras las ondas de la luz al beso[3]
      Palpiten encendidas;
  Mientras el sol las desgarradas nubes
      De fuego y oro vista;

  Mientras el aire en su regazo lleve
      Perfumes y armonias;
  Mientras haya en el mundo primavera,
      iHabra poesia!

  Mientras la ciencia a descubrir no alcance
      Las fuentes de la vida,
  Y en el mar o en el cielo haya un abismo
      Que al calculo resista;[4]
  Mientras la humanidad siempre avanzando
      No sepa a do camina;[5]
  Mientras haya un misterio para el hombre,
      iHabra poesia!

  Mientras sintamos que se alegra el alma,
      Sin que los labios rian;
  Mientras se llore sin que el llanto acuda
      A nublar la pupila;

  Mientras el corazon y la cabeza[6]
    Batallando prosigan;
  Mientras haya esperanzas y recuerdos,
    iHabra poesia!

  Mientras haya unos ojos que reflejen
      Los ojos que los miran;
  Mientras responda el labio suspirando
      Al labio que suspira;
  Mientras sentirse puedan en un beso
      Dos almas confundidas;
  Mientras exista una mujer hermosa,
      iHabra poesia!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic and
    heptasyllabic verses, with a pentasyllabic refrain. The
    hendecasyllabic verses are partly of the first and partly of the
    second class (see Introduction), while the heptasyllabic verses
    have the required accent on the sixth syllable, with at least one
    minor variable accent, and the pentasyllabic verses on the fourth,
    according to rule. The even verses have the same assonance
    throughout.]

    [Footnote 2: De asuntos falta = 'through (_or_ for) lack of
    subjects.' Prose order--_falta de asuntos_.]

    [Footnote 3: de la luz al beso. Prose order--al beso de la luz.]

    [Footnote 4: Mientras... resista. Man's inability to solve these
    sovereign problems is nowhere more poetically expressed than in
    Edward Fitzgerald's translation of Omar Khayyam's _Rubaiyat._
    Compare--

            (XXVII)
      Myself when young did eagerly frequent
      Doctor and Saint, and heard great argument
      About it and about: but evermore,
      Came out by the same door where in I went.

            (XXXI)
      Up from Earth's Center through the Seventh Gate
      I rose, and on the Throne of Saturn sate,
      And many a Knot unravel'd by the Road;
      But not the Master-knot of Human Fate.]

    [Footnote 5: No sepa a do camina. This doubt seems to assail
    frequently the mind of Becquer, as it does that of the old Persian
    poet Omar Khayyam:

            (XXIX)
      Into this Universe, and _Why_ not knowing
      Nor _Whence_, like water willy-nilly flowing;
      And out of it, as Wind along the Waste
      I know not _Whither_, willy-nilly blowing.

            (LXIV)
      Strange, is it not? that of the myriads who
      Before us pass'd the door of Darkness through,
      Not one returns to tell us of the Road,
      Which to discover we must travel too.

    _Rubaiyat--Edward Fitzgerald's translation._]

    [Footnote 6: el corazon y la cabeza. Compare--

      It is the heart, and not the brain,
      That to the highest doth attain.

    Longfellow, _The Building of the Ship._]




VII[1]


    Del salon en el angulo obscuro,
  De su dueno tal vez olvidada,
  Silenciosa y cubierta de polvo
      Veiase el arpa.

    iCuanta nota dormia en sus cuerdas,
  Como el pajaro duerme en las ramas,
  Esperando la mano de nieve
      Que sabe arrancarlas![2]

    iAy! pense; icuantas veces el genio
  Asi duerme en el fondo del alma,
  Y una voz, como Lazaro,[3] espera
      Que le diga: "Levantate y anda!"

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of decasyllabic anapests and of
    hexasyllabic amphibrachs, thus:

      -- -- / | -- -- / | -- -- / | --
      -- / -- | -- / --

    The even verses have the same assonance throughout.]

    [Footnote 2: For this idea, compare--

      Je suis dans un salon comme une mandoline
      Oubliee en passant sur le bord d'un coussin.
      Elle renferme en elle une langue divine,
      Mais si son mattre dort, tout reste dans son sein.

    Alfred de Musset, _A quoi revent les jeunes filles_, Act 1, SC.
    iv.]

    [Footnote 3: Lazaro = 'Lazarus.' See Gospel by St. John, chapter
    II. Read Stephen Phillips' beautiful poem entitled "Lazarus," pp.
    45-47 of his _Poems_, published by John Lane, London, 1901.]




IX[1]


    Besa el aura que gime blandamente
  Las leves ondas que jugando riza;
  El sol besa a la nube en occidente
  Y de purpura y oro la matiza;
  La llama en derredor del tronco ardiente
  Por besar a otra llama se desliza,
  Y hasta el sauce, inclinandose a su peso,
  Al rio, que le besa, vuelve un beso.

    [Footnote 1: This poem, of the form called Octava _real_, with the
    regular rhyme scheme _a b a b a b c c_, is composed of
    hendecasyllabic verses of the first class, save the 2d, which is
    of the second class.]




X[1]


    Los invisibles atomos del aire
  En derredor palpitan y se inflaman;
  El cielo se deshace en rayos de oro;
  La tierra se estremece alborozada;
  Oigo flotando en olas de armonia
  Rumor de besos y batir de alas;
  Mis parpados se cierran... ?Que sucede?
  --!Es el amor que pasa![2]

    [Footnote 1: This poem is an _Octava_ composed, with the exception
    of the concluding heptasyllabic verse, of hendecasyllabic verses,
    all of which are of the first class, save the 6th, which is of the
    second class. Note the hiatus in the 6th verse. The even verses
    have the same assonance.]

    [Footnote 2: Note Mrs. Ward's translation (_Macmillan's Mag._,
    Feb., 1883, p. 316).

      The viewless atoms of the air
      Around me palpitate and burn,
      All heaven dissolves in gold, and earth
          Quivers with new-found joy.
      Floating on waves of harmony I hear
      A stir of kisses, and a sweep of wings;
      Mine eyelids close--"What pageant nears?"
          "'Tis Love that passes by!"]




XIII[1]


    Tu pupila es azul, y cuando ries,
  Su claridad suave me recuerda
  El tremulo fulgor de la manana
      Que en el mar se refleja.

    _Tu pupila es azul; y cuando lloras,
  Las trasparentes lagrimas en ella
  Se me figuran gotas de rocio
      Sobre una violeta._

    Tu pupila es azul, y si en su fondo
  Como un punto de luz radia una idea,[2]
  Me parece en el cielo de la tarde
      iUna perdida estrella!

    [Footnote 1: Each stanza of this poem is composed of three
    hendecasyllabic verses of the first class, followed by a
    heptasyllabic verse. The even verses of the poem have the same
    assonance throughout.]

    [Footnote 2: radia una idea = 'there gleams some fancy.']




XIV[1]


    Te vi un punto,[2] y, flotando ante mis ojos
  La imagen de tus ojos se quedo,
  Como la mancha obscura, orlada en fuego,
  Que flota y ciega, si se mira al sol.

    Adonde quiera que la vista fijo,
  Torno a ver sus pupilas llamear,
  Mas no te encuentro a ti; que es tu mirada:
  Unos ojos, los tuyos, nada mas.

    De mi alcoba en el angulo los miro
  Desasidos fantasticos lucir:[3]
  Cuando duermo los siento que se ciernen
  De par en par abiertos sobre mi.

    Yo se que hay fuegos fatuos que en la noche
  Llevan al caminante a perecer:
  Yo me siento arrastrado por tus ojos,
  Pero adonde me arrastran, no lo se.

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed chiefly of hendecasyllabic
    verses of the first class. The even verses of each stanza are
    _agudos_ and assonanced.]

    [Footnote 2: un punto = 'but a moment.']

    [Footnote 3: los miro desasidos fantasticos lucir = 'I watch them
    shine like orbs fantastic.' Mrs. Ward translates this stanza as
    follows:

      In my room's furthest corner I behold
      Their strange fantastic blaze,
      And when I sleep I feel them watch
      Unmoved and open o'er my head.

    See Macmillan's Magazine, February, 1883, P--317.]




XV[1]


    Cendal flotante de leve bruma,
  Rizada cinta de blanca espuma,
      Rumor sonoro
      De arpa de oro,
  Beso del aura, onda de luz,
      Eso eres tu.

    Tu, sombra aerea que, cuantas veces
  Voy a tocarte, te desvaneces
  Como la llama, como el sonido,
  Como la niebla, como el gemido
      Del lago azul.

    En mar sin playas onda sonante,
  En el vacio cometa errante,
        Largo lamento
        Del ronco viento,
  Ansia perpetua de algo mejor,
        Eso soy yo.

    iYo, que a tus ojos en mi agonia
  Los ojos vuelvo de noche y dia;
  Yo, que incansable corro y demente
  Tras una sombra, tras la hija ardiente
      De una vision!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of decasyllabic and of
    pentasyllable verses. The last two verses of the lst and 3d
    stanzas and the last verse of the 2d and 4th stanzas are agudos,
    the other verses being _llanos_. The rhyme scheme is _a, a, b, b,
    c, c, d, d, e, e, c_ for each half of the poem. Notice the hiatus
    in the 4th and 5th verses.




XVI[1]


    Si al mecer las azules campanillas
        De tu balcon,
  Crees que suspirando pasa el viento
        Murmurador,
  Sabe que, oculto entre las verdes hojas,
        Suspiro yo.

    Si al resonar confuso a tus espaldas
        Vago rumor,
  Crees que por tu nombre te ha llamado
        Lejana voz,
  Sabe que, entre las sombras que te cercan,
        Te llamo yo.

    Si se turba medroso en la alta noche
        Tu corazon,
  Al sentir en tus labios un aliento
        Abrasador,
  Sabe que, aunque invisible, al lado tuyo
        Respire yo.

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    both classes, with pentasyllable verses alternating. These latter
    are _agudos_ and have the same assonance throughout.]



XXI[1]


    ?Que es poesia? dices mientras clavas
  En mi pupila tu pupila azul;
    ?Que es poesia? ?Y tu me lo preguntas?
        Poesia ... eres tu.[2]

    [Footnote 1: We have here three hendecasyllabic verses of both
    classes, followed by a heptasyllabic. Notice the hiatus in the
    1st, 3d, and 4th verses. The 2d and 4th are _agudos_ and
    assonanced.]

    [Footnote 2: This thought is developed in the first of Becquer's
    _Cartas literarias a una mujer._]




XXIII[1]


    Por una mirada, un mundo;
  Por una sonrisa, un cielo;
  Por un beso... iyo no se
  Que te diera por un beso!

    [Footnote 1: Of these four octosyllabic verses the 2d and 4th are
    assonanced.]




XXVII[1]


    Despierta, tiemblo al mirarte;
      Dormida me atrevo a verte;
  Por eso, alma de mi alma,
      Yo velo mientras tu duermes.

    Despierta, ries; y al reir, tus labios
      Inquietos me parecen
  Relampagos de grana que serpean
      Sobre un cielo de nieve.

    Dormida,[2] los extremos de tu boca
      Pliega sonrisa leve,[3]
  Suave como el rastro luminoso
      Que deja un sol que muere...
      --iDuerme!

    Despierta, miras, y al mirar, tus ojos
      Humedos resplandecen
  Como la onda azul, en cuya cresta
      Chispeando el sol hiere.

    Al traves de tus parpados, dormida,
      Tranquilo fulgor viertes,
  Cual derrama de luz templado rayo
      Lampara transparente[4] ...
    --iDuerme!

    Despierta, hablas, y al hablar, vibrantes
      Tus palabras parecen
  Lluvia de perlas que en dorada copa
      Se derrama a torrentes?[5]

    Dormida, en el murmullo de tu aliento
      Acompasado y tenue,
  Escucho yo un poema, que mi alma
      Enamorada entiende ...
      --iDuerme!

    Sobre el corazon la mano
  Me he puesto, porque no suene
  Su latido, y de la noche
  Turbe la calma solemne.

    De tu balcon las persianas
  Cerre ya, porque no entre
  El resplandor enojoso
  De la aurora, y te despierte ...
    --iDuerme!

    [Footnote 1: The 1st, 8th, and 9th stanzas of this poem are in
    octosyllabic verses, and the rest in hendecasyllabic verses of
    both classes, with heptasyllabic verses alternating. A refrain of
    dissyllabic verse begins at the close of the 3d stanza and recurs
    after that regularly at the close of every other stanza. The even
    verses of each stanza have the same assonance throughout, as does
    the refrain. Notice the hiatus in the 3d verse of the 4th stanza
    and in the 1st verse of the 6th stanza.]

    [Footnote 2: Dormida. All of the texts that have been consulted
    read Despierta, but the contrast throughout the poem between the
    two ideas seems to warrant the reading given here, and Mrs. Ward
    in her translation of the poem (see _Macmillan's Mag._, Feb.,
    1883, p. 317) so renders it:

      _Asleep_, the corners of thy mouth
      A light smile upcurls,
      Sweet as the luminous trail
      Left by the dying sun--
      Sleep!]

    [Footnote 3: los ... leve. Prose order--_(una) leve sonrisa pliega
    los extremos..._]

    [Footnote 4: Cual... transparente. Prose order--_Cual_ (una)
    _lampara transparente derrama (un) templado rayo de luz._]

    [Footnote 5: Notice Mrs. Ward's translation of this stanza:

      Awake thou speak'st, and as thou speak'st, thy words
        Vibrating seem
      A rain of pearls that in a golden cup
        Plashes in torrents.

    See _Macmillan's Magazine_, February, 1883, p. 317.]




XXIX[1]


    Sobre la falda tenia
      El libro abierto;
  En mi mejilla tocaban
      Sus rizos negros;
  No veiamos las letras
      Ninguno, creo;
  Mas guardabamos entrambos
      Hondo silencio.
  ?Cuanto duro? Ni aun entonces
      Pude saberlo;
  Solo se que no se oia
      Mas que el aliento,
  Que apresurado escapaba
      Del labio seco.
  Solo se que nos volvimos
      Los dos a un tiempo,
  Y nuestros ojos se hallaron,
      Y sono un beso.

       *       *       *

    Creacio de Dante era el libro,
      Era su _Infierno_.[2]
  Cuando a el bajamos los ojos,
      Yo dije tremulo:
  --?Comprendes ya que un poema
      Cabe en un verso?[3]
    Y ella respondio encendida:
          --iYa lo comprendo!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of alternating octosyllabic and
    pentasyllabic verses, the latter having the same assonance
    throughout. Notice that the 5th verse from the end is _a verso
    esdrujulo_.]

    [Footnote 2: The most celebrated work of this world-famous poet
    (1265-1321) is the _Divina Commedia_ which is divided into three
    parts,--_Inferno, Purgatorio, Paradiso_. In the first of these, in
    Canto v, occurs the episode of Paolo and Francesca da Rimini,
    which is imitated in this poem. See p. 124, note 1.]

    [Footnote 3: Comprendes ... en un verso? The meaning of this
    phrase becomes clear when we compare it with the Italian original.

      _Quel giorno piu non vi leggemmo avante._
      That day we read in it no farther.]




XXX[1]


    Asomaba a sus ojos una lagrima
  Y a mi labio una frase de perdon;
  Hablo el orgullo y se enjugo su llanto,
  Y la frase en mis labios expiro.

    Yo voy por un camino, ella por otro;
  Pero al pensar en nuestro mutuo amor,
  Yo digo aun: ?Por que calle aquel dia?
  Y ella dira: ?por que no llore yo?

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    both classes. The even verses are _agudos_ and have the same
    assonance throughout. Note the _esdrujulo_ ending the lst verse.
    The thought of the poem is very similar to that of Heine's _Wann
    zwei van einander scheiden:_

      Often when two are parting,
      Each grasps a hand as friend;
      And then begins a weeping
      And a sighing without end.

      We did not sigh when parting;
      No tears between us fell;
      The weeping and the sighing
      Came after our farewell.

    _Lyrical Intermezzo, No. 55, translated by Chas. G. Leland._]





XXXI[1]


    Nuestra pasion fue un tragico sainete
  En cuya absurda fabula
  Lo comico y lo grave confundidos
  Risas y llanto arrancan.

    iPero fue lo peor de aquella historia
      Que al fin de la jornada,
  A ella tocaron lagrimas y risas,
      Y a mi solo las lagrimas!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    the first class alternating with regular heptasyllabic verses.
    Notice the _esdrujulos_ terminating the 2d and 8th verses. The
    even verses have the same assonance throughout.]




XXXIII[1]


    Es cuestion de palabras, y no obstante
      Ni tu ni yo jamas,
  Despues de lo pasado, convendremos
      En quien la culpa esta.

    iLastima que el amor un diccionario
      No tenga donde hallar
  Cuando el orgullo es simplemente orgullo,
      Y cuando es dignidad!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    both classes alternating with regular heptasyllabic verses, which
    latter are _agudos_ and have the same assonance throughout.]




XXXVII[1]


    iAntes que tu me morire: escondido
      En las entranas ya
  El hierro llevo con que abrio tu mano
      La ancha herida mortal!

    Antes que tu me morire: y mi espiritu
      En su empeno tenaz,
  Sentandose a las puertas de la muerte,
      Alli te esperara.

    Con las horas los dias, con los dias
      Los anos volaran,
  Y a aquella puerta llamaras al cabo...
      ?Quien deja de llamar?

    Entonces, que tu culpa y tus despojos
      La tierra guardara
  Lavandote en las ondas de la muerte
      Como en otro Jordan;[2]

    Alli, donde el murmullo de la vida
      Temblando a morir va,
  Como la ola que a la playa viene
      Silenciosa a expirar;

    Alli, donde el sepulcro que se cierra
      Abre una eternidad...
  Todo cuanto los dos hemos callado
      iLo tenemos[3] que hablar!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    both classes, alternating with regular heptasyllabic _versos
    agudos_, which latter have the same assonance throughout. Notice
    the _esdrujulo_ terminating the 5th verse, and the hiatus in the
    19th verse.]

    [Footnote 2: Jordan. The principal river of Palestine. The idea of
    cleansing by "washing in Jordan" comes originally from the account
    of Elisha's cure of Naaman as related in II Kings v. 10; but that
    of spiritual purification, from the New Testament account of the
    use made of the waters of Jordan by John the Baptist.]

    [Footnote 3: tenemos. The present tense is used here in the sense
    of the future.]




XXXVIII[1]


    Los suspires son aire, y van al aire.
  Las lagrimas son agua, y van al mar.
  Dime, mujer: cuando el amor se olvida,
      ?Sabes tu a donde va?

    [Footnote 1: The first two verses of this poem are hendecasyllabic
    of the first class, the 3d is a hendecasyllabic of the second
    class, and the closing verse is heptasyllabic. The even verses are
    _agudos_ and assonanced.]




XXXIX[1]


    ?A que me lo decis? lo se: es mudable,
  Es altanera y vana y caprichosa;
  Antes que el sentimiento de su alma,
  Brotara el agua de la esteril roca.

    Se que en su corazon, nido de sierpes,
  No hay una fibra que al amor responda;
  Que es una estatua inanimada... pero...
        iEs tan hermosa!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    both classes, with a closing pentasyllabic verse. The even verses
    have the same assonance throughout.]





XL[1]


    Su mano entre mis manos,
  Sus ojos en mis ojos,
  La amorosa cabeza
  Apoyada en mi hombro,
  iDios sabe cuantas veces
  Con paso perezoso,
  Hemos vagado juntos
  Bajo los altos olmos,
  Que de su casa prestan
  Misterio y sombra al portico!
  Y ayer... un ano apenas
  Pasado como un soplo,
  iCon que exquisita gracia,
  Con que admirable aplomo,
  Me dijo, al presentarnos
  Un amigo oficioso:
  "--Creo que en alguna parte
  He visto a usted.--" iAh! bobos,
  Que sois de los salones
  Comadres de buen tono,
  Y andais por alli a caza
  De galantes embrollos;
  iQue historia habeis perdido!
  iQue manjar tan sabroso
  Para ser devorado
  _Sotto voce_[2] en un corro,
  Detras del abanico
  De plumas y de oro!

       *       *       *

  iDiscreta y casta luna,
  Copudos y altos olmos,
  Paredes de su casa,
  Umbrales de su portico,
  Callad, y que el secreto
  No saiga de vosotros!
  Callad, que por mi parte
  Lo he olvidado todo:
  Y ella ... ella ... ino hay mascara
  Semejante a su rostro!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed entirely of heptasyllabic
    verses. Notice the _esdrujulos_ ending the 10th, 32d, and 37th
    verses. The even verses have the same assonance throughout.]

    [Footnote 2: Sotto voce: An Italian expression meaning 'in an
    undertone'. Translate here 'mid whispers'.]




XLII[1]


    Cuando me lo contaron senti el frio
  De una hoja de acero en las entranas,
  Me apoye contra el muro, y un instante
  La conciencia perdi de donde estaba.
    Cayo sobre mi espiritu la noche;
  En ira y en piedad se anego el alma...
  iY entonces comprendi por que se llora,
  Y entonces comprendi por que se mata![2]
    Paso la nube de dolor... con pena
  Logre balbucear breves, palabras...
  ?Quien me dio la noticia?... Un fiel amigo...
  iMe haci un gran favor!... Le di las gracias.


    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed entirely of hendecasyllabic
    verses, of both classes. The even verses have the same assonance
    throughout.]

    [Footnote 2: Compare Alfred de Mussel's description of a similar
    experience of his own, after his rupture with George Sand, which
    occurred in Venice in 1834 during the Italian journey.

      Lamartine, c'est la, dans cette rue obscure,
      Assis sur une borne, au fond d'un carrefour,
      Les deux mains sur mon coeur, et serrant ma blessure,
      Et sentant y saigner un invincible amour;
      C'est la, dans cette nuit d'horreur et de detresse,
      Au milieu des transports d'un peuple furieux
      Qui semblait en passant crier a ma jeunesse:
      "Toi qui pleures ce soir, n'as-ta pas ri comme eux?"
      C'est la, devant ce mur, ou j'ai frappe ma tete,
      Ou j'ai pose deux fois le fer sur mon sein nu;
      C'est la, le croiras-tu? chaste et noble poete,
      Que de tes chants divins je me suis souvenu.

                      _Lettre a Lamartine_.]




XLIII[1]


    Deje la luz a un lado, y en el borde
  De la revuelta cama me sente,
  Mudo, sombrio, la pupila inmovil
        Clavada en la pared.

    ?Que tiempo estuve asi-? No se: al dejarme
  La embriaguez horrible del dolor,
  Expiraba la luz, y en mis balcones
        Reia el sol.

    Ni se tampoco en tan terribles horas
  En que pensaba o que paso por mi;
  Solo recuerdo que llore y maldije,
  Y que en aquella noche envejeci.[2]

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    both classes, with a heptasyllabic verse closing the first stanza,
    and a pentasyllable verse closing the second stanza. The even
    verses of each Stanza are _agudos_ and assonanced.]

    [Footnote 2: This poem may have been inspired by the following
    lines of Alfred de Musset, describing his experience in Venice.
    See p. 181, note 1.

      Elle ne venait pas. Seul, la tete baissee,
      Je regardai longtemps les murs et le chemin,--
      Et je ne t'ai pas dit quelle ardeur insensee
      Cette inconstante femme allumait dans mon sein;
      Je n'aimais qu'elle au monde, et vivre un jour sans elle
      Me semblait un destin plus affreux que la mort.
      Je me souviens pourtant qu'en cette nuit cruelle
      Pour briser mon lien je fis un long effort.
           *       *       *       *       *       *
      Le jour parut enfin. Las d'une vaine attente,
      Sur le bord du balcon je m'etais assoupi;
      Je rouvris la paupiere A  l'aurore naissante,
      Et je laissai flotter mon regard ebloui.

                      _La Nuit d'Octobre._]





XLIX[1]


  Alguna vez la encuentro por el mundo
      Y pasa junto a mi:
  Y pasa sonriendose, y yo digo:
      ?Como puede reir?

  Luego asomo a mi labio otra sonrisa,
      Mascara del dolor,
  Y entonces pienso:--iAcaso ella se rie
      Como me rio yo!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    the first class, alternating with assonanced heptasyllabic
    _versos_ agudos.]





LII[1]


    Olas gigantes que os rompeis bramando
  En las playas desiertas y remotas,
  Envuelto entre la sabana de espumas,
      iLlevadme con vosotras!

    Rafagas de huracan, que arrebatais
  Del alto bosque las marchitas hojas,
  Arrastrado en el ciego torbellino,
      iLlevadme con vosotras!

    Nubes de tempestad, que[2] rompe el rayo
  Y en fuego ornais las desprendidas orlas,
  Arrebatado entre la niebla obscura,
      iLlevadme con vosotras!

    Llevadme, por piedad, adonde el vertigo
  Con[3] la razon me arranque la memoria...
  iPor piedad!... iTengo miedo de quedarme
      Con mi dolor a solas!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    both classes, with a heptasyllabic verse closing each stanza.
    Notice the _esdrujuto_ terminating the 13th verse. All even verses
    have the same assonance.]

    [Footnote 2: que rompe el rayo y ... ornais. Comparep. 10, note
    1, and p. 29, note 3.]

    [Footnote 3: Con = 'along with.']





LIII[1]


    Volveran las obscuras golondrinas
  En tu balcon sus nidos a colgar,
  Y, otra vez, con el ala a sus cristales
      Jugando llamaran.

    Pero aquellas que el vuelo refrenaban
  Tu hermosura y mi dicha a contemplar,
  Aquellas que aprendieron nuestros nombres...
      Esas... ino volveran!

    Volveran las tupidas madreselvas
  De tu jardi-n las tapias a escalar,
  Y otra vez a la tarde, aun mas hermosas,
      Sus flores se abriran;

    Pero aquellas, cuajadas de rocio,
  Cuyas gotas mirabamos temblar
  Y caer, como lagrimas del dia...
      Esas... ino volveran!

    Volveran del amor en tus oidos
  Las palabras ardientes a sonar;[2]
  Tu corazon de su profundo sueno
      Tal vez despertara;

    Pero mudo y absorto y de rodillas,
  Como se adora a Dios ante su altar,
  Como yo te he querido... desenganate,
      Asi no te querran![3]

    [Footnote 1: This is the most beautiful and the best known of
    Becquer's poems, and has often been set to music. It is composed
    of hendecasyllabic verses, mostly of the first class, with a
    heptasyllabic verse closing each stanza. Notice the _esdrujulo_
    terminating the next to the last verse. The even verses are agudos
    and of the same assonance throughout, with the alternate ones
    rhyming.]

    [Footnote 2: Volveran ... a sonar. Prose order--_Las ardientes
    palabras del amor volveran a sonar en tus oidos_.]

    [Footnote 3: "With this passionate and melancholy poem, full in
    the Spanish of cadences which cling to the memory, the love-story
    proper seems to come to an end. The remaining poems are all so
    many cries of melancholy and despair, without, however, any
    special reference to the treacherous mistress of the earlier
    series." Mrs. Ward, _A Spanish Romanticist_, Macmillan's Magazine,
    February, 1883, p. 319.]





LXVI[1]


    ?De donde vengo?... El mas horrible y aspero
        De los senderos busca;
  Las huellas de unos pies ensangrentados
        Sobre la roca dura;
  Los despojos de un alma hecha jirones
        En las zarzas agudas;
        Te diran el camino
        Que conduce a mi cuna.[2]

    ?Adonde voy? El mas sombrio y triste
        De los paramos cruza;
  Valle de eternas nieves y de eternas
        Melancolicas brumas.
  En donde este una piedra solitaria
        Sin inscripcion alguna,
        Donde habite el olvido,
        Alli estara mi tumba?[3]

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses,
    mostly of the first class, and of heptasyllabic verses. Notice the
    _esdrujulo_ ending the 1st verse. The even verses have the same
    assonance throughout.]

    [Footnote 2: "Read in the light of what we know of his long
    struggle, his frail physical health, his sensitive temper, his
    crushing double defeat at the hands of death, these somber verses
    have an individual, personal note, hardly present, perhaps, in the
    love-poems, with all their passionate beauty." Mrs. Ward, _A
    Spanish Romanticist_, Macmillan Magazine, February, 1883, p, 319.]

    [Footnote 3: "He used to dream, he tells us, in his boyish
    visions, of a marble tomb by the Guadalquivir, of which his
    fellow-townsmen should probably say as they pointed it out to
    strangers, 'Here sleeps the poet!' In his later days, oppressed
    with drudgery and ill-health, as he looked towards the future he
    bitterly saw himself forgotten, and oblivion settling down on all
    his half-finished activities of heart and brain." (Mrs. Ward,
    _ib_, p. 320.) It was in such a mood that he wrote this the most
    painful of all his poems.]





LXVIII[1]


      No se lo que he sonado
      En la noche pasada;
  Triste, muy triste debio ser el sueno,
  Pues despierto la angustia me duraba.

      Note, al incorporarme,
      Humeda la almohada,
  Y por primera vez senti, al notarlo,
  De un amargo placer henchirse el alma.

      Triste cosa es el sueno
      Que llanto nos arranca;
  Mas tengo en mi tristeza una alegria...
  iSe que aun me quedan lagrimas!

    [Footnote 1: Each stanza of this poem is composed of two
    heptasyllabic verses followed (except in the case of the third
    stanza which ends in a heptasyllabic verse) by two hendecasyllabic
    verses. The even verses have the same assonance throughout. Notice
    the _esdrujulo_ ending the poem.

    The thought in the poem recalls that of Heine's _Ich hab' im Traum
    geweinet_. Becquer's verses are less musical, but the sentiment
    expressed by them is less artificial, and gives evidence of more
    real bitterness of heart.

      I wept while I was dreaming
        That thou didst buried lie;
      I woke, and with my weeping
        My cheeks were not yet dry.

      I wept while I was dreaming
        That thou hadst gone from me;
      I woke, and still kept weeping
        Full long and bitterly.

      I wept while I was dreaming
        That thou didst love me well;
      I woke, and--woe is me, love--
        My tears are flowing still.

    _Lyrical Intermezzo, no. 59, translated by Chas. G. Leland._]





LXIX[1]



    Al brillar un relampago[2] nacemos,
  Y aun dura su fulgor, cuando morimos:
      iTan corto es el vivir![3]
    La gloria y el amor tras que corremos,
  Sombras de un sueno son que perseguimos:
      iDespertar es morir!

    [Footnote 1: Each stanza of this poem is composed of two
    hendecasyllabic verses of the first class, followed by a
    heptasyllabic _verso agudo_. The rhyme scheme of the poem is a, b,
    c, a, b, c.]

    [Footnote 2: Al brillar un relampago = 'At a lightning's flash';
    that is to say, at the first gleam from a flash of lightning.

    [Footnote 3: Tan corto es el vivir. The brevity of human life is
    naturally enough a favorite theme with poets. Compare--

      A Moment's Halt--a momentary taste
      Of BEING from the Well amid the Waste--
      And Lo!--the phantom Caravan has reached
      The NOTHING it set out from--
          Oh, make haste!

    _The Rubaiyat of Omay Khayyam, 48th quatrain, Edward Fitzgerald's
    translation._]




LXXIII[1]


    Cerraron sus ojos
  Que aun tenia abiertos;
  Taparon su cara
  Con un blanco lienzo:
  Y unos sollozando,
  Otros en silencio,
  De la triste alcoba
  Todos se salieron.

    La luz, que en un vaso,
  Ardia en el suelo,
  Al muro arrojaba
  La sombra del lecho;
  Y entre aquella sombra
  Veiase a intervalos,
  Dibujarse rigida
  La forma del cuerpo.

    Despertaba el dia,
  Y a su albor primero
  Con sus mil ruidos
  Despertaba el pueblo.
  Ante aquel contraste
  De vida y misterios,
  De luz y tinieblas,
  Medite un momento:
  "_iDios mio, que solos
  se quedan los muertos!!_"

    De la casa en hombros
  Llevaronla al templo,
  Y en una capilla
  Dejaron el feretro.
  Alli rodearon
  Sus palidos restos
  De amarillas velas
  Y de panos negros.[2]

    Al dar de las animas[3]
  El toque postrero,
  Acabo una vieja
  Sus ultimos rezos;
  Cruzo la ancha nave,
  Las puertas gimieron,
  Y el santo recinto
  Quedose desierto;

    De un reloj se oia
  Compasado el pendulo,
  Y de algunos cirios
  El chisporroteo.
  Tan medroso y triste,
  Tan obscuro y yerto,
  Todo se encontraba...
  Que pense un momento:
  "_iDios mio, que solos
  se quedan los muertos!!_"

    De la alta campana
  La lengua de hierro,
  Le dio, volteando,
  Su adios lastimero.
  El luto en las ropas,
  Amigos y deudos
  Cruzaron en fila,
  Formando el cortejo.

    Del ultimo asilo,
  Obscuro y estrecho,
  Abrio la piqueta
  El nicho a un extremo.[4]
  Alli la acostaron,
  Tapiaronle luego,
  Y con un saludo
  Despidiose el duelo.

    La piqueta al hombro,
  El sepulturero
  Cantando entre dientes
  Se perdio a lo lejos.
  La noche se entraba,
  Reinaba el silencio;
  Perdido en las sombras,
  Medite un momento:
  "_iDios mio, que solos
  se quedan los muertos?!_"

    En las largas noches
  Del helado invierno,
  Cuando las maderas
  Crujir hace el viento
  Y azota los vidrios
  El fuerte aguacero,
  De la pobre nina
  A solas me acuerdo.

    Alli cae la lluvia
  Con un son eterno;
  Alli la combate
  El soplo del cierzo.
  Del humedo muro
  Tendida en el hueco,
  Acaso de frio
  Se hielan sus huesos!...

       *       *       *

    ?Vuelve el polvo al polvo?
  ?Vuela el alma al cielo?
  ?Todo es vil materia,
  Podredumbre y cieno?
  iNo se;[5] pero hay algo
  Que explicar no puedo
  Que al par nos infunde
  Repugnancia y duelo,
  Al dejar tan tristes,
  Tan solos los muertos!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hexasyllabic verses. Notice
    the _esdrujulos_ terminating lines 14, 15, 30, 35, and 44. The
    even verses have the same assonance throughout.]

    [Footnote 2: De la casa ... panes negros. "The following are the
    chief points in the funeral rite as prescribed in the Roman
    Ritual. The corpse is borne in procession with lights to the
    church. The parish priest assists in surplice and black stole; the
    clerks carry the holy water and cross; the coffin is first
    sprinkled with holy water and the psalm _De Profundis_ recited;
    then the corpse is carried to the church while the Miserere is
    said.... Candles are lighted round the coffin, and the office and
    Mass of the dead, followed by absolution, accompanied by aspersion
    and incensation over the corpse, are said. Then another
    procession, and the corpse is carried to the tomb." Addis and
    Arnold, _Catholic Dict._, p. 361.

    [Footnote 3: las animas. The ringing of bells to remind the
    faithful to pray for the souls of the dead.]

    [Footnote 4: El nicho a un extremo. To understand this passage one
    must bear in mind that in Spanish graveyards corpses are generally
    interred in niches superimposed one above the other in high walls,
    like the pigeon-holes of a cabinet, and that these niches are
    sealed with stone tablets bearing the names etc. of the deceased.]

    [Footnote 5: No se. See p. 166, note 1.]





LXXV[1]



    ?Sera verdad que cuando toca el sueno
  Con sus dedos de rosa nuestros ojos
  De la carcel que habita huye el espiritu
      En vuelo presuroso?[2]

    ?Sera verdad que, huesped de las nieblas,
  De la brisa nocturna al tenue soplo,[3]
  Alado sube a la region vacia[4]
        A encontrarse con otros?

    ?Y alli, desnudo de la humana forma,
  Alli, los lazos terrenales rotos,
  Breves horas habita de la idea
        El mundo silencioso?

    ?Y rie y llora y aborrece y ama,
  Y guarda un rastro del dolor y el gozo,
  Semejante al que deja cuando cruza
        El cielo un meteoro?

    iYo no se si ese mundo de visiones
  Vive fuera, o va dentro de nosotros;[5]
  Pero se que conozco a muchas gentes
      A quienes no conozco![6]

    [Footnote 1: Each Stanza of this poem is composed of three
    hendecasyllabic verses followed by a heptasyllabic. Notice the
    _esdrujulo_ ending the 3d verse and the hiatus in the 5th verse.
    The even verses are of the same assonance throughout.

    [Footnote 2: cuando toca ... presaroso. Cicero says, in _De
    Divinatione_, I. 30. 63: _Jacet enim corpus dormientis ui mortui;
    viget autem et vivil animus,_ The body of the sleeper lies as
    though dead; but his mind lives and flourishes.

    [Footnote 3: Delabrisa ... soplo. Prose order--_Al tenue soplo de
    la brisa nocturna_.]

    [Footnote 4: sube a la region vacia = 'rises into space.']

    [Footnote 5: Vive fuera, o va dentro de nosotros = 'is an
    independent fact, or the product of our imagination.']

    [Footnote 6: conozco ... no conozco = 'I am acquainted with many
    people (because I have met them in thought or in dreams) whom I do
    not know (have never met in the flesh, nor heard of).' Having met
    other souls while wandering in dreams (line 8) or in some way
    equally difficult of rational explanation, I have a circle of
    acquaintances that transcends the list of those of whom I have
    knowledge in any recognized way. The thought is thus identical
    with that of Kipling's story "The Brushwood Boy."]




VOCABULARY


a, to, at, on, by, with, from, in, within, according to; _sign of the
object after transitive verbs before a personal object, and often
before any animate object;_ -- impulsos de, moved by, overcome by; --
lo largo de, along; -- mas de, besides; -- mas y mejor, the best they
could; the most possible; vying with one another; a -- la media hora,
within half an hour; -- medias, half; -- medio abrir, half open; al
parecer, seemingly; -- poco, in a little while; -- poco de, shortly
after; --los pocos minutos, within a few minutes; estar al ponerse, to
be about to set; -- proposito, suited, suitable, desirable; by the
way; apropos; -- lo que, as far as; from what; as; ?-- que? why?
wherefore? al reves, backwards; -- no saber, had I not known; -- no
ser, unless it be; -- no ser por, were it not for; -- solas, alone; --
tientas, groping; stealthily; -- traves de, across, through; -- vida,
alive; al vuelo, flying; on the wing.

abad, _m._, abbot.

abadesa, _f._, abbess.

abajo, under, below; de arriba --, from top to bottom, from end to end.

abalanzarse, to rush upon.

abandonar, to abandon, desert, leave, let go, give up.

abandono, _m._, abandonment, abandon.

abanico, _m._, fan.

abarcar, to embrace, take in.

abatido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ abatir, blown down, dimmed, dim.

abatir, to lower, take off, strike down; -- el vuelo, to alight.

abeja, _f._, bee.

abierto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ abrir, opened, open.

abigarrado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ abigarrar, flecked, variegated, motley.

abismo, _m._, abyss, deep, depth.

abofetear, to buffet, slap, strike.

abogado, _m._, intercessor.

aborrecer, to abhor, hate.

abortar, to eject, abort, give untimely birth to.

abrasador, burning, ardent.

abrasar, to burn.

abrazar, to embrace.

abrazo, _m._, embrace.

abrevar, to water.

abrigo, _m._, shelter, protection.

abril, _m._, April.

abrillantar, to light up, make sparkle, cause to shine.

abrir, to open, open up; -- paso, to clear the way, make room;

a medio --, half open; _subst._, opening; en un -- y cerrar de ojos,
in the twinkling of an eye; in an instant; _refl._, to open (up), be
disclosed; to burst, swell.

absolucion, _f._, absolution.

absolutamente, absolutely.

absorto, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.)_ of absorber, absorbed, amazed;
engrossed, spellbound.

abstraccion, _f._, abstraction, separation.

absurdo, -a, absurd; _subst. m._, absurdity, nonsense.

abuela, _f._, grandmother.

abuelo, _m._, grandfather.

abultar, to enlarge, increase.

abundancia, _f._, abundance.

abundante, abundant, luxuriant profuse.

aburrido, _adj. pp. of_ aburrir, tired, impatient.

aburrirse, to be bored, be perplexed grow impatient.

abusar, to impose (de, upon).

aca, here; de -- ... de aculla, here ... there; de -- para alla, from
point to point; hither and thither por --, in this direction.

acabar, to finish, end, close, succeed in; -- de, to have just; lo que
acababa de suceder, what had just happened; lo que acabamos de
escuchar, what we have just listened to; iAcabaramos de una vez! well
and good! quien (en) mal anda, (en) mal acaba, a bad beginning makes a
bad ending.

acaecer, to happen, befall.

acalorado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ acalorar, heated, hot.

acariciar, to caress, fondle, delight.

acaso, _m._, chance; por --, perchance; _adv._, perhaps, perchance.

accidentado, -a, broken, rugged.

accidente, _m._, accident, property, peculiarity, roughness,
irregularity.

accion, _f._, act, action.

acecho, _m._, ambush.

aceite, _m._, oil.

acento, _m._, tone, accent, voice, word, expression; decia aun su --,
his accents kept repeating.

acerca: -- de, about.

acercar, to approach, bring near; _refl._, to approach.

acero, _m._, steel; sword.

acertado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ acertar, ascertained, accurate.

acertar, to succeed, be able; -con, to hit upon, find, be certain of.

acicate, _m._, spur, rowel.

aclimacion, _f._, acclamation.

aclamar, to acclaim.

acoger, to receive; _refl._, to resort, take refuge.

acometedor, _m._, undertaker, one who undertakes.

acometer, to attack, seize.

acomodar, to accommodate, lodge, quarter, furnish with lodging.

acompanamiento, _m._, accompaniment.

acompaiiante, _m._, companion.

acompanar, to accompany.

acompasado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ acompasar measured, regular.

aconsejar, to counsel, advise.

acontecer, to happen.

acordarse, to recollect, remember; -- de, to remember.

acorde, _m._, accord, harmony.

acortarse, to slacken, abate, diminish.

acosar, to molest, harass.

acostar, to lay, place; _refl._, to lie down, go to bed.

acostumbrar, to accustom; to be accustomed.

actitud, _f._, attitude, posture; colocarse en -- de defensa, to fall
on guard.

acto, _m._, act, occasion, incident; -- continuo, straightway,
immediately, immediately afterward.

actor, _m._, actor.

actual, present.

acuatico, -a, aquatic.

acudir, to go, come, repair to, run up, hasten, gather, flock, rush.

acuerdo, _m._, agreement; ponerse de --, to come to an agreement; to
agree.

aculla, there; ... de aca ... de --, ... here ... there.

acurrucarse, to conceal oneself; to crouch down.

acusar, to accuse; -- de, to accuse as (_or_ of) being.

adarme, _m._, half a drachm (_or_ dram); minute quantity; mite; dos
--s de imaginacion, the least bit of imagination.

adelantar, to advance, proceed; _refl._, to advance, proceed,
approach, go, hasten.

adelante, forward, further; desde alli en --, from that time on; hacia
--; forward; mas --, further on, later; i--! forward!

ademan, _m._, attitude, gesture, manner, action, motion.

adentro, within.

aderezar, to get ready, prepare, clean.

adios, _m._, farewell; i--! good-by!

adivinar, to divine, guess, observe, note.

administrar, to administer.

admirable, admirable.

admiracion, _f._, admiration, wonder.

admirar, to admire, esteem; _refl._, to be seized with admiration; to
marvel.

admitir, to admit, receive.

adolescencia, _f._, adolescence.

adonde (and adonde), _int. (and rel.) adv. and conj._, whither, where;
-- quiera, wheresoever, wheresoe'er.

adoracion, _f._, worship, adoration, devotion; _pl., same meanings._

adorador, _m._, adorer.

adormido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ adormir, drowsy, heavy with sleep.

adornar, to adorn.

adosado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ adosar, placed (resting, standing, _or_
leaning) against.

adulador, fawning.

advertencia, _f._, advice, information.

advertir, to notice, advise, inform, warn; pues es de --, and you must
remember (know _or_ bear in mind).

aereo, -a, aerial, of (_or_ pertaining to) the air.

afable, courteous, gracious.

afan, _m._, eagerness, eager desire.

afectado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ afectar, feigned, affected.

afectar, to affect.

afilado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ afilar, sharpened, sharp.

afilar, to grind, whet, sharpen.

afirmar, to affirm, assert.

afligido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ afligir, afflicted, wretched, miserable.

afligir, to afflict, make wretched (_or_ miserable).

afortunadamente, fortunately.

agarrarse, to grasp, clasp, seize, hold tightly.

agasaparse, to conceal oneself.

agil, agile, fleet.

agilidad, _f._, agility, celerity.

agitacion, _f._, excitement, agitation.

agitar, to agitate, move, shake; _refl._, to move restlessly, be
agitated; to wave, flutter.

agolparse, to crowd, rush.

agonia, _f._, agony, act of expiring.

agotar, to exhaust.

agradable, agreeable, pleasant.

agrupar, to group, collect; _refl._ to come together; to assemble,
collect.

agua, _f._, water; -- bendita, holy water.

aguacero, _m._, shower, torrent of rain.

aguardar, to expect, await, wait for; hacerse --, to delay in
appearing.

agudo, -a, sharp, acute, biting, piercing.

aguijonear, to thrust, impel, drive (_or_ spur) on.

aguja, _f._, needle, spire.

agujero, _m._, hole.

iah! ah! oh!

ahi, here, there; por --, hereabouts.

ahogar, to suffocate, smother, drown; to be repressed (_or_ confined).

ahora, now; desde --, from now on.

ahorcar, to hang.

aire, _m_, air, look, appearance, manner, tune, melody.

airoso, -a, airy, graceful; mas airosa, with better grace; _adv._,
gracefully.

aislado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ aislar, isolated.

ajimez, _m._, ajimez, pointed (_or_ arched) double window divided in
the middle by a column.

ajorca, _f._ bracelet.

al = a + el; -- salir, as I was going out.

ala, _f._, wing, pinion.

alabastro, _m._, alabaster.

alado, -a, winged, soaring.

alali, _m._, alali, a hunting cry.

alameda, _f._, grove of poplar-trees.

alamo, _m._ poplar, white poplar.

alargar, to extend, raise.

alarido, _m._, outcry, shout, howl, yell.

alarma, _m. or f._, alarm; poner en --, to alarm.

alazan, _m._, sorrel horse.

alba, _f._: dawn.

albedrio, _m._, free will; con libre --, of (her) own free will.

albergarse, to take up lodgings.

albino, _m._, albino.

albor, _m._, (poet.) dawn.

alborotar, to disturb; _refl._, to be disturbed, be turbulent.

alboroto, _m._, disturbance, noise.

alborozado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ alborozar, exhilarated, rejoicing,
gleeful, joyous.

alborozo, _m._, joy, rejoicing, rapture.

alcaide, _m._, jailer, warden, governor (of a castle).

alcance, _m._, reach, range.

alcanzar, to succeed, be able; to overtake, reach, attain, come to; to
comprehend; a la (gente) que sele alcanza, those (persons) who are
good judges of.

alcazar, _m._, castle.

aldaba, _f._, bar, cross-bar, knocker.

aldea, _f._, village, hamlet.

aldeano, _m._, peasant, villager.

alegar, to allege, adduce.

alegrarse, to rejoice, exult, be glad.

alegre, pleasant, joyful, bright, joyous, merry.

alegremente, joyfully, merrily.

alegria, _f._, joy, gladness.

alejar, to remove, take away; _refl._, to go away, disappear.

alerce, _m._, larch, genus of coniferous trees.

alfombra, _f._, carpet, rug.

Alfonso, _m._, Alphonso.

alga, _f._, seaweed, alga.

algarabia, _f._, jargon, babble, clatter, hubbub.

algazara, _f._, rejoicing, shout(s), shouting.

algo, something, anything, some what; -- es --, something is better
than nothing; that is something.

algodon, _m._, cotton.

alguacil, _m._, constable, alguazil.

algun. See alguno.

alguno, -a, some, any; -- que otro, here and there one; a very few;
some.

aliaga, _f._, furze, a thorny evergreen shrub with beautiful yellow
flowers.

aliento, _m._, breath.

aligerar, to lighten, ease.

alimana, _f._, (_obs._) animal.

aliviar, to alleviate, mitigate, relieve.

alma, _f._, soul, spirit.

almena, _f._, turret.

almohada, _f._, pillow.

alojamiento, _m._, lodging, quarters.

alojarse, to lodge, find lodgings (_or_ quarters).

alondra, _f._, lark.

Alonso, _m._, Alonzo, Alphonso.

alqueria, _f._, farmhouse.

alrededor, around; -- de, about, round; a su --, around him; _subst.
m. pl._, environs, neighborhood.

altanero, -a, haughty, proud.

altar, _m._, altar; -- mayor, high altar, chief altar.

alterarse, to be disturbed.

alternado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ alternar, alternating, intermittent,
recurrent.

alteza, _f._, highness.

altisimo, -a, _abs. super. of_ alto, very high, lofty.

altivo, -a, haughty.

alto, -a, tall, high, deep, lofty; important, late, loud; en la alta
noche, in the dead of night; late at night; _subst. m._, height,
summit, top.

alto, _m._, halt; mandar hacer --, to give orders to halt; i--! halt!

altura, _f._, height, summit.

alucinacion, _f._, hallucination.

alumbrar, to give light to; to enable to see; to light up.

alzar, to raise, lift up; _refl._, to rise, heave.

alla, there; mas --, farther; beyond; on past; -- al filo de la media
noche, just about midnight; -- por ..., back there in...; port --, in
that direction, thither, there; de aca para --, from point to point;
hither and thither.

allegados, _m. pl._, friends, allies.

allegar, to collect, get together.

alli, there; desde en adelante, from that time on; ya --, (when they
had) arrived there.

amado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ amar, beloved, loved.

amaestrar, to break in; to train, teach

amalgama, _f._, amalgamation, mixture

amanecer, to dawn; all --, at dawn; at break of day; hasta el --, till
break of day; until dawn; nos amanecia llorando, doawn found us
weeping.

amante, _subst. m. or f._, lover, beloved, loved one.

amar, to love.

amargo, -a, bitter, painful.

amarillo, -a, yallow

ambicion, _f._, ambition.

ambito, m. confines, inclosure, body, compass.

ambos, -as, both.

amenaza, _f._, threat, menace.

amenazador, menacing, threatening.

amenazar, to threaten.

amigablemente, amicably, pleasantly.

amigo, _m._, friend.

amigote, _m._ great friend, intimate friend.

amistad, _f._, friendship.

amonestacion, _f._, advice, admonition, warning.

amontonar, to pile up, heap up, crowd together.

amor, _m._, love; sweetheart; -- propio, self-love, conceit, vanity.

amoroso, -a, amorous, loving, dear.

amortiguar, to temper, soften.

amparar, to protect, aid, assist, help.

amparo, _m._, succor, protection, refuge.

amplio, -a, full.

analizar, to analyze.

anciano, -a, old, aged, ancient; _subst. m. or f._, old man, old
woman; _m. pl._, old people, elders.

ancho, -a, large, broad.

anchuroso, -a, spacious.

andar, to go, walk, act, be; a mas --, at full speed; como se las
entrase a mas -- el dia, as the day went on; as the day passed (for
them); -- penando, to suffer torment; -- por, to go about, be current
in; -- mas de sobra, to be more in excess; a los talones, to follow
closely; de algun tiempo a esta parte anda, (who) for some time now
has been; quien (en) mal anda, (en) mal acaba, a bad beginning makes a
bad ending.

andas, _f. pl._, bier (with shafts), stretcher, litter.

andurriales, _m. pl._, by-roads, retired spots, out-of-the-way places.

anegarse, to be inundated (_or_ submerged).

anfiteatro, _m._, amphitheater.

anfitrion, _m._, amphitr-yon, host.

angel, _m._, angel.

angosto, -a, narrow, close.

angulo, _m._, angle, corner.

anguloso, -a, angular.

angustia, _f._, anguish.

angustioso, -a, full of anguish, heartrending, desperate, terrible,
agonizing.

anilla, _f._, ring.

anillo, _m._, ring, coil.

anima,_f._, soul; en Dios y en mi --, in very truth; God knows (that
it is true).

animacion, _f._, animation.

animado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ animar, animated, enlivened, heated, moved,
encouraged, heightened.

animadversion, _f._, censure, reproof, hostility.

animal, _m._, animal.

animar, to animate, encourage, urge on.

animo, _m._, mind, thought, intention, spirit; recobrar el --, to
recover one's senses; to come to oneself.

anoche, last night.

ansia, _f._, anxiety, agony; eager desire, love, longing.

ansiedad, _f._, anxiety; con --, anxiously.

ansioso, -a, anxious, eager, desirous.

ante, before, in the presence of.

antemano: de --, beforehand, previously.

antepasados, _m. pl._, ancestors.

antepecho, _m._, breastwork, balcony, balustrade.

anterior, former; la noche --, the night before.

anteriormente, previously, before.

antes, formerly, before, first, rather, once; -- de, before; -- de
tiempo, prematurely; before it was ripe; -- que, before; rather than,
sooner than; far from; las -- losas sepulcrales, the once sepulchral
slabs.

antiguo, -a, old, ancient, former.

antojarse, to have a fancy (_or_ desire) (_used only in the 3rd person
sing., with_ me, te, le, etc.); antojabaseme, it seemed to me; I
fancied.

antojo, _m._, whim, fancy, caprice.

anublar, to cloud, darken.

anudarse, to become choked; to die away.

anunciar, to announce, foretell.

anuncio, _m._, announcement.

anadidura, _f._; addition; por --, besides, in addition.

anadir, to add.

ano, _m._, year; el -- que viene, next year; alla por los --s de mil
trescientos y pico, back there in the year thirteen hundred and
something.

anoso, -a, old, ancient.

apacible, placid, quiet, pleasant, peaceful, serene.

apaciguarse, to be (_or_ become) calm; to be appeased.

apagar, to put out, extinguish, quench; _refl._, to go out, die out,
be extinguished; to become calm (_or_ silent).

apalear, to beat, cudgel.

aparecer, to appear.

aparicion, _f._, appearance, apparition.

apariencia, _f._, appearance.

apartar, to take away, remove, put aside, separate; -- la vista, to
look away; _refl._, to depart, swerve.

aparte de, aside from.

apasionado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ apasionar, passionate.

apearse, to alight, dismount.

apedrear, to stone.

apelar, to appeal.

apellidar, to call.

apenas, hardly, barely; -- si, hardly, barely; -- si pudiera, I could
scarcely.

apercibir, to prepare, get ready; to warn.

apilar, to pile (_or_ heap) up.

apinado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ apinar, pyramidal, heaped up, crowded,
closely pressed, dense; --os grupos, dense crowds, closely packed
groups; -as matas, tangled (_or_ dense) shrubbery (_or_ under-brush);
-as olas, tossing waves.

apinar, to heap up, press (_or_ crowd) together; to mass; _refl._, to
a crowd.

aplastar, to flatten, crush, weigh down, smash, destroy.

aplauso, _m._, applause; _pl._, applause.

aplicar, to apply.

aplomo, _m._, assurance, self-possession.

apoderarse, to take possession (de, of).

aposentador, _m._, quartermaster; sargento --, quartermaster-sergeant.

apostarse, to post oneself, take up a position.

apoyado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ apoyar, supported, leaning.

apoyarse, to rest, be supported, support oneself, bear upon, lean (en,
on, upon).

apreciar, to value, appreciate.

aprecio, _m._, esteem, regard.

aprehender, to take; to capture.

aprender, to learn; -- de memoria, to memorize, learn by heart.

aprension, _f._, apprehension, imagination, groundless fear (de, on
the part of).

aprestarse, to make preparations.

apresurar, to hasten, quicken; _refl._, to hasten, make haste.

apresurado, _adj. pp. of_ apresurar, quickened, hasty, rapid, in
haste, convulsive; _adv._, convulsively.

apretado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ apretar, crowded, dense, difficult.

aprisionar, to confine, imprison.

aprobar, to approve, show one's pleasure.

aproposito de, about, with regard to.

aprovechar, to take advantage of, profit by, avail oneself of, seize..

aproximacion, _f._, approach, proximity.

aproximarse, to approach, draw near; ir aproximando, to approach.

apurar, to exhaust, clean up, drain; to try, test.

apuro, _m._, difficulty, straits.

aquel, --la, --lo, that.

aquel, --la, --lo, the one, that one, the former.

aqui, here; pasar de --, to go (any) further (_or_ farther); por --,
here, hereabouts, hither; he --, here is (_or_ are); behold.

ara, _f._, altar.

arabe. Arabic, Moorish.

aragones, Aragonese, of (_or_ pertaining to) Aragon.

arana, _f._, spider.

arbol, _m._, tree.

arbusto, _m._, shrub, bush.

arca, _f._, chest, coffer.

arcada, _f._, arcade, arch.

arcangel, _m._, archangel.

arco, _m._, arch, archway, entrance

arch, niche, recess; --iris, rainbow.

arder, to burn, blaze, glow.

ardid, _m._, cunning, trick.

ardiente, ardent, fiery, burning, glowing.

ardor, _m._, ardor, fire, heat.

ardoroso, -a, burning, glowing.

arena, _f._, sand.

arista, _f._, straw; fiber (of plants).

arma, _f._, arm, weapon; el haz de --s, panoply; hacer sus (primeras)
--s, to learn fencing.

armada, _f._, fleet, armada.

armadura, _f._, annor

armar, to arm.

armario, _m._, wardrobe, cabinet; no tener su alma en su --, not to
have one's soul in the right place; to have one's soul in an abnormal
condition.

armonia, _f._, harmony.

armonico, -a, harmonious, without discord; melodious, with sweet
sounds.

armonioso, -a, harmonious, regular, beautiful.

aroma, _m._, aroma, odor, perfume.

arpa, _f._, harp, lyre.

arpon, _m._, harpoon, javelin, shaft.

arqueologo, _m._, archaeologist.

arquero, _m._, archer, bowman.

arrancar, to pull off, snatch away, pull out, tear, wrest, draw,
obtain, deprive of; to produce; to awaken suddenly.

arrancharse, to camp; to mess.

arranque, _m._, passion, burst of passion.

arrastrar, to trail, drag along the ground, draw on, attract, bring
up, take, carry, drag, touch, draw away; _refl._, to drag oneself; to
creep, crawl, drag along the ground, trail; to be convinced, be
induced.

arrebatar, to carry off, snatch away.

arrebato, _m._, transport.

arrebolar, to redden.

arrebujarse, to wrap oneself up.

arreglar, to regulate.

arremolinar, to whirl; to heap (or pile) up.

arrepentido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ arrepentirse, repented, repentant.

arrepentirse, to repent.

arriba, above, over, up; de -- abajo, from top to bottom; from end to
end.

arriesgarse, to venture, risk oneself (por, through, in).

arrodillado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ arrodillarse, kneeling, on one's knees.

arrodillarse, to kneel.

arrogante, handsome, commanding.

arrojar, to throw, cast, fling, hurl forth; to shed, pour, emit,
utter; _refl._, to cast oneself; to fall.

arrostrar, to brave, face, encounter.

arroyo, _m._, rivulet, small stream.

arruinar, to ruin.

arte, _m. or f._, art, artifice, trick.

articular, to speak, utter.

artista, _m._, artist.

artistico, -a, artistic.

arzobispo, _m._, archbishop.

asalto, _m._, assault, storm.

asaz, (_poet._) quite, enough.

ascenso, _m._, ascent.

asco, _m._, nausea, loathing.

ascua, _f._, coal, glowing coal.

asegurar, to assert, assure, secure.

asemejar, to resemble; _refl._, to resemble.

asenderear, to persecute.

asentarse, to be seated; to sit down; to be situated.

asentimiento, _m._, assent.

asesinar, to assassinate.

asesinato, _m._, assassination, murder.

asi, thus, so.

asiduidad, _f._, assiduity, assiduous attention, zeal.

asiento, _m._, seat, chair.

asilo, _m._, asylum, sanctuary, shelter, refuge.

asir, to seize, grasp, lay hold of.

asistente, _m._, chief justice (of Seville); servant, orderly.

asistir, to be present; to assist; to witness.

asomado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ asomar, appearing, looking out.

asomar, to appear, be visible, loom up, look up, put out, show; en
hablando del ruin de Roma, catale aqui que asoma, speak of the devil
and he will appear.

asombrado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ asombrar, wondering, astonished,
frightened, terrified, anxious.

asombro, _m._, astonishment, surprise.

asombroso, -a, astonishing, marvelous.

aspecto, _m._, sight, appearance, aspect.

aspero, -a, rough, harsh, unkempt, rugged.

aspid, _m._, aspic, asp.

aspirar, to breathe in.

asqueroso, -a, loathsome, noisome.

asta, _f._, shaft, staff, trunk, body.

astilla, _f._, chip, splinter.

astro, _m._, star.

astuto, -a, cunning, crafty, sly.

asunto, _m._, circumstance, matter.

affair, event, incident, subject.

asustar, to frighten.

atabal, _m._, drum, kettledrum.

atajar, to stop.

atar, to bind, tie; -- bien corto, to tie very short; to hold in
strict subjection; -- de pies y manos, to bind hand and foot.

ateismo, _m._, atheism, unbelief.

atencion, _f._, attention.

atender, to pay attention to; to expect.

atento, -a, attentive, heedful.

aterrador, terrifying, frightful.

aterrar, to frighten, terrify.

atillo, _m._, bundle.

atmosfera, _f._, atmosphere.

atolondrado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ atolondrar, perplexed, confused; giddy,
wild, heedless.

atomo, _m._, atom, particle.

atonito, -a, astonished, amazed.

atractivo, _m._, charm, attraction.

atraer, to draw, attract, bring down.

atras; back, backwards; -- de, behind.

atravesar, to cross, traverse.

atreverse, to dare, venture, have the courage.

atrevido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ atreverse, daring, bold, rash, audacious.

atrevimiento, _m._, boldness, rashness.

atribulado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ atribular, afflicted, vexed, suffering.

atrio, _m._, portico, church porch.

atronador, deafening, thundering, thunderous.

atropellarse, to hurry, rush.

aturdido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ aturdir, perturbed, confused, bewildered,
stupefied, astonished, agitated.

aturdir, to disturb, confuse, bewilder.

auditorio, _m._, audience.

aullar, to howl.

aun (or aun), even, still, yet; no ... ni --, not even; -- cuando,
although; -- que, although.

aunque, although.

aura, _f._, gentle breeze, zephyr.

aurora, _f._ dawn.

ausencia, _f._, absence.

ausente, absent.

auto, _m._, judicial decree or sentence; warrant, edict; -- de fe,
public punishment by the Inquisition, often a public burning; (hence)
a great fire, a bonfire, a fire.

autor, _m._, author.

autoridad, _f._, authority.

autorizar, to authorize

avanzado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ avanzar, advanced, late.

avanzar, to advance, progress.

avaro, -a, miserly, avaricious

ave, _f._, bird.

avenida, _f._, approach, avenue.

aventura, _f._, adventure, event, incident.

aventurarse, to venture.

aventurero, _m._, adventurer, knight errant.

averiguar, to inquire, find out, investigate.

avidez, _f._, avidity; con --, eagerly.

avisado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ avisar, advised, informed.

aviso, _m._, warning.

iay! alas! ayes, _subst. m. pl._, lamentations.

ayer yesterday.

ayuda, _f._, aid, help, means.

ayudar, to aid, help.

ayuntamiento, _m._, municipal government, town (_or_ city) hall.

azar, _m._, hazard; al --, at hazard; at random.

azaroso, -a, hazardous, adventurous, venturesome.

azotar, to whip, lash, beat against, strike, cut.

azucena, _f._, lily, white lily.

azul, blue; -- turqui, dark blue; _subst. m._, blue, indigo.

azulado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ azular, azured, bluish, indigo, blue.

azuzar, to set on, let loose, urge on.


B


bagaje, _m._, baggage; _pl._, baggage (of an army).

ibah! bah!, nonsense!

bajar, to descend, lower, sink down, let fall, cast down, come down.

bajel, _m._, ship.

bajo, -a, low; _adv._, underneath, under, beneath.

balanceado. -a, _adj. pp. of_ balancear, balanced, swayed, swaying.

balancearse, to sway, totter, reel.

balbucear, to stammer.

balcon, _m._, balcony, casement window, balcony casement window.

balde: en --, in vain, vainly.

balsa, _f._, pool, lake.

Baltasara, _f._, (_Span._) Raltasara.

ballesta, _f._;, crossbow.

ballestero, _m._, archer, crossbowman.

banda, _f._, band, gang, flock.

bandada,_f,_, flock, crowd, band, swarm.

bandido, _m._, bandit.

bando, _m._, flock, flight.

bandolera, _f._, bandoleer, hunting-belt (slung across the shoulder).

banquillo, _m._, stool, bench.

banar, to bathe, wash.

baquico, -a, bacchanal, bacchanalian.

barajarse, to writhe.

barandal, _m._, balustrade, railing.

barba, _f._, beard; _pl._, beard; y se le rieron en sus --s; and they
laughed in his face.

baron, _m._, baron, lord.

barra, _f._, bar.

barranco, _m._, gorge, precipice.

barrio, _m._, ward, quarter.

base, _f._, base, basis.

basta, enough, halt, stop.

bastante, sufficient, enough, sufficiently, rather, considerable; lo
--, sufficiently, enough.

bastar, to be sufficient; baste, let that suffice; enough.

batallar, to disagree, battle, be at odds.

batir, to beat, strike, clap; -- el cobre de firme, to be most
diligent; -- las palmas, to clap the hands; _subst._, beating; _refl._
to fight a duel.

beata, _f._, pious woman; lay sister.

bebedor, _m._, tippler, toper.

beber, to drink.

belleza, _f._, beauty.

bellisimo, -a, _abs._ supper. of bello, very (_or_ most) beautiful.

bello, -a, beautiful, handsome.

bendecir, to consecrate, bless.

bendicion, _f._, benediction, blessing; que era una -- del cielo, in a
surprising way.

bendito, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ bendecir, blessed, holy,
consecrated.

benevolo, -a, benevolent, gracious.

besar, to kiss; to touch; llegar y -- el santo, to succeed in a brief
space of time; to find good fortune quickly.

beso; _m._, kiss.

biblioteca, _f._, library.

bien, _m._, good deed (or act), good, benefit; un -- de caridad, a
good turn, a benevolent favor; _pl._, property; _adv._, well, very; si
--, although, even if; mas --, rather; pues --, well, well then, well
now; o --, or, or else; -- ... o, whether ... or; either, or; porque
... o por ser, whether because ... or because it was; -- que ... --
que, whether ... or; either because ... or because.

bigote, _m._, mustache.

birrete, _m._, cap, barret.

bisojo, -a, cross-eyed.

bizarro, -a, gallant, brave, highspirited, generous.

blanco, -a, white.

blancura, _f._, whiteness, whiteness of complexion.

blancusco, -a, whitish, gray.

blandamente, softly.

blandir, to brandish.

blando, -a, soft.

blanquear, to whiten, shine white; to bleach.

blasfemar, to blaspheme, curse.

blasfemia, _f._, blasphemy.

blason, _m._, blazon.

bobo, _m._, dunce, fool.

boca, _f._, mouth; de --, on (his) face; de manos a --, all of a
sudden; unexpectedly; punto en --, silence, hush.

boca-calle, _f._, entrance (end _or_ opening) to a street.

bocado, _m._, morsel, bite.

boceto, _m._, sketch, outline.

bocina, _f._, trumpet, horn, bugle.

bofetada, _f._, buffet, blow.

bofeton, _m._, slap, blow.

bondad, _f._, kindness, goodness.

bondadoso, -a, benevolent, kind.

bonito, -a, pretty, charming, good, fine.

borceguf, _m._, buskin.

bordar, to border, embroider.

borde, _m._, edge, border, brink, bank.

bordon, _m._, staff.

borracho, -a, drunk, intoxicated.

borrar, to efface, erase; _refl._, to be effaced (_or_ blotted out).

borrascoso, -a, stormy, angry.

bosque, _m._, grove, forest, wood.

bosquecillo, _m._, coppice.

bosquejar, to sketch, paint.

bote, _m._, bound; boat; canister; box, toilet box, estar de -- en --,
to be cram full; to be completely filled.

botella, _f._, bottle.

Botero. See caldera.

botin, _m._, booty.

boton, _m._, button, bud.

boveda, _f._, arch, vault.

bramar, to roar.

bramido, _m._, bellow, bellowing, belling; calling; clamor, noise,
blast.

ibravo! bravo!

brazo, _m._, arm.

brecha, _f._, breach.

brena, _f._, bramble, brambles, thicket.

breve, short, brief; en-s palabras, in a few words.

brevisimo, -a, _abs._ sapper, of breve, very (_or_ most) brief.

brial, _m._, skirt, rich silken skirt.

brida, _f._, bridle.

brigada, _f._, brigade; general de --, brigadier-general.

brillante, brilliant, bright, radiant, clear.

brillar, to shine, gleam.

brillo, _m._, gleam, glitter, light, brilliancy, brightness.

brinco, _m._, leap, bound; dar un --, to leap, bound, jump.

brindar, to offer; to toast, drink a toast.

brindis, _m._, toast.

brisa, _f._, breeze.

brocade, _m._, brocade.

broma, _f._, rubbish; jest, joke; echar a --, to take (_or_ consider)
as a joke (_or_ jest).

bromear, to jest, joke, banter.

bronce, _m._, bronze.

broquel, _m._, shield, buckler.

brotar, to bud; to gush, issue, flow, burst forth, gush out.

bruja, _f._, witch.

brujeria, _f._, witchcraft.

bruma, _f._, mist, fog.

brunido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ brunir, burnished, polished.

bruto, _m._, brute, beast; clownish (_or_ ignorant) fellow.

buen. See bueuo.

bueno, -a, good, kind, well, fine; una buena, a good one; a warm
reception; Noche Buena, Christmas eve; mass of Christmas eve; --s
evaugelios, some holy sayings; some of the holy Scriptures; de buen
tono, fashionable; _subst._ _m._, good man, Christian.

buffet, _m._, (_French_) buffet, refreshment table.

bufido, _m_)., snort.

bufon, _m._, buffoon.

buho, _m._, owl.

bulto, _m._, bust, figure, form.

bulla, _f._, noise.

bullicio, _m._, bustle, noise, excitement.

bullicioso, -a, lively, restless, noisy, boisterous.

burla, _f._, joke, jest, jesting, scoffing, trick; hacer --, to play a
joke (_or_ trick).

burlado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ burlar, cheated, deceived, mocked, made
sport of, destroyed.

burlarse, to jest, mock, laugh at, make sport of.

burlon, jesting, joking, scoffing, mocking.

busca, _f._, search; echar en --, to go (_or_ set off) in search;
vamos en su --, let us look for her, let us go to her.

buscar, to seek, look for.

busilis, _m._, mystery.


C


cabal, just, exact, quite.

cabalgadura, _f._, beast (of burden), steed, mount.

cabalgar, to ride; to parade on horseback.

cabalgata, _f._, cavalcade.

caballeria, _f._, horse, mount, saddlehorse, chivalry; _pl._,
chivalrous deeds.

caballero, _m._, knight, gentleman, lord, sir.

cabecear, to nod; to shake (_or_ toss) the head.

cabecera, _f._, head, head-piece, top (of the cross).

cabellera, _f._, hair.

cabello, _m._, hair; _pl._, hair.

caber, to be contained; to find room; to be; no cabia duda, there was
no doubt.

cabeza, _f._, head, head of hair.

cabezo, _m._, summit, peak.

cabo, _m._, end; al --, finally; llevar a --, to carry out; to
execute; to terminate successfully.

caceria, _f._, hunting expedition, hunting party.

cada, each, every; -- uno, each one; -- vez, each time; ever,
continually.

cadaver, _m._, corpse, cadaver.

cadena, _f._, chain.

cadencia, _f._, measure, beat, strain, cadence, cadenza.

caer, to fall; to strike (against something in falling); -- a pedazos,
to fall to pieces.

caida, _f._, fall.

calabozo, _m._, dungeon, cell.

calado, -a, of openwork; of fretwork; _pp. of_ calar, (of the hat)
pulled down, pressed down (over the eyes).

calamidad, _f._, calamity.

calar, to pull down, press down.

Calavera, _f._, skull; el Cristo de la --, Christ of the skull, the
crucifix with a skull (carved) at the feet of Christ.

calcareo, -a, calcareous.

calcinar, to burn, reduce to ashes.

calculo, _m._, estimate, calculation, expectation, computation.

caldera, _f._, caldron, kettle; en las --s de Pero Botero, (_coll._)
in the devil's boiler; in hell.

calentar, to warm.

calibre, _m._, caliber, sort, kind.

calidad, _f._, quality.

caliente, hot, fiery.

calificarse, to qualify, be designated (_or_ described).

caliginoso, -a, dim, dark, obscure, murky, dense.

caliz, _m._, calyx.

calma, _f._, calm, composure, calmness, tranquillity, silence; con --,
calmly, with composure.

calmar, to calm, appease.

caluroso, -a, heated, hot.

calzado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ calzar, shod, with hair growing low; frente
calzada, low forehead.

calzas, _f._ _pl._, breeches, trousers.

callado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ callar, silent.

callar, to be silent; icalle! hush! silence!

calle, _f._, street.

icalle! See callar. callejon, _m._, lane, alley, narrow street.

cama, _f._, bed; caer en --, to fall sick.

camara, _f._, chamber, bedroom.

camarada, _m._, comrade, companion.

cambiante, _m._, iridescence; iridescent gleam, glint.

cambiar, to change, exchange.

cambron, _m._, bramble.

caminante, _m._, traveler.

caminar, to go, walk, walk along.

camino, _m._, way, road, journey, march, course; -- atras, back; down
(_or_ up) the road.

campana, _f._, bell, church bell.

campanada, _f._, stroke.

campanario, _m._, belfry, bell-tower; -- de espadana, single-walled
bell-tower; belfry (of a single wall with openings for the bells).

campanero, _m._, bellman.

campanilla, _f._, small bell, hand-bell, bell; morning-glory.

campana, _f._, campaign.

campina, _f._, field, plain.

campo, _m._, field, camp.

cancion, _f._, song.

candelabro, _m._, candlestick, chandelier.

candelilla, _f._, small candle.

candente, incandescent, red-hot.

candido, white, snowy.

cangilon, _m._, bucket (or cup of an endless chain used in drawing
water). _See_ noria.

cano, -a, hoary, gray.

canonigo, _m._, canon, prebendary.

cansado, -a, _adj. pp._ of cansar, tired, wearied, weary.


cansarse, to bore oneself, be bored, be tired.

cantar, to sing, hum, buzz; -- entre dientes, to hum (a song).

cantar, _m._, song.

cantaro, _m._, pitcher, water-pitcher.

cantazo, _m._, stone, blow with a stone.

cantera, _f._, quarry.

cantidad, _f._, quantity, sum.

cantiga, _f._, song, metrical romance.

canto, _m._, song, hymn, chant, canticle, canto.

cantueso, _m._, lavender, French lavender, spike.

canada, _f._, glen, dale, glade.

cano, _m._, stream, jet.

canuto, _m._, fluting; gorguera de --s, fluted raff.

capa, _f._, cloak, mantle.

capaz, capable, able.

capellan, _m._, chaplain.

caperuza, _f._, pointed cap, pointed hood, hood.

capilla, _f._, chapel; maestro de --, choir-master, one who composes
and directs church music; -- mayor, main chapel (containing the pulpit
and high altar, and in most Spanish churches opposite the _coro_ and
separated from the transept by a railing).

capitan, _m._, captain.

capitel, _m._, capital.

capitulo, _m._, chapter, council, court.

capote, _m._, cloak, coat, greatcoat.

capotillo, _m._, mantelet, short cloak.

capoton, _m._, large cloak, greatcoat.

capricho, _m._, caprice, whim, fancy; a --, aimlessly.

caprichosamente, capriciously, fancifully.

caprichoso, -a, capricious.

capuchino, _m._, Capuchin monk

cara, _f._, face, countenance, expression, head.

caracolear, to caracole; caracoleando en sus corceles, on their
prancing steeds.

caracter, _m._, character, disposition.

caracterizar, to characterize, describe.

carbon, _m._, charcoal; coal.

carcajada, _f._, laugh, burst of laughter.

carcel, _f._, prison, jail.

carcomer, to corrode.

cardeno, -a, violet, livid.

cargo, _m._, charge, office; hacer -- de, to examine, inspect.

caricia, _f._, caress.

caridad, _f._, charity; un bien de -, a good turn, a benevolent favor.

cariiio, _m._, love, affection, tenderness.

Carlos, _m._, Charles.

carne, _f._, meat, flesh; _pl._, flesh; de-y hueso, of flesh and
blood.

caro, -a, dear; _adv._, dearly.

carraca, _f._, rattle, an instrument used instead of bells the last
three days of Holy Week.

carrasca, _f._, pin-oak, swamp-oak.

carrascal, _m._, plantation of pin-oaks; clump of pin-oaks.

carrera, _f._, race, course, speed.

carro, _m._, car, chariot.

carta, _f._, letter, card; tomar--en el asunto, to take a hand in the
matter; cartas leyes, summons.

casa, _f._, house; --de Consejos (_or_ --Consistorial), town hall,
city hall.

casaca, _f._, coat.

Casca, _f._, (_Span._) Casca.

cascada, _f._, cascade.

casco, _m._, helmet; hoof; outside (of anything);--s de las bote-llas
vacias, empty bottles.

caserfo, _m._, houses, row of houses; village, small town.

caseron, _m._, edifice, dwelling, large house.

casi, almost, very nearly.

casita, _f._, small house, cottage.

caso, _m._, case, event, circumstance, effect, fact, matter, affair;
es el --, the fact is; hacer--de, to pay attention to; to care about;
to consider important.

castellano, -a, Castilian, of (_or_ pertaining to) Castile.

castigar, to punish, chastise.

castigo, _m._, chastisement, punishment.

castillo, _m._, castle.

casto, -a, chaste, pure.

casualidad, _f._, chance.

casualmente, casually, by chance.

casulla, _f._, chasuble.

cata. See catar.

catar, to see, consider, notice; catale aqui que asoma, why! (_or_
lo!) here it (_or_ he) comes. See ruin.

catastrofe, _f._, catastrophe.

catedral, _f._, cathedral.

catorce, fourteen.

cauce, _m._, drain, bed, stream, rivulet.

causa, _f._, cause.

causar, to cause.

caverna, _f._, cave, cavern.

cavidad, _f._, cavity, hollow.

cavilacion, _f._, pondering, worrying, preoccupation.

caza, _f._, chase, hunt; andar a -- de, to go in pursuit of; to go
hunting (_or_ seeking); salir de --, to go hunting.

cazador, _m._, hunter, huntsman; --es furtivos, poachers.

cazar, to hunt.

ceder, to yield, submit.

cegar, to blind, make blind; to fill up, obstruct.

ceja, _f._, eyebrow.

cejar, to relax.

celda, _f._, cell.

celebrado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ celebrar, celebrated, famous.

celebrante, _m._, officiating priest.

celebrar, to celebrate; _refl._, to be celebrated.

celeste, celestial, heavenly.

celo, _m._, zeal, ardor, devotion; _pl._, jealousy.

celoso, -a, jealous; tener --, to make jealous.

cena, _f._, supper.

cenagoso, -a, muddy, miry.

cencerrada, _f._, charivari.

cendal, _m._, crape, gauze.

cenizas, _f._ _pl._, ashes.

cenobita, _m._, cenobite.

centella, _f._, lightning, lightning flash (_or_ bolt), thunderbolt.

centesimo, -a, hundredth.

centinela, _m._, sentry, sentinel.

cerca, near, near at hand; -- de, near; tan de --, so closely; muy de
--, very closely, very well.

cercano, -a, near, close, next, neighboring.

cercar, to surround.

cerciorarse, to assure oneself; to ascertain.

cerco, _m._, circle.

cerebro, _m._, brain.

ceremonia, _f._, ceremony, service.

cernerse, to soar; to flit; to hover.

cerrar, to close, shut; la noche habia cerrado, night had come (_or_
fallen); night had closed in (around him); _subst._, shutting; en un
abrir y -- de ojos, in the twinkling of an eye; in an instant;
_refl._, to close, shut.

cerrojo, _m._, bolt.

cesar, to cease, stop, end; ir cesando, to cease, die out; sin --,
incessantly, continually.

cesped, _m._, grass, sod, grass-plot, turf; _pl._, grasses.

cicerone, _m._, guide, cicerone.

ciego, -a, blind, blinded.

cielo, _m._, sky, heaven.

cien. See ciento.

ciencia, _f._, science, art, knowledge.

cieno, _m._, mire, filth.

ciento, hundred.

ciertamente, certainly, indeed.

cierto, -a, certain.

ciervo, _m._, deer, stag.

cierzo, _m._, north wind.

cifra, _f._, cipher; written character; writing.

cima, _f._, summit, top; por -- de, over; above the tops of.

cimera, _f._, crest.

cimiento, _m._, foundation.

cincelado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ cincelar, carved, engraved, embossed.

cinco, five.

cinta, _f._, ribbon, band, girdle; estar en --, to be pregnant; to
have conceived.

cintarazo, _m._, knock, thump, blow, slap (with something flat).

circular, to circulate, flow.

circulo, _m._, circle.

circunspeccion, _f._, circumspection, dignity.

circunstanciado, -a, circumstantial, minute, detailed.

circunstantes, _m. pl._; bystanders, listeners, hearers, persons
present.

cirio, _m._, (large) wax candle (by taper).

cisne, _m._, swan.

cita, _f._, appointment, rendezvous, tryst.

citar, to make an appointment (with), to give a rendezvous (to).

ciudad, _f._, city.

clamor, _m._, clamor, noise.

clamoreo, _m._, clamor, noise.

clarear, to grow light; to dawn.

claridad, _f._, light, shine.

clarin, _m._, trumpet.

clarisimo, -a, illustrious.

claro, -a, clear; _adv._, clearly.

clase, _f._, class, kind.

claustro, _m._, cloister, piazza, gallery.

clavado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ clavar, fixed, brim. fastened, rooted,
nailed.

clavar, to fix, fasten, nail; _refl._, to be fixed; to fix itself; to
stick, strike.

clave, _f._, keystone.

clavo, _m._, nail; point.

clero, _m._, clergy.

cobarde, coward, cowardly.

cobertizo, _m._, small projecting roof; shed.

cocodrilo, _m._, crocodile.

codazo, _m_, thrust with the elbow.

codiciado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ codiciar, coveted.

codicioso, -a, greedy, covetous.

codo, _m._, elbow.

coger, to catch, take up, pick up, pluck, collect, seize; cogerse, to
be caught; to be trampled (_or_ crushed).

coincidencia, _f._, coincidence.

cojin, _m._, cushion.

cola, _f._, tail.

colacion, _f._, lunch.

colegio, _m._, college, school.

colegir, to gather, collect, deduce, infer

colera, _f._, anger, fury, passion, rage, wrath

colerico, -a, angry, choleric, irascible, passionate.

coleto, _m._, doublet body; inside (_or_ body) of a man; echarse
(algo) al --, to swallow (at a gulp).

colgado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ colgar, suspended, hung, hanging.

colgar, to hang, suspend; to hang from, be suspended.

colina, _f._, hill.

colmar, to heap up, fill to the brim.

colmo, _m._, climax.

colocar, to place, set up; --se en actitud de defensa, to fall on
guard.

color, _m._, color, coloring, hue, complexion, shadings; de --(es),
colored, stained; -- de plomo, leaden, lead-colored; -- de rosa,
rose-colored.

colorado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ colorar, colored, dyed, ruddy, florid,
red; sorrel.

colorearse, to redden, become red.

colorin, _m._, showy (_or_ vivid) color.

colosal, colossal, enormous.

columbrar, to discern, espy.

columna, _f._, column, body of soldiers; -- volante, flying column.

columnilla, _f._, little column; -- salomonica, little twisted column.

columpiarse, to swing.

comadre, _f._, a gossip.

comarca, _f._, district, border, country.

comarcano, -a, neighboring, of (_or_ pertaining to) the neighborhood.

combate, _m._, combat, duel.

combatiente, _m._, combatant.

combatir, to fight, beat, strike, attack.

combinacion, _f._, combination.

comedimiento, _m._, courtesy, civility, politeness.

comentar, to comment upon, discuss.

comentario, _m._, commentary, remark.

comenzar, to begin; _reft._, to begin, commence.

comer, to eat; que se ha de -- la tierra, which the earth shall (one
day) swallow up.

cometa, _m._, comet.

comico, -a, comical.

comitiva, _f_,. procession, cortege, retinue, company, suite, escort.

como, as, like, as if, as it were, as though, so to speak, apparently,
if, if only, provided that, as soon as; -- de, at (_or_ of) about;
about; a distancia de, something like a distance of; at about the
distance of; distant about; asi --, as well as; as also; asi ... --,
both ... and; -- no sea, unless it be; except; -- para, as if to; --
que, as; -- as if; inasmuch as; it was as if; he was as it were; --
quiera que, although; notwithstanding the fact that; tanto --, as much
as; tal --, just as; tan --, as.. as; tan pronto ... -- ..., now ...
now ...; i-- ha'de ser! that's the way of the world! what can you
expect? what is to be expected? -- pudo, as best he could; -- las
gasta, how he acts.

?como? how? why?

compacto, -a, compact, dense.

companera, _f._, companion, mate.

companero, _m._, companion, comrade, associate.

comparable, comparable.

comparacion, _f._, comparison.

comparar, to compare.

comparecer, to appear.

compas, _m._, measure, time, accompaniment, rhythm, beat.

compasado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ compasar, measured, regular.

compasion, _f._, compassion, pity.

compeudioso, -a, laconic.

complacerse, to take pleasure (en, in).


completamente, completely.


completar, to complete.


completo; -a, complete; por --, completely.

componer, to compose, repair, keep in repair; _refl._, to be composed;
to consist.

comprar, to buy.


comprender, to understand, comprehend; hacerse --, to make oneself
understood.


comprimir, to restrain, compress, suppress.


comprometerse, to compromise oneself, risk one's reputation, lay
oneself open to criticism.


comunicar, to communicate; _refl._, to communicate.


comunidad, _f._, community, order; en --, by ourselves; with only the
members of the order present.



con, with, along with, by, among; para --, amongst; -- que, therefore,
wherefore, so then; -- vida, alive.


concebir, to conceive.

concejo, _m._, council.


concepto, _m._, conceit, thought, fancy.

concertar, to hold (secret) council; to plan, concert.


conciencia, _f._, conscience, consciousness.


concierto, _m._, concert, arrangement, method.


conciliabulo, _m._, conventicle, secret council.

concluido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ concluir, concluded; after.

concluir, to conclude, end, finish, complete, infer.

concurrente, _m._, person present; bystander, spectator; _pl._,
assembly, congregation, audience.

concha, _f._, shell.

condado, _m._, earldom, county.

conde, _m._, earl, count.

condenacion, _f._; condemnation, damnation.

condenar, to condemn, damn.

condesa, _f._, countess.

condicion, _f._, condition, circumstance.

conducir, to lead, conduct, convey, bear, bring in.

conducta, _f._, conduct, leadership, guidance.

confesar, to confess, acknowledge.

confesion, _f._, confession.

confesor, _m._, confessor, a priest authorized to hear confession of
sins and to grant absolution.

confirmar, to confirm.

conforme, agreeable to; according to.

conformidad, _f._, agreement; state, condition.

confundir, to confuse, confound, mingle, unite; _refl._, to lose form
(_or_ substance); to blend, be confused (confounded or mingled); to
mingle, intermingle, vanish, be lost, be lost to sight (en, in).

confusamente, confusedly.

confusion, _f._, confusion, complication.

confuso, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ confundir, confused, perplexed,
indistinct.

congregar, to assemble.

conjunto, _m._, ensemble, collection, combination.

conjurar, to conjure, beseech.

conjuro, _m._, incantation, enchantment.

conmigo, with me.

conmocion, _f._, commotion.

conmover, to move, affect.

conmovido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ conmover, affected, moved, in (_or_ with)
emotion.

conocer, to know, recognize, realize, be acquainted with.

conquistar, to conquer.

consagracion, _f._, consecration.

consagrar, to consecrate.

conseguir, to succeed, obtain.

conseja, _f._, fable, story.

consejo, _m._, council, advice; Casa de --s, town hall, city hall.

consentir, to agree (_or_ consent) to.

conservar, to keep, guard.

consigo, with himself, with herself, with itself, with oneself, with
themselves.

consiguiente, _m._, consequence; por --, consequently, therefore,
hence.

consistencia, _f._, consistency, coherence.

consistir, to consist, lie; no se en que consista, I do not know why.

consistorial. See casa.

constante, constant.

Constanza, _f._, Constance.

constelacion, _f._, constellation.

consternado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ consternar, dismayed, in consternation.

construccion, _f._, fortification.

consuelo, _m._, comfort, consolation.

consultar, to consult, ask, advise, consult about, ask advice about.

consumir, to consume, eat, cost.

consuncion, _f._, consumption.

contacto, _m._, contact, touch.

contar, to count, recount, relate, tell; -- con, to count (_or_ rely)
upon.

contemplacion, _f._, contemplation.

contemplar, to contemplate.

contener, to contain, hold, repress, restrain.

contenido, _m._, contents.

contentamiento, _m._, satisfaction, pleasure.

contestation, _f._, reply.

contestar, to reply.

continuamente, continually.

continuar, to continue.

continuo, -a, continual; de --, continually; acto --, straightway,
immediately, immediately afterward.

contorno, _m._, form, waist, trunk, torso; circuit, radius; veinte
jornados al --, within a radius of twenty days' journey.

contorsion, _f._, contortion; hacer una --, to bend one's body; to
writhe.

contra, against, contrary to; en -- mia, against myself; against my
interests.

contraer, to contract.

contraido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ contraer, contracted, rigid.

contraposicion, _f._, contrast.

contrario, _m._, contrary, reverse, opposite, opponent, adversary; al
--, on the contrary; por el --, on the contrary.

contraste, _ m._, contrast.

contribuir, to contribute, serve.

convecino, _m_, neighbor.

convencer, to convince.

conveniencia, _f._, advantage, utility, expediency.

convenir, to agree, come to an agreement, acknowledge.

convento, _m._, convent, cloister, monastery.

conversacion, _f._, conversation.

convertir, to change, convert, metamorphose.

convidado, _m._, guest.

convito, _M._, feast, banquet.

convulsion, _f._, convulsion.

convulsivamente, convulsively.

convulsivo, -a, convulsive, rigid, convulsed, trembling, shaking.

coordinar, to collect, arrange.

copa, _f._, cup, goblet, drinking cup; summit, crest, crown.

copia, _f._, copy.

copiar, to copy, reproduce.

copla, _f._, couplet; _pl._, verses.

copudo, -a, copped, crested.

coral, _m._, coral.

corazon, _m._, heart; hacerse de tripas--, to pluck up courage.

corcel, _m._, steed, charger.

cordero, _m._, lamb.

cornisa, _f._, cornice.

coro, _m._, choir, chorus.

corona, _f._, crown.

coronar, to crown, adorn, deck.

corporacion, _f._, body; en--, in a body.

corpulento, -a, large, bulky.

corregidor,_m._, corregidor, a Spanish magistrate; a mayor of a town.

correo, _m._, messenger, courier;--de gabinete, state messenger,
king's messenger.

correr, to run, move, be current, flow; a todo (el)--, at full speed.

correria, _f._, incursion, raid.

corresponder, to correspond.

corriente, usual, current; _subst. m._, current, course; al -- de,
conversant (or acquainted) with; muy al --, well informed; _subst.
f._, current (of streams).

corrillo, _m._, circle, gathering, knot, group.

corro, _m._, circle, group.

cortado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ cortar, cut, interrupted, abashed,
confounded; --a pico, perpendicular, precipitous.

cortadura, _f._, gorge, ravine.

cortar, to cut, cut off, intercept, interrupt; terreno, to make a
short cut; to shorten the way (_or_ distance).

corte, _f._, court; de--, trenchant, sharp-edged.

cortejar, to court, win the affection of.

cortejo, _m._, procession, cortege.

cortes, courteous, polite.

cortesano, -a, courtly.

cortina, _f,_, curtain.

corto, -a, short.

corza, _f._, roe, doe.

cosa, _f._, thing, matter, matter of importance, fact; -- de, about;
desde habia -- de, for a matter of; for about; gran --, much, a great
deal; -- hecha, settled, decided; -- imposible, impossible; la -- no
era para menos, nothing less could be expected; publica, well-known,
notorious; que --, what; ser -- de, to be sufficient cause to; to be
enough to; no ser --: not to be small (_or_ few in number), to be
large (_or_ numerous).

cosecha, _f._, production; de mi --, of my own invention.

coser, to sew, sew up.

cosquilla, _f._, ticklish point, weak point.

costa, _f._, cost, price; a --, at the cost.

costado, _m._, side.

costar, to cost.

costear, to skirt.

costumbre, _f._, custom, habit; de -- , customary, usual(ly); tener de
--, to be accustomed; to be one's custom.

cota, _f._, coat of mail.

coyuntura, _f._, occasion, opportunity.

craneo, _m._, cranium.

creacion, _f._, creation.

crecer, to grow, increase.

creciendo, increasing, growing, swelling.

creciente, increasing, growing.

credito, _m._, credit, belief; dar -- a, to believe.

credulidad, _f._, credulity.

creencia, _f._, belief.

creer, to believe, fancy, think.

crepusculo, _m._, twilight.

cresta, _f._, crest, cresting, peak.

criado, _m._, servant.

Criador, _m._, Creator.

criatura, _f._, creature, being, woman; babe, baby, infant.

crimen, _m._, crime.

criminal, criminal.

crin, _f._, mane; _pl.,_ mane.

crispado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ crispar, agitated, convulsed, clinched,
trembling, nervous, convulsive.

crispar, to shrivel; to cause to creep.

cristal, _m._, crystal, glass, window; de --, crystalline, clear,
pure.

cristiano, _m._, Christian.

Cristo, _m._, Christ.

critica, _f._, criticism.

cronica, _f._, chronicle.

cronista, _m._, chronicler, narrator.

crucera, _m._, crossing, the place of crossing of nave and transept,
in some churches the choir.

crudo, -a, rude, coarse, pitiless, ruthless.

cruel, cruel.

crueldad, _f._, cruelty.

crujir, to crackle, clash, rustle, crack, clang.

cruz, _f._, cross.

cruzado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ cruzar, interposed, intervening.

cruzar, to cross, pass by, pass, clasp, join.

cuadra, _f._, hall; stable; _pl._, quarters.

cuadro, _m._, picture, painting.

cuajar, to coat over; (_here_) to begem.

cual, which; such, as, such as; el --, la--, lo--, who, which; por
lo--, wherefore; cada --, each (_or_ every) one; -- si, as if; tal --,
such as; todas a -- mas bellas, vying with one another in loveliness;
each one more lovely than the other.

cual, what, which, which one; -- .,. --, one...one.

?cual? what? which?

cualidad, _f._, quality; _pl._, disposition.

cualquier. See cualquiera.

cualquiera, anybody, whatever, whoever, any.. whatever, one, some; --
otro, any one else; -- otra cosa, anything else; -- que, whoever.

cuando, when; aun --, although; hasta --, how long; de yez en --, from
time to time; every now and then; at intervals; de -- en --, from time
to time.

?cuando? when?

cuanto, how much, as much, as much as, whatever, as many as, that
which, what.

cuanto, _adv._, as much as; en --, as soon as, when; en -- a, as to,
as for, as regards; -- quedarepetido, as has been said.

?cuanto? how much? what? _pl._, how many?

cuarenta, forty.

cuarta, _f._, fourth, quarter, fourth part (of a _vara_),
hand-breadth; hundir una -- de hierro, to bury the spurs; to spur
deeply.

cuartel, _m._, quarters.

cuartilla, _f._, sheet.

cuarto, _m._, quarter.

cuatro, four.

cubierto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ cubrir, covered, overcast, cloaked;
shrub-covered; s&t. _m._, cover; a --, under shelter.

cubilete, _m._, dice-box.

cubrir, to cover, cloak.

cuchillo, _m._, knife; -- de monte, hunting-knife, hunter's cutlass.

cuello, _m._, neck.

cuenca, _f._, valley, deep valley surrounded by mountains.

cuenta, _f._, account, reckoning, calculation, explanation; tener en
--, to take into account; to consider, darse -- de, to realize.

cuento, _m._, story, fiction, tale, fable; de nunca acabar,
never-ending story.

cuerda, _f._, cord, string, rope.

cuerpo, _m._, body, corpse; story, floor, section (of a building up to
the cornice).

cuesta, _f._, hill, slope.

cuestion, _f._, question, matter.

cuidado, _m._, care, wory; _pl._, care, attentions; i -- ! mind!
notice! -- con (_or_ que), mind, stop, beware, look out, notice; no
haya --, don't worry; never mind; apprehension (_or_ care).

cuidar, to take care, look after, care for, care, pay attention,
notice.

cuja, _f._, socket, lance-bucket.

culebra, _f._, snake.

culpa, _f._, fault, crime, blame, sin, guilt.

culto, _m._, worship.

cumbre, _f._, summit, mountain ridge.

cumplido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ cumplir, polished, accomplished,
faultless.

cumplir, to perform, fulfill, discharge accomplish.

cuna, _f._, cradle; iguales en --, equals in point of birth.

cundir, to spread.

cupula, _f._, cupola, dome.

cura, _m._, curate, priest, rector.

curiosidad, _f._, curiosity.

curioso, -a, curious, inquisitive.

curso, _m._, course.

curva, _f._, curve, winding.

cuspide, _f._, point, summit, peak.

cuyo, -a, whose.

?cuyo? whose?


Ch


Champagne, _m._, champagne.

chanzoneta, _f._, jest, joke, nonsense.

chapar (en), to plate (with); to cover (with).

chapin, _m._, clog, patten, chopine.

charla, _f._, gossip, chat.

charlar, to gossip, chat.

chasquido, _f._, crackling, lashing, dashing, cracking, creaking,
rustling.

chico, -a, small; _subst. m. or f._, little one; child.

chirrido, _m._, grating, rubbing, friction rattle, sound, squeak,
swish, rasping.

chispa, _f._, spark.

chispeante, sparkling, dazzling.

chispear, to sparkle.

chisporrotear, to crackle.

chisporroteo, _m._, hissing, crackling.

chiste, _m._, joke, jest.

chocar, to clang, rattle, clatter, strike, knock.

chopera, _f._, forest (_or_ grove) of black poplars.

chopo, _m._, black poplar.

choque, _m._, shock, clang.

choza, _f._, hut, hovel.


D


dado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ dar, given, granted; considering, in view of.

dado, _m._, die, cube; _pl._, dice.

daga, _f._, dagger.

idale! the deuce! come! again! el -- que le das, the persistent
efforts.

dama, _f._, lady.

danzar, to dance.

dano, _m._, harm, injury.

dar, to give; -- credito a, to believe; -- de firme, to beat firmly
(_or_ lustily); -- en, to rush (_or_ fall) headlong into; -- en la
flor, to take into one's head; to fall into the habit; -- fin, to die,
perish; --le a los fuelles, to pump the bellows; -- lugar, to give
rise; -- gusto, to gratify; -- de palos, to beat, give a beating; to
cudgel; -- un paso, to take a step; -- por, to consider, regard (as);
-- principio, to begin; -- que hacer, to give trouble; -- que reir
(con), to ridicule, make sport (of), make a laughing stock (of); --
razon de, to give an account of; to inform regarding; -- a alguno en
el rostro con, to cast in one's face; -- por seguro, to assert,
assure; -- susto, to frighten; tanto os da de, you think as highly of;
-- tumbos, to tumble; to whirl head over heels; -- vista a, to come
into view of; -- una gran voz, to call out loudly; -- una vuelta, to
take a turn, take a walk; -- vueltas, to turn, whirl, revolve; el dale
que le das, the persistent efforts; como Dios me daba a emender, to
the best of my ability; -- se cuenta de, to realize; -- se de ojo, to
conspire, have a secret understanding.

de, of, to, from, at, with, by, in, on, as, than; el bruto Esteban,
that clownish fellow Stephen; -- improviso, unexpectedly, suddenly; --
modo que, so that; -- nuevo, again; anew; -- por si, by himself; --
prisa, rapidly; -- pronto, suddenly, abruptly; -- repente, suddenly;
--seguro, assuredly; -- no ser, if not; -- sobra, over and above; --
tarde en tarde, seldom; -- un todo, once for all; del todo, wholly,
quite.

debajo, underneath, below; por -- de, beneath, below, under.

deber, to owe, be (destined) to, must, ought.

debil, weak, feeble, faint.

debilisimo, -a, _abs. super, of_ debil, very weak (feeble _or_ faint).

debilitarse, to be (or become) weak (faint, dim, or soft).

debilmente, faintly, softly.

decidir, to decide, determine; _refl._, to decide, determine.

decir, to say, tell, speak; se dice, it is said; dicen, they say,
people say; al -- de, according to; es --, that is; por --lo asi, so
to speak; por mejor --, in other words, rather; ?no os le dije? didn't
I tell you so? no se ha de --, it cannot be said; o mejor dicho, or
rather; querer --, to mean.

decision, _f._, decision.

dedicar, to dedicate, consecrate.

dedo, _m._, finger; dos --s de luz, a thin streak of light.

defender, to defend, guard, protect, shield.

defensa, _f._, defense, guard.

deforme, deformed, formless, shapeless, misshapen, hideous.

dejar, to leave, let, allow, cease, leave off, abandon, fail; Como
dejo dicho, as I have said; segun dejamos dicho, as we have said; --
entrever, to show slightly; -- escapar, to utter; -- lugar, to give
place; -- paso, to let pass, make way; no -- titers con cabeza, to
destroy everything, put everything in disorder; -- se ver, to appear,
show oneself; -- la vida, to die; dejase de decir, fails to be said,
is not said, is left unsaid; -- se sentir, to make itself felt.

del = de + el.

delante, before; -- de, before, in front of, in (the) presence of.

delgado, -a, thin, slender, delicate, flexible, gaunt.

deliberar, to deliberate.

delicado, -a, delicate, light.

delicioso, -a, delicious, exquisite, delightful.

delincuente, _m._, delinquent.

delirio, _m._, delirium, madness.

delito, _m._, crime.

demacracion,_f._, emaciation.

demandadera, _f._, convent servant, woman who attends at the door of a
convent to run errands.

demas, further, besides; los --, the others, the rest; por lo --, for
the rest, moreover, besides.

demente, mad; _adv._, madly.

demonio, _m._, demon, devil.

demostrar, to show, manifest, demonstrate, evince.

dentellado, -a, dentated, dentate.

dentro, within; -- de, within, inside of, in.

deparar, to offer, provide.

departir, to speak, converse, chat, talk, dependiente, _m._,
dependent, servant.

depositar, to deposit.

derecho, -a, right; a la derecha, at (_or_ to) the right; a derechas,
straight, straight ahead; _subst. m._, right, claim, privilege; feudal
right (_or_ privilege); _adv._, straight.

derramado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ derramar, scattered, ranging.

derramar, to shed, cast, pour, plash, scatter, emit, pour out;
_refl._, to fall, be scattered (cast _or_ shed).

derredor, _m._, circumference, circuit; en --, around; en -- suyo,
around him, about him.

derretir, to melt, dissolve.

derribir, to demolish, destroy, fell, throw, cast.

derruido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ derruir, demolished, ruined, in ruins.

derrumbadero, _m._, precipice.

derrumbar, to fall with a crash.

desacato, _m._, disrespect, insolence.

desafiar, to defy, challenge.

desafio, _m._, challenge, duel.

desaforado, -a, disorderly, discordant, loud.

desagradable, disagreeable.

desalmado, -a, soulless, inhuman.

desaparecer, to disappear.

desarmar, to disarm, unload, discharge.

desarreglo, _m._, disorder, confusion, derangement.

desarrollarse, to unfold, be disclosed (_or_ developed).

desasido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desasir, detached, divested (of the body).

desasirse, to free (_or_ extricate) oneself.

desastroso, -a, disastrous.

desatar, to untie, unleash; _rfl._, to break loose.

desbandarse, to disband, scatter.

desbocado, -a, wild, unbridled, unrestrained.

descalzo, -a, barefoot.

descansar, to rest, repose, recover.

descargar, to unload, discharge, cast, direct.

descarnado, -a, fleshless, emaciated.

descender, to descend.

descifrar, to decipher, unravel.

descomponerse, to break up, fall apart.

descompuesto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ descomponer, altered, changed, harsh;
apart, in disorder.

desconfianza, _f._, distrust, suspicion, diffidence, fear.

desconocido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desconocer, unknown, foreign, strange,
unfamiliar.

descorrer, to draw (as a curtain).

descortes, uncivil, discourteous, rude.

describir, to describe.

descubrimiento, _m._, discovery.

descubrir, to lay bare, disclose, uncover, discover; _refl._, to
uncover oneself, take off one's hat (_or_ helmet); to appear, be
visible, be revealed.

descuidado, -a, careless.

descuido, _m._, carelessness; por --, from carelessness;
inadvertently; con --, carelessly.

desde, from, since, after, to, even to; -- donde, from where; -- que,
since; -- lejos, from a distance; -- luego, at once, straightway,
thereupon, immediately.

desden, _m._, disdain, scorn.

desdenoso, -a, disdainful.

desear, to desire, long for, wish.

desechar, to expel, drive away, exclude, dispel.

desembarazarse de, to free oneself of; to throw off.

desembocar, to terminate, open (en, into).

desembozarse, to uncover one's face, throw open one's cloak.

desempenar, to drag (_or_ thrust) over; to perform, fulfill, fill.

desencadenado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desencadenar, unchained, wild.

desencajado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desencajar, disfigured, with distorted
features: (with eyes) unnaturally wide open, projecting, bulging,
staring.

desenganarse, to be undeceived, to undeceive oneself, not to deceive
oneself.

desenlace, _m._, catastrophe, denouement.

desenredarse, to extricate oneself.

desenvolverse, to unfold.

deseo, _m._, desire.

desesperacion, _f._, desperation, despair.

desesperado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desesperar, driven to despair,
desperate, in despair; _subst. m._, desperate man, one in despair.

desesperante, maddening.

desesperar, to drive to despair.

desfiladero, _m._, defile, pass.

desfilar, to defile, pass by, file past.

desgajar, to break (_or_ lop) off.

desgarrado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desgarrar, rent, torn.

desgarrador, piercing, heartrending.

desgarrar, to rend, tear; _refl._, to tear, be torn.

desgracia, _f._, misfortune; por --, unfortunately.

deshacer, to destroy; to mutilate; _refl._, to dissolve, vanish, be
dissolved.

desheredar, to disinherit.

desierto, -a, deserted; _subst_ _m._, desert, waste.

designio, _m._, design, plan.

desigual, unequal, uneven, abrupt.

desistir, to desist, cease, abandon.

desligarse, to free oneself, get loose.

deslizarse, to glide, move slowly, slip through, pierce, go cautiously
(_or_ furtively), slide, flow, fall.

deslumbrador, dazzling, brilliant.

desmantelado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desmantelar, dismantled, dilapidated.

desmayado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desmayar, depressed, dispirited,
drooping, pale, wan.

desmayar, to lose heart, be discouraged; _refl._, to faint, swoon.

desmentir, to contradict; to deny.

desnudar, to strip; to unsheathe; _refl._, to take off, strip oneself.

desnudo, -a, bare, naked, stripped.

desorden, _m._, disorder.

despacio, at leisure, leisurely, slowly, deliberately.

despacharse, to set out, make haste.

despacho, _m._, haste, dispatch.

desparecer, to disappear.

desparramarse, to scatter.

despavorido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ despavorir, terrified, in terror.

despecho, _m._, despair.

despedida, _f._, farewell.

despedir, to discharge, dispatch, emit; to take leave (a, of);
_refl._, to take leave, depart.

despegar, to open.

despenadero, _m._, precipice.

despenar, to hurl, fling, hurl over a precipice.

despertar, to arouse, awaken, awake, wake up; to break (of day);
_refl._, to awake, wake up.

despierto, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ despertar, aroused, awake.

desplegar, to unfold, uncoil, open, display; _refl._, to display,
unfold.

desplomar, to fall; caer desplomado, to fall in a heap, fall flat;
_refl._, to fall, fall flat (_or_ in a heap).

despojar, to despoil, strip; _refl._, to strip oneself; to take off.

despojo, _m._, spoil; _pl._, spoils, remains, mortal remains.

despreciar, to scorn, despise.

desprecio, _m._, scorn, mockery.

desprenderse, to issue forth, be launched, be shed; to fall; to free
oneself, escape, depart.

desprendido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desprender, unfastened; (of leaves)
loosened from the stem (_or_ frond); broken, separated.

despreocupacion, _f._, unconventionality, recklessness.

despreocupado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ despreocupar, unprejudiced, liberal,
unconventional; reckless.

despues, afterwards, later; since, then; --de, after; --que, after.

despuntar, to break; al --la manana, at break of day; at dawn.

destacar, to detach, be detached, stand out (sobre, against); _refl._,
to stand out (sobre, against).

destapar, to uncover, uncork, open.

destartalado, -a, huddled (together), incompact, promiscuous, without
order.

destemplado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ destemplar, untuned, harsh, discordant.

destiuado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ destiuar, destined, designed, intended.

destinar, to destine, design.

destino, _m._, fate, destiny.

destrozar, to destroy.

destructor, -a, destructive.

desunir, to separate, sunder, disunite.

desvanecer, to cause to vanish; to clear up, unravel, dissipate; -- su
cabeza, to make one giddy, affect with dizziness, make one's head
swim; _refl._, to vanish, evaporate, disappear; to faint, fall
fainting.

desvanecido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desvanecer, vanished; unconscious.

desvencijado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desvencijar, broken, dilapidated.

detalle, _m._, detail.

detener, to hinder, restrain, stop, keep, detain; _refl._, to stop,
halt.

determinacion, _f._, determination.

determinado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ determinar, determined, resolved,
determinate, definite.

determinarse, to determine, resolve, decide, make up one's mind.

detestar, to detest.

detras, after, behind; -- de, after; per --, behind; por -- de,
behind.

deudo, _m._, parent, relative.

devauar, to rack; -- se los sesos, to rack one's brains.

devocion, _f._, devotion, ardent love.

devolver, to return, restore.

devorar, to devour, absorb, consume.

devoto, -a, devout, pious; _subst. m._, devout (_or_ pious) person.

dia, _m._, day; al otro --, the next day; aun en el --, to this day;
de noche y --, night and day; en otros --s, in other (_or_ former)
days; formerly; un -- y otro, day after day; constantly.

diablo, _m._, devil, rascal, fellow.

diabolico, -a, diabolic.

diafano, -a, diaphanous, transparent, pellucid.

dialogo, _m._, dialogue.

diamaute, _m._, diamond.

diantre, _m._, deuce; ique --! the deuce! i(en) que -- (_or_ --s)!
what the deuce!

dibujar, to draw, sketch; _refl._, to be drawn (_or_ sketched); to
appear.

diccionario, _m._, dictionary.

dicha, _f._, happiness, felicity, pleasure.

dichoso, -a, happy, fortunate.

diecinueve (more _commonly_ diez y nueve), nineteen.

diente, _m._, tooth; como que echo los --s en, he was, as it were,
born to (_or_ into); eutre --s, between (my) teeth; cantar entre --s,
to hum (a song).

diestro, _m._, halter, bridle; elevar del --, to lead by the halter
(_or_ bridle).

diez, ten; -- y nueve, nineteen.

diferencia, _f._, difference; _pl._, differences; quarrel,
disagreement.

dificil, difficult; que no sera --, which it easily may.

dificultad, _f._, difficulty.

difunto, -a, defunct, deceased.

dignidad, _f._, dignity, self-respect.

digno, -a, worthy.

digresien, _f._, digression.

dilatacien, _f._, dilation, expansion.

dilatar, to dilate, expand, enlarge, spread (abroad); _refl._, to
dilate, spread out, expand, extend, swell.

diminuto, -a, diminutive, very small.

dinero, _m._, money.

dintel, _m._, lintel; threshold (_incorrect_ use).

Dionis, _m._, Dionysius, Dennis.

dios, _m._, god.

Dios, _m._, God; i--! Lord! Goodness! en -- y en mi anima, in very
truth; God knows (that it is true); estar de --, to be God's will, to
be inevitable.

direccion, _f._, direction; con -- a, in the direction of.

dirigir, to direct, guide, cast; -- la palabra, to address, speak;
_refl._, to turn, face, be directed, direct one's steps, make one's
way, take one's course; to address (oneself).

dirimir, to adjust, settle.

discordante, discordant.

discorde, discordant.

discrete, -a, discreet.

disculpa, _f._, excuse, exculpation.

discurrir, to pass; to talk, discourse; to ramble, run about.

discurso, _m._, discourse, speech.

diseminar, to scatter; _refl._, to scatter, be scattered.

disensien, _f._, strife, dissension.

disforme, deformed, misshapen, monstrous.

disfrutar (de), to enjoy.

disgusto, _m._, disgust, ill humor, displeasure.

disimular, to dissemble, conceal, veil.

disipacion, _f._, dissipation.

disipar, to dissipate, dispel, displace, cause to vanish; _refl._, to
vanish, scatter, be scattered (_or_ dispelled).

disolverse, to dissolve, separate, breakup.

disparar, to fire, shoot, discharge; al --la, upon firing (_or_
shooting) at it.

disparatado, -a, inconsistent, absurd.

dispersarse, to disperse, vanish, scatter.

disponer, to dispose, order, direct, arrange, prepare, get ready;
_refl._, to prepare, get ready, proceed, be about to; to be arranged
(_or_ projected).

disposicion, _f._, disposition, arrangement, position, natural
fitness.

disputa, _f._, dispute.

disputar, to dispute, argue, quarrel; _refl._, to vie with one
another.

distancia, _f._, distance; como a -- de, something like a distance of;
at about the distance of; distant about.

distante, distant, remote.

distar, to be distant.

distincion, _f._, distinction, favor.

distinguir, to distinguish; _refl._, to be distinguished, be visible.

distintamente, distinctly.

distintivo, _m._, distinction, badge, order.

distinto, -a, distinct, different, various.

distraction, _f._, diversion, amusement.

distraer, to divert; _refl._, to divert (_or_ amuse) oneself.

distraido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ distraer, distraught, diverted,
absentminded, lost in thought, vacant.

diversiOn, _f._, diversion, entertainment, sport, amusement.

diverso, -a, different, diverse, various.

divertido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ divertir, diverted, amused, pleasant.

divino, -a, divine.

divisar, to perceive, see, recognize, descry; to divide, separate;
_refl._, to be visible (at a distance).

divisorio, -a, dividing; linea divisoria, boundary.

divulgarse, to be divulged; to spread.

do (_poet._ for donde), where; a --, whither.

doblar, to double, pass round; to bow.

doble, double; mas --, most double.

doce, twelve; al punto y hora de las --, exactly at midnight.

docena, _f._, dozen.

doctor, _m._, doctor, physician.

doler, to grieve; _refl._, to grieve.

doliente, sorrowful, plaintive.

dolor, _m._, grief, pain, sorrow, anguish.

domar, to break, tame, subdue, master, dominate, overcome.

dominar, to master, dominate, overcome, overlook, obtain a clear view
of.

domingo, _m._, Sunday.

dominio, _m._, possession, domain.

don, _m._, Don (a title used beforeChristian names of men).

donacion, _f._, donation, gift.

donaire, _m._, grace, courtesy.

doncel, _m._, youth, young nobleman.

doncella, _f._, girl, young lady, maid, maiden.

donde, where, in which; en --, in (_or_ on) which; hasta --, how far;
por --, where, through which; ?Donde va Vicente? Donde va la gente
(_lit._, "Where is Vincent going? Where the crowd goes"), it comes
easy to follow the crowd.

?donde? where? ?a --? whither? ?de --? whence? dona, _f._, Lady,
mistress (a title used before Christian names of women).

dorado, -a, gilded, golden; brilliant.

dormido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ dormir, slept, sleeping, asleep.

dormir, to sleep, lie dormant; -- a pierna suielta, to sleep soundly
(_or_ deeply).

dos, two; los --, both.

doscientos, -as, two hundred.

dosel, _m._, canopy, dais.

dosis, _f._, dose.

dotar, to endow.

dragon, _m._, dragoon.

ducado, _m._, ducat (a gold coin of variable value).

duda, _f._, doubt, suspicion; sin --, doubtless.

dudar, to doubt, hesitate.

dudoso, -a, doubtful, uncertain, hazardous.

duelo, _m._, duel.

duelo, _m._, grief, mourning; funeral procession.

duena, _f._, duenna, mistress, lady in waiting.

dueno, _m._, master, owner.

dulce, sweet, pleasant, soft, gentle, mild.

dulcisimo, -a, _abs. super. of_ dulce, very (_or_ most) sweet (soft
_or_ gentle).

dulzura, _f._, sweetness, gentleness.

duque, _m._, duke.

durante, during, for.

durar, to last, continue.

duro, -a, hard; a duras penas, with great difficulty; _subst. m._,
dollar.


E


e, and (_before_ i- and hi-).

ebano, _m._, ebony.

ebrio, -a, drunken, intoxicated, drunk.

eco, _m._, echo.

echado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ echar, thrown, cast; lying.

echar, to throw, cast, put, place, utter, dismiss, put out; -- la
bendicion, to give the benediction; -- a broma, to take (_or_
consider) as a joke (_or_ jest); -- en busca, to go (_or_ set off) in
search; -se algo al coleto, to swallow at a gulp; -- los dientes, to
cut one's teeth; como que echo los dientes en, he was, as it were,
born to (_or_ into); -- el guante, to arrest; hasta -- los higados,
with all (your) might; -- mano de, to lay hands upon, take possession
of; -- pestes de, to storm at; -- pie a tierra, to get down, dismount;
-- en saco roto, to be heedless of; not to take advantage of; to
forget; -- un trago, to have a drink, take a dram.

edad, _f._, age.

edificio, _m._, edifice, building.

efectivamente, indeed, in fact, in reality, effectually.

efecto, _m._, result, effect; en --, in fact, indeed.

efluvio, _m._, effluvium, exhalation, emanation.

efusion, _f._, effusion, tenderness.

egoismo, _m._, selfishness, egoism.

ieh! eh! say!

eje, _m._, axis, axle.

ejemplar, exemplary; _subst. m._, example; sin --, unprecedented.

ejemplo, _m._, example.

ejercicio, _m._, exercise, practice.

ejercitar, to exercise, drill, train.

ejercito, _m._, army, array.

el, la, lo, the.

el, ella, ello, he, him, she, her, it.

el, la, lo, that.

elaborar, to elaborate, develop, unfold.

elargar, to stretch out, raise.

elegante, elegant, fine, graceful.

elegir, to elect, choose.

elemento, _m._, element.

elevado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ elevar, elevated, lofty.

elevar, to elevate, raise, lift up; _refl._, to arise, rise up.

Elvira, _f._, Elvira.

ella, she, her, it.

ello, it; -- es que, the fact is.

embargar, to hold in subjection, restrain, control.

embargo, _m._, hindrance; sin --, nevertheless, however,
notwithstanding.

embebecido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ embebecer, enraptured.

embellecer, to embellish, adorn.

emblema, _m._, emblem.

embocadura, _f._, mouth, entrance.

emboscada, _f._, ambuscade.

emboscarse, to lie in ambush.

embozado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ embozar, wrapped (_or_ muffled) up;
disguised, covert.

embozar, to muffle the greater part of one's face.

embriagar, to intoxicate, delight, transport; _reft._, to become
intoxicated, get drunk.

embriaguez, _f._, intoxication, stupor, torpor.

embrollo, _m._, intrigue, liaison.

embrujar, to charm, bewitch.

emisario, _m._, emissary.

emocion, _f._, emotion.

empellon, _m._, push, shove, shoving, blow.

empenarse, to endeavor, persist in.

empeno, _m._, aim, purpose, desire, eagerness; tener --, to desire
earnestly.

empequenecerse, to be (_or_ become) small.

emperador, _m._, emperor.

empero, however.

empezar, to begin.

empinado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ empinar, raised, elevated, lofty, steep.

empinarse, to raise oneself; to rise.

emplear, to employ, make use of.

emponzonar, to poison.

emprender, to undertake, take, take up, set out on.

empresa, _f._, enterprise, activity, undertaking.

empujar, to drive, impel, force along, push, stir.

empujon, _m._, push, violent shove.

empunadura, _f._, hilt.

en, in, on, to, upon, at, into; as (a); -- contra mia, against myself;
against my interests; -- cuanto, as soon as, when; -- cuanto o, as to,
as for, as regards; -- pos de, after, behind, in pursuit of; -- lo
posible, as much as possible; -- tanto que, while; -- torno, round
about; -- torno de, about, around.

enamorado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ enamorar, enamored, in love, loving,
tender, lovesick; _subst. m._, lover.

encadenar, to chain, bind.

encajarse, to join, be united, come together.

encaje, _m._, lace.

encaminarse, to proceed, take the road, betake oneself.

encanijar, to weaken, cause to pine away.

encantar, to delight, enchant, charm.

encanto, _m._, enchantment, charm, spell.

encapotar, to cloak, muffle.

encaramarse, to climb.

encarar, to aim; -- se con, to face, confront.

encarcelar, to imprison.

encargar, to charge, recommend.

encenagar, to mire; to trouble, disturb.

encender, to kindle, light; _refl._, to be kindled.

encendido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ encender, lighted, inflamed, burning,
glowing, aflame, aglow, blazing, passionate.

encerrar, to confine, imprison, enclose, embody; _refl._, to shut
oneself up, seclude onself, retire.

encima, upon; -- de, upon, on top of; por -- de, over, above.

encina, _f._, evergreen oak.

enclavar, to nail.

encoger, to shrug; _refl._, to draw back, shrink.

encogido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ encoger, contracted, shrinking.

encogimiento, _m._, timidity.

encomendar, to recommend, commit.

encomienda, _f._, badge, the embroidered cross worn by knights of
military orders.

encontrar, to meet, find, encounter, see, reach; _refl._, to meet each
other (_or_ one another); to be found, be met with; to be; to meet,
join.

encorvado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ encorvar, bent, crooked.

encubierto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ encubrir, covered, concealed, veiled,
hidden.

encubrir, to cover, veil, conceal.

encuentro, _m._, meeting, encounter; a su --, to meet him (her, you,
_or_ them).

enderezarse, to enter, plunge into.

endiablado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ endiablar, corrupted, devilish, vile,
diabolical.

endriago, _m._, monster, dragon.

enebro, _m._, juniper, common juniper.

enemigo, -a, hostile, inimical; _subst. m._, enemy.

energico, -a, energetic.

enfermo, -a, sick, ill.

enganarse, to be mistaken.

enganoso, -a, deceitful, deceptive.

engarzar, to enchase, encircle, set.

engendrar, to produce, engender.

engendro, _m._, offspring.

engolfar, to engross, engage, occupy.

engreido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ engreir, elated, lofty, haughty.

enigma, _m._, enigma.

enigmatico, -a, enigmatical.

enjaezado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ enjaezar, caparisoned.

enjambre, _m._, swarm.

enjugar, to dry, wipe away.

enlutado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ enlutar, in mourning.

enmaranado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ enmaranar, entangled, perplexing,
confusing, intricate.

enmudecer, to be (_or_ become) silent.

ennegrecido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ ennegrecer, blackened, black, burnt.

enojoso, -a, vexing, disturbing.

enorme, enormous, mighty.

enredar, to become entangled; to catch, entangle, entwine, coil
_refl._, to entwine (around); to entangle oneself, become entangled
(_or_ ensnared); to coil.

enrojecer, to redden, heat red-hot; _refl._, to become red-hot.

enroscarse, to twist, curl, coil, writhe.

ensancharse, to widen, broaden.

ensangrentar, to stain with blood, be blood-stained.

ensayar, to practice.

ensenar, to teach.

ensordecer, to deafen.

ensueno, _m._, sleep, dream.

entender, to understand; como Dios me daba a --, to the best of my
ability.

enteramente, entirely, quite, just, right.

enterarse, to inform oneself.

entero, -a, entire, whole.

enterrar, to inter, bury.

entonar, to sing, begin singing.

entonces, then; -- que ..., then, while ...; then, when ...

entornar, to turn; to close.

entrada, _f._, entrance.

entranas, _f._ _pl._, entrails, heart.

entrar, to enter, come, arrive; a to begin; _refl._, (of the night) to
come on; to fall; como se les enttase a mas andar el dia, as the day
went on; as the day passed (for them).

entre, between, among, in; por --, between, among, in, through;
mirarse -- se, to look at each other (_or_ one another); si, to
himself, etc.

entreabierto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ entreabrir, half opened, ajar, gaping.

entreabrir, to open slightly.

entrecortado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ entrecortar, interrupted, broken,
broken.

entregado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ entregar, given over, devoted.

entregarse, to yield, give way, give oneself over (up. up), abandon
oneself.

entrelazar, to interlace, intertwine.

entremezclar, to intermingle.

entretener, to keep (in order); to entertain, divert; _refl._, to
delay, tarry, amuse oneself.

entrever, to get a glimpse of; dejar --, to show slightly.

entrevista, _f._, interview, meeting.

enturbiar, to disturb, trouble.

entusiasmo, _m._, enthusiasm.

envejecer, to grow old.

enviar, to send.

envidioso, -a, envious, invidious.

envilecer, to debase, debauch.

envio, _m._, remittance.

envolver, to envelop.

enzarzarse, to be (_or_ become) entangled (as among brambles or
briars).

epidermis, _f._, epidermis.

epigrama, _m._, epigram.

epoca, _f_, period, epoch, time.

equivaler, to be equal to, be worth, be equivalent to.

equivocadamente, inadvertently, by mistake.

eremita, _m._, hermit.

erguirse, to straighten up; to rise.

erizado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ erizar, bristling (de, with).

erizar, to cause to stand on end; to bristle; _refl._, to stand on
end; to bristle.

ermita, _f._, hermitage.

ermitano, _m._, hermit.

errante, wandering, rambling, roving.

esbelto, -a, tall, slender.

escabel, _m._, seat, stool; pedestal; resting-place.

escala, _f._, ladder.

escalador, _m._, scaler, one who scales walls.

escalar, to scale, climb.

escalera, _f._, stairs, staircase.

escalinata, _f._, steps.

escalon, _m._, step, jut, projection.

escandaloso, -a, scandalous, disgraceful, opprobrious.

escano, _m._, bench, chair.

escapar, to escape, fall; _refl._, to escape, fall.

escape, _m._, flight, speed; a (or al) --, at full speed; a todo --,
at full speed.

escapulario, _m._, scapular.

escarabajo, _m._, scarab.

escarcha, _f._, hoar-frost, frost.

escasear, to give sparingly (_or_ grudgingly).

escaso, -a, slight, scanty.

escena, _f._, scene.

esclarecimiento, _m._, dawn.

escoger, to choose, select.

escogido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ escoger, chosen, select, choice, fine.

escombros, _m. pl._, debris, rubbish.

esconder, to hide, cover up; _refl._, to hide, be concealed; (of the
sun) to set; to disappear.

escondido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ esconder, concealed, hidden, secret.

escondite, _m._, concealment, retreat, hiding-place.

escondrijo, _m._, concealment, hiding-place, retreat.

escribir, to write.

escrito, -a, _adj. pp. of_ escribir, written; _subst. m._, writing,
work.

escuadra, _f._, squadron.

escuailido, -a, weak, miserable.

escuchar, to listen, listen to, hear; _refl._, to be heard, be
audible.

escudero, _m._, squire.

escudo, _m._, shield, buckler; escutcheon.

escudrinar, to search, examine, scrutinize.

escueto, -a, free, open.

esculpir, to sculpture, carve.

escultor, _m._, sculptor.

escultura, _f._, sculpture, statue.

ese, esa, that.

ese, esa, eso, that one, that; esa, your city (the city where you are
staying).

esforzar, to reenforce, support, help on, applaud; _refl._, to make an
effort; to exert oneself.

esfuerzo, _m._, effort, exertion.

esmeralda, _f._, emerald.

eso, that; por --, for that reason; hence, therefore; ?que es --? what
is it? what is the matter?

espacio, _m._, space; _pl._, space.

espacioso, -a, spacious.

espada, _f._, sword.

espadaiia, _f._, spire, tower; campanario de --, single-walled
belltower; belfry of a single wall with openings for the bells.

espalda, _f._, back; _pl._, shoulders, back; a mis --s, behind me;
vuelto de --s, with (his) back turned.

espaldar, _m._, backplate (of a cuirass).

espantado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ espantar, frightened, terrified,
astonished, wondering, in terror (_or_ astonishment).

espantoso, -a, frightful, dreadful, horrible.

espanol, -a, Spanish.

especial, special, peculiar, particular, uncommon.

especialmente, especially, particularly.

especie, _f._, kind.

espectaculo, _m._, spectacle.

espectador, _m._, spectator.

espejo, _m._, mirror.

esperanza, _f._, hope, expectation.

esperar, to hope, expect, wait for, await, wait; _refl._, to expect.

espesisimo, -a, _abs. super._ of espeso, very (_or_ most) dense.

espeso, -a, dense.

espesura, _f._, thicket, wilderness.

espiral, _f._, spiral.

espiritu, _m._, spirit, mind, heart, soul.

espiritual, spiritual; spiritualized; unworldly; ethereal.

esplendor, _m._, splendor.

espontaneamente, spontaneously.

espontaneo, -a, spontaneous.

esposa, _f._, wife

espuela, _f._, spur.

espuma, _f._, foam, froth.

espumoso, -a, sparkling, effervescent.

esqueleto, _m._, skeleton, corpse.

esquililla, _f._, small bell, sheep bell.

esquilon, _f._, bell, church bell.

esquina, _f._, corner, angle.

esquivar, to avoid, evade.

esta. See este.

estacionarse, to station oneself, take up a position.

estado, _m._, state, condition, rank.

estancarse, to stop, fall.

estar, to be; -- de Dios, to be God's will, to be inevitable; para, to
be about to; -- a punto, to be ready; to be on the point of, be about
to; -- viendolo, to see it; to be present; estuve oyendo, I kept
hearing.

estatua, _f._, statue.

este, esta, this.

este, esta, esto, this one, this, the latter; a este quiero a este no
quiero, without asking permission; without choice; willy-nilly.

Esteban, _m._, Stephen.

estela, _f._, wake, track, streak.

esteril, sterile, barren.

esto, this;--es, that is; namely; de la solfa, the art of music.

estomago, _m._, stomach.

estoque, _m._, sword, rapier.

estrado, _m._, platform (on which the royal throne is placed).

estrambotico, -a, strange, odd, queer, eccentric.

estrategico, -a, strategic.

estrechar, to press, clasp, constrain.

estrecho, -a, narrow, close.

estrella, _f._, star.

estremecer, to shake, make shudder, cause to tremble; _refl._, to
tremble, start, quiver, be startled, vibrate, shiver; (of the flesh)
to creep.

estremecido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ estremecer, shaken, trembling,
quivering.

estremecimiento, _m._, trembling, start, shiver.

estrepito, _m._, noise, clamor.

estrepitoso, -a, noisy, boisterous.

estribo, _m._, stirrup.

estridente, strident, shrill, harsh.

estruendo, _m._, noise, rumor.

estruendoso, -a, noisy, clamorous.

estrujar, to press, clasp.

estudiante, _m._, student.

estudiar, to study.

estupendo, -a, wonderful, stupendous, marvelous.

esthpido, -a, stupid, dull, dazed.

estupor, _m._, stupor, torpor, amazement.

eter, _m._, ether.

eternamente, eternally.

eternidad, _f._, eternity.

eterno, -a, eternal, everlasting, endless.

Evangelio, _m._, Gospel; _pl._, Gospels; buenos --s, some holy
sayings; some of the Holy Scriptures.

evaporarse, to evaporate, vanish.

evasivo, -a, evasive.

evitar, to avoid, escape.

evolucion, _f._, evolution, change.

exabrupto, _m._, outburst, excess, violence, abruptness, abrupt (_or_
unexpected) remark.

exagerar, to exaggerate.

exaltacion, _f._, exaltation, sublimity; exaggeration, fanaticism,
imagination, mere fancy.

examinar, to examine.

exasperar, to exasperate.

exceder, to exceed, surpass.

excepto, except.

exclamacion, _f._, exclamation.

exclamar, to exclaim.

exclusive, -a, exclusive.

excursion, _f._, expedition, incursion, raid.

excusar, to excuse, exempt, release, spare.

exhalacion, _f._, exhalation; (_here_) flash of lightning.

exhalar, to exhale.

existencia, _f._, existence.

existir, to exist, live.

expedicion, _f._, expedition, journey.

experimentar, to experience, feel.

expiacion, _f._, expiation.

expiar, to expiate, atone.

expirar, to expire, vanish, die away.

explicacion, _f._, explanation, explanatory remark.

explicar, to explain; _refl._, to express oneself.

explosion, _f._, explosion, burst.

exponerse, to expose oneself, be exposed, run the risk.

expresar, to express.

expresion, _f._, expression; _pl._, regards.

exquisito, -a, exquisite, extreme, perfect, supreme.

extasis, _m._, ecstasy.

extender, to stretch out, extend, lengthen; _refl._, to spread.

extenso, -a, vast.

extrano, -a, strange.

extraordinario, -a, extraordinary.

extravagancia, _f._, extravagance, madness.

extravagante, wild, extravagant, odd, strange.

extraviado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ extraviar, distracted, bewildered, wild,
wandering, roving.

extravio, _m._, disorder, irregularity.

extremidad, _f._, extremity.

extremo,_m._, end, extremity, limit, corner, angle.


F


fabula, _f._, rumor, story, fable, fiction, idle tale; composition,
plot.

fabuloso, -a, fabulous.

facciones,_f. pl._, features.

faceta, _f._, facet, surface.

facil, easy.

faja, _f._, band, sash, belt.

falda,_f._, slope; skirt, lap.

falta, _f._, fault, lack, want.

faltar, to fail, lack, need, be lacking (_or_ wanting); -- por hacer,
to remain to be done.

falto, -a, lacking; -- de sentido, unconscious.

fama, _f._, report, rumor.

familia,_f._, family.

familiar, _m._, servant, attendant; _pl._, retinue, suite.

familiarizado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ familiarizar, familiarized, familiar,
acquainted, accustomed.

famoso, -a, famous, celebrated, notorious.

fango, _m._, mire.

fantasia, _f._, fancy, imagination.

fantasma, _m._, phantom; _f._, scarecrow.

fantasmagoria, _f._, phantasmagoria.

fantastico, -a, fantastic.

farol, _m._, lantern.

farolillo, _m._, small lantern.

farsante, _m._, claimant, pretender.

fascinador, fascinating.

fascinar, to fascinate, charm.

fastidiarse, to be bored.

fatiga, _f._, fatigue, toil, labor, hardship.

fatigado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ fatigar, tired, fatigued.

fatigar, to tire, weary, fatigue.

fatigoso, -a, exhausting.

fatuos: fuegos --, ignis fatuus; will-o'-the-wisp.

fauces, _f. pl._, jaws.

fausto, _m._, splendor, pomp, luxury.

favor, _m._, favor, kindness; en -- de, in behalf of; to favor.

favorecido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ favorecer, favored, in favor.

favorite, -a, favorite.

faz, _f._, face.

fe, _f._, faith, belief; a -- de quien soy, on my honor; on the word
of a gentleman; a -- a -- que, upon my word; I give you my word; in
truth; por mi --, on my word; auto de --, public burning by the
Inquisition; (hence) great fire, bonfire, fire.

febril, feverish.

fecundo, -a, fertile.

fechorla, _f._, act, deed, evil deed.

felicidad, _f._, felicity, bliss.

feliz, happy, blissful.

fenomeno, _m._, phenomenon, manifestation.

feretro, _m._, bier, coffin.

feria, _f._, fair.

Fernando, _m._, Ferdinand.

ferocidad, _f._, ferocity; _pl._, ferocity.

feroz, ferocious.

ferrar, to garnish with points of iron; to strengthen with iron
plates.

ferreo, -a, iron, of (_or_ pertaining to) iron.

festin, _m._, feast, banquet, festival.

feston, _m._, festoon, garland.

feudal, feudal.

feudo, _m._, fief, feud.

fibra, _f._, fiber.

fiebre, _f._, fever.

fiel, faithful, loyal.

fieltro, _m._, felt; hat.

fiera, _f._, wild beast.

fiesta, _f._, feast, festival, fete, festivity.

figura, _f._, figure, form.

figurar, to imagine; _refl._, to imagine, fancy; to appear in fancy;
se me figuran, appear to my fancy.

fijamente, fixedly.

fijar, to fix, fasten; _refl._, to be fixed; to look fixedly.

fijo, -a, fixed.

fila, _f._, file, rank, line, row.

filigrana, _f._, filigree.

filo, _m._, edge; alla al -- de la media noche, just about midnight.

fin, _m._, end; al --, finally; a -- de, in order to; dar --, to die,
perish; en --, in fine, finally, in short, after all, anyhow, well;
por --, finally.

final, _m._, end, conclusion.

fingir, to feign, pretend, simulate, counterfeit, take the form of,
affect, assume, imitate, seem to be.

finura, _f._, charm, finesse. firme, firm; de --, firmly, forcibly,
lustily.

fisico, -a, physical; _subst. m._, physique, physical organization
(being _or_ make-up)

flamencote, _m._, big Fleming.

flanquear, to flank, flag, falter, grow feeble.

flexible, flexible, supple, soft.

flor, _f._, flower; dar en la --, to take into one's head; to fall
into the habit.

floral, floral.

florido, -a, elegant, select.

flotante, floating, waving.

flotar, to float, wave, hover.

fluido, _m._, fluid.

foco, _m._, focus; center.

fogata, _f._, blaze, fire.

fogoso, -a, fiery, spirited.

follaje, _m._, foliage. fondo, _m._, back, rear, background, depth,
heart, recess, bottom.

forcejear, to struggle, writhe.

forma, _f._, form, figure, shape, host; _pl._, form, figure; Sagrada
Forma, Consecrated Host.

formar, to form.

formidable, formidable, dreadful.

formula, _f._, formula, charm, recipe.

formular, to formulate, speak.

fornido, -a, robust, lusty, stout.

forraje, _m._, forage, hay, grass.

fortaleza, _f._, fortress, stronghold.

fortuna, _f._, fortune; por --, fortunately.

fosa, _f._, ditch, grave.

fosforico, -a, phosphorescent.

foso, _m._, ditch, moat.

fragmento, _m._, fragment, piece, bowlder.

fragoso, -a, craggy, rough, uneven.

fraguarse, to break; to be forged (invented _or_ gotten up).

fraile, _m._, friar.

francamente, frankly.

franqueza, _f._, frankness.

frase, _f._, phrase, speech, word, words; --s enamoradas, tender
(loving _or_ lovesick) phrases (_or_ words).

fratricida, fratricidal.

frecuente, frequent.

fregona, _f._, kitchen-maid, scrubbing-girl.

freir, to fry; _refl._, to fry.

freno, _m._, restraint, bounds.

frente, _f._, brow, forehead, face, head; -- a, facing; in front of.

fresco, -a, fresh, cool.

frescura, _f._, freshness.

frio, -a, cold; _subst. m._, cold; hacer --, to be cold.

friolera, _f._, trifle, mere trifle; i--! nonsense!

fronda, _f._, frond, leaf.

frondoso, -a, leafy, covered with leaves, luxuriant, shady.

frontera, _f._, frontier.

frugal, frugal.

frustrar, to frustrate.

fruta, _f._, fruit.

fuego, _m._, fire; poner --, to set fire (to); --s fatuos, ignis
fatuus; will-o'-the-wisp.

fuelles, _m. pl._, bellows (of an organ); para darle a los --, to pump
the bellows.

fuente, _f._, fountain, source.

fuer, a -- de, as, like, being, by dint of being, since you are (_or_
were).

fuera, out; -- de, outside of, beyond, beside; -- de si, beside
oneself.

fuerte, strong, mighty, violent.

fuertemente, strongly, firmly.

fuerza, _f._, force, power, might; body of troops; a -- de, by dint
of; -- le sera, he will have to; he will be forced.

fugaz, fleeting, fugitive.

fugitivo, -a, fleeting, fugitive.

fulgor, _m._, gleam, glow, flash, brilliancy, effulgence.

funcion, _m._, ceremony, solemnity.

fundado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ fundar, grounded in the belief; taking (it)
for granted; believing.

fundar, to found, ground.

fundir, to melt.

funesto, -a, baleful, fatal.

furia, _f._, fury; estar hecho una --, to be in a rage.

furioso, -a, furious.

furtivo, -a, furtive, clandestine, fleeting; cazadores --s, poachers.

futuro, -a, future.


G


gabinete, _m._, cabinet; correo de --, state (_or_ king's) messenger.

gaita, _f._, bagpipe.

gala, _f._, ostentation, display, grace, adornment; full (_or_ court)
dress; _pl._, regalia, finery, paraphernalia.

galan. _m._, gallant, lover, suitor, wooer.

galante, gallant; of (_or_ pertaining to) lovers.

galanteria, _f._, gallantry, courteousness, courtliness.

galanura, _f._, grace, gracefulness, elegance (in language _or_
style), style, repartee.

Galatea, _f._, Galatea.

galeon, _m._, galleon.

galeria, _f._, gallery.

galonear, to adorn (_or_ deck) with lace.

gallardia, _f._, gallantry.

gallo, _m._, cock, rooster; Misa del Gallo, midnight mass on Christmas
eve.

gamo, _m._, buck.

gana, _f._, appetite, desire, wish, inclination; tener --s, to have a
mind (de, to).

ganado, _m._, flock, herd.

ganar, to gain.

ganga, _f._, (_coll._) fortune, luck, anything valuable acquired with
little labor.

Garces, _m._, (_Span._} Garcts.

garganta, _f._, throat.

garra, _f._, claw.

garrotazo, _m._, blow with a staff (_or_ cudgel).

garrote, _m._, cudgel, stick, staff.

gasa, _f._, gauze.

gastar, to spend; to display; como las gasta, how he acts; how he
comports himself; what his tricks are.

gato, _m._, cat.

gavilanes, _m. pl._, cross-bars of the guard of a sword; guard (of a
sword-hilt).

gavilla, _f._, band, gang.

gay saber, _m._, poetry, art of poetry.

gemido, _m._, sigh, groan, moan, moaning, sighing.

gemir, to moan, sigh, groan; to creak.

general, general; _subst. m._, general.

genero, _m._, kind, species, quality, nature.

generoso, -a, generous.

genial, _m._, disposition, nature.

genio, _m._, genius, spirit.

gente, _f._, people, crowd, servants; _pl._, servants; -- menuda,
servants, domestics, dependents; -- del pueblo, common people.

Gerardo, _m._, Gerard.

gerifalte, _m._, falcon, gyrfalcon.

germinar, to germinate, bud.

gigante, gigantic, grand.

gigantesco, -a, gigantic, vast.

girar, to turn, revolve, dart about; to creak.

giron, _m._, piece, tatter, banner, pennant, flag.

gitana, _f._, gypsy.

glacial, glacial, icy.

globo, _m._, globe, sphere, ball.

gloria, _f._, glory; el dia de --, the day of glory, Holy Saturday.

goce, _m._, enjoyment, pleasure.

gola, _f._, gorget, neck-plate.

golondrina, _f._, swallow.

golpe, _m._, stroke, blow, clang, clank; a --s, by (_or_ with) blows.

golpear, to strike, beat; _subst. m._, clattering.

gordo, -a, large, big, great, coarse.

gorguera, _f_, ruff; -- de canutos, fluted ruff.

gorjear, to warble.

gota, _f._, drop; -- a --, drop by drop.

gotear, to drop, drip, fall drop by drop.

gotico, -a, Gothic.

gozar, to enjoy; -- de, to enjoy.

gozne, _m._, hinge.

gozo, _m._, joy, pleasure, satisfaction.

grabar, to engrave.

gracia, _f._, grace, favor, charm; _pl._, thanks; dar las --s, to
express one's thanks.

gracioso, -a, funny, comical.

grada, _f._, step, stair, gradine; _pl._, perron, staircase.

grado, _m._, grade, rank, degree.

gradualmente, gradually.

grama, _f._, dog-grass, dog-wheat.

gran. See grande.

grana, _f._, scarlet; (fine) scarlet cloth; de --, scarlet.

grande, great, grand, large, tall, long; a --s voces, in a loud voice,
loudly.

granito, _m._, granite.

granjear, to obtain, gain, win.

grano, _m._, gram.

grave, serious, dignified, grave.

gravedad, _f._, gravity, seriousness.

graznido, _m._, croaking, cawing.

grena, _f._, tangled (_or_ matted) hair.

griego, -a, Greek.

grifo, _m._, griffin, a fabulous monster, half lion, half eagle.

gris, gray.

gritar, to cry (out).

grito, _m._, cry; -- de vela, watch-cry.

groseramente, roughly, rudely, coarsely.

grotesco, -a, grotesque.

grueso, -a, thick, large, big, bulky; _subst. m._, large body, main
body.

grupa, _f._, croup; volver --s; to turn back (_or_ around).

grupo, _m._, group.

guante, _m._, glove; echar el --, to arrest.

guantelete, _m._, gauntlet.

guarda, _m._, guard.

guardar, to retain, keep, possess, have, guard; to stow away.

guardia, _f._, guard; en --, on guard.

guardian, _m._, keeper, warden.

guarecerse, to take refuge, find shelter, escape.

guarida, _f._, cave, cavern, den, lair.

guedeja, _f._, lock (of hair).

guerra, _f._, war.

guerrero, _m._, warrior, soldier.

guia, _m._, guide.

guiar, to guide.

guijarro, _m._, pebble.

guion, _m._, bell-wether, bell-sheep.

guisa, _f._, manner, guise; a -- de, by way of.

gusano, _m._, worm, maggot.

gustar, to like, please.

gusto, _m._, taste, pleasure, ease, leisure; dar --, to gratify.

guzla, _f._, guzla, fiddle with a single string.


H


ha, _contraction of_ hace. See hacer.

haber, to have; -- de, to have to, be obliged to; must, should, would,
ought; to be to, be able to; can; he de, I must; habia de, I was to; I
had to; no se ha de decir, it cannot be said; que se ha de comer la
tierra, which the earth shall (one day) swallow up; ?y por que no has
de vivir? and why can you not (_or_ should you not) live? --
(_impers._), to be; hay, there is (_or_ are); habia, there was (_or_
were); habra, there will be; -- que, to be necessary; me lo habian de
asegurar ... y no lo creeria, even if I were assured by ... I wouldn't
believe it; que habreis visto, which you probably have seen; ?que hay?
what is it? what is the matter? si no hay mas que, one needs only to;
no hay para que decir que se fastidiaban, it is needless to say were
bored; no haya cuidado, don't worry, never fear, let there be no fear;
que no haya mas que oir, that nothing else can be heard; he aqui, here
is (_or_ are); behold, lo.

habilitar, to provide, equip, furnish.

habitacion, _f._, hall, room.

habitador, _m._, inhabitant, tenant.

habitar, to live, dwell, inhabit, reside.

habito, _m._, habit, custom; dress; _pl._, cassock, clothes.

habitual, habitual.

hablar, to speak; en hablando del ruin de Roma, catale aqui que asoma,
speak of the devil and he will appear.

hablilla, _f._, rumor, report, babbling.

hacer, to make, do, cause, bring about, work, cast, be, become, be
turned into; --(_impers._), to be (of the weather and of time); hace,
ago; hace mucho tiempo, a long time ago; no hace (_or_ ha) mucho, not
long ago; hace muchos anos, many years ago; hace rato, quite a while
ago; hara cosa de tres o cuatro dias, about three or four days ago;
haria cosa de unas dos horas, it must have been about two hours; --
justicia, to execute; -- mal de ojo, to cast the evil eye; -- memoria
de, to remember; -- monos, to play tricks; -- pedazos, to break to
pieces; -- platillo de, to converse about; -- una pregunta, to ask a
question, make a request; -- presente, to lay before, present, state;
dar que --, to give trouble; estar hecbo una furia, to be in a rage;
_refl._, to be, become; -- se de tripas corazon, to pluck up courage.

hacia, towards; -- adelante, forward.

hacha, _f._, torch.

hada, _f._, fairy; enchanted nymph.

halagar, to flatter, caress.

halagueeno, -a, attractive, alluring.

halcon, _m._, falcon.

hallar, to find, meet; _refl._, to be, be found, meet.

hambre, _f._, hunger.

harapo, _m._, tatter, rag, fringe.

haraposo, -a, ragged.

hasta, as far as, up to, until, to, towards, also, besides, even, even
to; -- entonces, till then; i-- la noche! (good-by) till tonight; no
... --, only; not before; -- que (no), until; -- tonto que, until;
-- unos cien, (up to) about a hundred.

haz, _m._, bundle; el -- de armas, panoply.

haz, _f._, face, surface.

haza, _f._, field, cultivated field.

he: -- aquf, here is (_or_ are); behold; hete aqui, hare is (_or_
are); behold.

hechicera, _f._, witch, hag.

hechizar, to bewitch.

hechizo, _m._, enchantment, charm.

hecho, -a, _pp. of_ hacer, made, turn (formed _or_ turned) into; like;
_subst. m._, fact, deed, act, event.

hediondo, -a, fetid, fould.

helado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ helar, frozen, icy, glacial.

helar, to freeze.

henchir(se), to swell.

hendidura, _f._, fissure, crack, crevice.

heredad, _f._, country place, farm.

heredar, to inherit.

herencia, _f._, inheritance.

herida, _f._, wound.

herido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ herir, wounded; a voz herida, in clanging
tones.

herir, to strike, wound, shine upon, light up; -- de muerte, to
strike dead.

hermana, _f._, sister.

hermano, _m._, brother.

hermoso, -a, lovely, beautiful, fine.

hermosote, very fine (or handsome).

hermosure, _f._, beauty.

heroe, _m._, hero.

hervir, to boil, blaze, seethe; to crowd, swarm.

hete. See he.

hiedra, _f._, ivy.

hielo, _m._, ice, frost.

hierba, _f._, grass, herb; _pl._, grass.

hierro, _m._, iron; _pl._, irons, fetters; arms; hundir una cuarta de
--, to bury the spurs; to spur deeply.

higado, _m._, liver; hasta echar los --s, with all (your) might.

hija, _f._, doughter, girl, child, offspring.

hijo, _m._, son; _pl._, children.

hilo, _m._, thread, ray.

hilvanar, to prepare; to plan.

himno, _m._, hymn.

hinchado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ hinchar, swollen.

hinojo, _m._, knee; de --s, kneeling; on one's knees.

hipocriton, very hypocritical; _subst. m._, great hypocrite.

hirviente, boiling, glowing, blazing.

hisopo, _m._, aspergill, brush used to sprinkle holy water.

historia _f._, story, incident.

historico, -a, historic, historical.

hito, _m._, mark; mirar de -- en --, to look at (_or_ over) closely,
view with attention, fix one's eyes upon.

hogar, _m._, hearth, home, fireplace.

hoguera, _f._, fire, bonfire, blaze.

hoja, _f._, leaf, fold, blade; _pl._, double doors, folding doors.

hojarasca, _f._, foliage; (_here_) carved foliage.

ihola! halloo! look! well! what!

hollar, to tread upon, trample.

hombre, _m._, man.

hombro, _m._, shoulder; en --s, on (their) shoulders.

homenaje,_m.._, homage; prestar --, to pay homage, profess fealty;
torre del --, tower of homage; homage tower; tower in a castle in
which the governor or warden took the oath of fidelity.

honda, _f._, sling; tiro de--, slingshot.

hondo, -a, profound, deep.

hondura, _f._, depth, cavity, basin, deep valley.

honor, _m._, honor.

honra, _f._, honor.

honrado, -a, honest, honorable.

hora, _f._, hour; o'clock; a --, at an hour; a la media --, within
half an hour; y esta es la -- en que todavia no le hemos visto, and we
haven't seen him since; al punto y -- de, on the stroke of, at
exactly.

horca, _f._, gallows.

horizonte, _m._, horizon.

hornacina, _f._, vaulted niche, niche.

horrible, horrible, fearful.

horror, _m._, horror, dread; santo --, awe, reverential fear.

horroroso, -a, horrid, hideous.

hostia, _f._, host.

hoy, to-day.

hucco, -a, hollow, cavernous; _subst. m._, hollow, hole, niche,
cavity, grave.

huella, _f._, impression, trace, track, print, footprint.

hueso, _m._, bone; _pl._, bones, remains; de carne y --, of flesh and
blood.

huesoso, -a, bony.

huesped, _m._, guest.

hueste, _f._, host, army.

huesudo, -a, bony.

huida, _f._, flight, escape.

huir, to flee, flee from, escape.

humanidad, _f._, humanity.

humano, -a, human, mortal.

humear, to smoke, smolder, steam.

humedecer, to moisten, dampen, steep.

humedo, -a, wet, moist, damp, humid.

humildad, _f._, humility.

humilde, humble.

humillar, to humble; _refl._, to humble oneself; to bow down.

humo, _m._, smoke, vapor, steam, fumes.

humor, _m._, humor; buen --, good humor, merriment; de buen --,
good-natured, jolly.

hundir, to sink, bury; -- una cuarta de hierro, to bury the spurs; to
spur deeply.

huracan, _m._, hurricane, storm.

husar, _m._, hussar.


I


idea, _f._, idea, thought, plan, fancy, imagination.

identico, -a, identical.

idioma, _m._, language, idiom.

ido, -a, _pp. of_ ir, gone; absent.

iglesia, _f._, church.

igneo, -a, of (_or_ pertaining to) fire.

ignorancia, _f._, ignorance.

ignoranton, _m._, great fool.

ignorar, to be ignorant of; not to know; _refl._, to be unknown.

ignoto, -a, unknown.

igual, equal, like, steady, even, uniform; the same; _subst. m._,
peer.

ijar, _m._, flank.

iluminar, to illuminate, light up; to enlighten.

ilusion, _f._, illusion.

ilustre, illustrious.

imagen, _f._, statue, figure, form, image; vision.

imaginacion, _f._, imagination, fancy.

imaginario, -a, imaginary.

imaginarse, to imagine.

imbecil, _m._, imbecile, fool.

imitar, to imitate.

impaciencia, _f._, impatience; con --, impatiently.

impaciente, impatient; _adv._, impatiently.

impasible, impassible, unmoved, motionless.

impavido, -a, dauntless, intrepid.

impedir, to hinder.

impeler, to impel, urge.

impenetrable, impenetrable.

imperceptible, imperceptible.

imperial, imperial.

impetuoso, -a, impetuous.

impiedad, _f._, impiety, irreligion.

impio, -a, impious.

implorar, to implore.

imponente, imposing, impressive.

imponer, to impose.

importancia, _f._, importance.

importante, important.

importar, to be of importance; no

importa, no matter.

importe, _m._, value, cost.

importuno, -a, importunate.

imposible, impossible.

impotencia, _f._, impotence; amenazas de --, impotent threats.

impracticable, impracticable.

imprecacion, _f._, imprecation, curse.

impregnar, to impregnate, saturate, imbue.

impresion, _f._, impression.

impreso, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ imprimir, imprinted, stamped.

improvisar, to improvise, extemporize.

improviso, -a, unexpected; de --, suddenly, unexpectedly.

impulsar, to impel.

impulso, _m._, impulse, power, force, motion, gust; a --s de, moved
by, overcome by.

inagotable, inexhaustible

inanimado, -a, inanimate, lifeless. incansable, indefatigable,
tireless, unwearied; _adv._, tirelessly.

incendiar, to set on fire.

incertidumbre,_f._, uncertainty, hesitation.

incesante, incessant.

incidente, _m._, incident, event, episode.

incienso, _m._, incense.

incierto, -a, uncertain, wandering, restless.

incitar, to incite; to inspire.

inclinar, to incline, bend over; _refl._, to bend down, bow, lean.

incognito, _m._, disguise, incognito.

incolume, safe, unharmed, in safety.

incomodar, to bother, disturb.

incomodidad,_f._, inconvenience.

incomodo, -a, comfortless, wretched; mas vale -- que ninguno, better
comfortless quarters than none at all.

incomparable, incomparable.

incomprensible, incomprehensible.

inconcebible, inconceivable.

incontestable, irresistible.

inconveniente, _m._, objection, inconvenience, impropriety; no tener
--, not to consider improper; to have no objection.

incorporarse, to rise, get up, straighten up; a medias, to sit up.

incorporeo, -a, incorporeal.

incorregible, incorrigible.

incredulidad, _f._, incredulity.

incredulo, -a, incredulous.

increible, incredible.

indecible, unspeakable, ineffable.

indeciso, -a, uncertain, indefinite.

indefinable, indefinable.

indescriptible, indescribable.

indicar, to indicate.

indiferente, indifferent.

indignacion, _f._, indignation.

indiscrecion, _f._, indiscretion.

indudablemente, indubitably, unquestionably.

inefable, ineffable, unspeakable.

inerte, inert, motionless, lifeless.

Ines, _f._, Agnes, Inez.

inesperado, -a, unexpected.

inexplicable, inexplicable.

inextinguible, inextinguishable, perpetual.

infecto, -a, infected, stagnant.

infeliz, unhappy, unfortunate, wretched; weak-minded; _subst._, poor
wretch, poor fellow.

infernal, infernal.

infiel, infidel; _subst. m. pl._, infidels, Moors, Saracens.

infiernos, _m. pl._, infernal regions; hell.

infinito, -a, infinite.

inflamarse, to catch fire, become inflamed.

influencia, _f._, influence.

influjo, _m._, influence.

informe, shapeless, formless.

infundir, to infuse, inspire, instill.

ingenio, _m._, ingenuity, cleverness, wit, mind.

ingenioso, -a, ingenious, clever.

ininteligible, unintelligible.

inmediato, -a, immediate, next, adjacent, very near.

inmensidad, _f._, immensity.

inmenso, -a, immense.

inmortal, immortal.

inmovil, motionless.

iumovilidad, _f._, immobility.

inocencia, _f._, innocence.

inocentada, _f._, (_coll._) foolishness, foolish speech (_or_ action).

inocente, innocent, simple.

inquietar, to trouble, disquiet, make anxious, disturb.

inquieto, -a, restless, shifting, anxious, disquieting.

inquietud, _f._, restlessness, anxiety.

inquirir, to inquire.

inscripcion, _f._, inscription.

insecto, _m._, insect.

inseguro, -a, unsteady.

insepulto, -a, unburied.

insignificante, insignificant.

insistencia, _f._, urgency, insistence.

insistir, to urge, persist, insist.

insolente, insolent.

insolito, -a, unusual, unaccustomed.

insomnio, _m._, insomnia.

insoportable, insufferable.

insostenible, indefensible, intolerable, unbearable.

inspiracion, _f._, inspiration.

inspirar, to inspire.

instancia, _f._, entreaty.

instantaneamente, instantly.

instante, _m._, moment, instant; por--s, for some moments.

instintivamente, instinctively.

instruccion, _f._, instruction, direction.

instrumento, _m._, instrument, tool.

insufrible, intolerable, insufferable.

insulso, -a, insipid, dull, flat.

insulto, _m._, insult.

intangible, intangible.

inteligencia, _f._, intelligence, comprehension.

inteligente, skillful; _subst. m_, clever man.

intemperie, _f._, inclemency (of the. weather).

intencion, _f._, intention, meaning, allusion; con --, on purpose;
purposely, designedly.

intensidad, _f._, intensity.

intenso, -a, intense.

intentar, to try, attempt, intend, mean, be about to.

interes, _m._, interest, concern.

interesar, to interest; -- se con, to be interested in.

interior, _m_, interior.

interiormente, inwardly, to oneself.

interlocutor, _m._, questioner, interlocutor.

interminable, interminable, endless.

internarse, to enter, penetrate.

interno, -a, internal.

interpelado, _ subst. m._, man (_or_ one) interrogated (_or_
questioned).

interpretar, to interpret, explain.

interrogacion, _f._, question, interrogation.

interrumpir, to interrupt, break.

intersticio, _m._, interstice, crack.

intervalo, _m._, interval.

intimamente, intimately.

intimidar, to intimidate.

intranquilo, -a, restless, moving, shifting.

intrincado, -a, intricate, obscure.

introduccion, _f_, introduction.

introito, _m._, (_eccl._) introit, a psalm or anthem sung immediately
before the communion or mass.

intruso, _m_, intruder.

inundar, to inundate.

inutil, useless, needless, unnecessary.

inutilmente, uselessly, in vain.

invadir, to invade.

invencible, invincible, irresistible, unconquerable.

invierno, _m._, winter.

invisible, invisible.

invitacion, _f._, invitation.

invocar, to invoke.

involuntariamente, involuntarily.

involuntario, -a, involuntary.

inyectar, to inject, fill.

Inigo, _m._, Ignatius.

ir, to go; to be; -aproximando, to approach; --subiendo de, to
increase, keep increasing; vamos, let us go; come, well, indeed;
ivaya! well! come! indeed! nonsense! _refl._, to go away, go off,
escape.

ira, _f._, wrath, rage.

iris, _m._, iris; arco--, rainbow.

ironia, _f._, irony.

irrealizable, impossible (of realization).

irrecusable, irrefutable.

irresolute, -a, irresolute, undecided, wavering.

irritar, to irritate.

izquierdo, -a, left.


J


ija! ha!

jabali, _m._, wild boar.

jacinto, _m._, hyacinth.

jadeante, panting, out of breath.

jambs, never, ever.

jaramago, _m._, hedge-mustard.

jarana, _f._, scuffle, contest.

jardin, _m._, garden.

jauria, _f._, hounds, pack of dogs.

jazmin, _m._, jasmine.

jefe, _m._, chief, leader.

jerarquia, _f._, hierarchy.

Jesucristo, _m._, Jesus Christ.

Jesus, _m._, Jesus; i--! Lord! goodness!

jifero, _m._, butcher.

jilguero, _m._, linnet.

jinete, _m._, rider, horseman; _used as adj._, mounted (de, on),
astride.

jiron, _m._, tatter, bit, scrap; flag, pennant.

jornada, _f._, day's march (_or_ journey); journey; act.

Jose, _m._, Joseph.

joven, young; _subst, m. and f._, young man, young woman, boy, girl,
youth.

joya, _f._, jewel, brooch, small ornament (usually worn about the
neck).

jubilo, _m._, joy, rejoicing.

jubon, _m._, doublet.

juego, _m._, play, game, amusement, sport, trick.

juez, _m._, judge.

jugar, to play.

juglar, _m._, juggler, minstrel, conjurer.

juguete, _m._, toy, sport.

juguetear, to trifle, sport, dally, frolic.

jugueton, playful, sportive.

juicio, _m._, judgment, sense, trial.

junco, _m._, reed, rush.

juntar, to join, clasp, unite.

junto, -a, united, together, joined, (_pl._) side by side; prep., --a,
near, near to, close, at the side of, beside.

juramento, _m._, oath.

jurar, to swear, vow.

justicia, _f._, justice; hacer--, to execute.

justillo, _m._, jacket, jerkin, doublet.

justo, -a, just, exact, holy, righteous.

juventud, _f._, youth.

juzgar, to judge, think, consider, believe.


L


la, the.

la, her, to her; that, that one; _pl._, them, those; (one's) tricks;
(one's) doings (_or_ deeds); como las gasta, how he acts; how he
comports himself; what his tricks are; las relataban, would tell of
his deeds.

laberinto, _m._, labyrinth.

labio, _m._, lip.

labrador, _m._, farmer.

labrar, to till, cultivate.

ladera, _f._, declivity.

lado, _m._, side, direction; por su--, on one's own account; for
one-self; as far as he (_or_ she) is (_or_ was) concerned; por todos
--s, in all directions; al--tuyo, at your side.

ladrar, to bark.

ladrido, _m._, bark, barking.

lago, _m._, lake.

lagrima, _f._, tear.

lagrimon, _m._, large tear.

lamentacion, _f._, lamentation.

lamento, _m._, lament, moaning, plaint, complaint.

lamer, to lap.

lampara, _f._, lamp, light.

lance, _m._, case, incident, occurrence, critical moment.

languidez, _f._, languor, torpor.

languido, -a, languid.

lanza, _f._, lance.

lanzar, to hurl, cast, emit, dart; re _f._, to rush forth, dart out, be
cast (_or_ hurled); to jump, spring, swing oneself.

largo, -a, long, prolonged, large, broad; a lo--de, along, the length
of; _adv._, long.

larva, _f._, larva, hobgoblin, sprite.

lastima, _f._, pity, compassion; i ! what a pity! it's a pity; too
bad! es (una)--, it is a pity.

lastimero, -a, piteous, sad, doleful, mournful.

latido, _m._, palpitation, beat.

latin, _m._, Latin.

latir, to beat, palpitate; to bark, yelp; _subst._ _m._, bark(s),
barking.

laudable, laudable, praiseworthy.

lava, _f._, lava.

lavar, to wash, lave.

Lazaro, _m._, Lazarus.

lazo, _m._, tie, bond, fetter.

le, him, to him, to her, you, to you, it.

lebrel, _m._, greyhound.

leccion, _f._, lesson.

lector, _m._, reader.

leche, f, milk.

lecho, _m._, bed, couch.

leer, to read.

legamo, _m._, mud, slime.

legion, _f._, legion.

legua, _f._, league, about four miles.

lejano, -a, distant, remote.

legos, far, afar, far off; a lo --, at a distance, afar, far off; in
the distance; desde --, from a distance.

lengua, _f._, tongue, language.

lenguaje, _m._, language, speech.

lentamente, slowly.

lentisco, _m._, lentiscus, mastic, a low, shrubby tree, growing upon
the islands and coasts of the Mediterranean.

lentitud, _f._, slowness; con --, slowly.

lento, -a, slow.

letra, _f._, letter; _pl._, letters, words.

levadizo, -a, raisable; puente --, drawbridge.

levantar, to raise; -- el vuelo, to rise in flight, _refl._, to arise,
raise oneself, rise, get up.

leve, light, slight, trifling, gay.

ley, _f._, law; cartas leyes, summons.

leyenda, _f._, legend; inscription.

liar, to tie, bind; _refl._, to entwine about, to bind oneself.

libacion, _f._, libation.

libelula, _f._, libellula, dragon-fly.

libertad, _f._, liberty, freedom.

libertar, to free, liberate, protect.

librar, to deliver, preserve.

libre, free.

libro, _m._, book.

licencioso, -a, licentious.

licor, _m._, liquor, wine.

lienzo, _m._, linen, linen cloth (_or_ veil); curtain.

ligar, to render impotent by charms or spells.

ligeramente, lightly, slightly.

ligereza, _f._, lightness, agility.

ligerfsimo, -a, _abs. super. of_ ligero, very (_or_ extremely) light
(trifling _or_ insignificant).

ligero, -a, light, slight, thin, quick, swift, fleeting.

lima, _f._, file.

limbo, _m._, border.

limitar, to limit, confine.

limite, _m._, limit, confines, bounds, boundary.

limosnero, -a, charitable.

limpiar, to wipe.

limpidez, _f._, limpidity.

limpido, -a, limpid, clear, pure.

lindo, -a, handsome, pretty, nice.

linea, _f._, line; -- divisoria, boundary.

lino, _m._, canvas, linen.

linterna, _f._, lantern.

lira, _f._, lyre.

lirio, _m._, iris, lily.

lisonjero, -a, flattering.

lista, _f._, shred, patch.

litera, _f._, litter.

literario, -a, literary.

lo, the.

lo, it, him.

lo, that; -- que, that which, what, whatever; --s que, those who (_or_
which).

lobo, _m._, wolf.

lobrego, -a, dark, obscure, gloomy.

local, _m._, place, site.

loco, -a, wild, hilarious, mad, foolish, _ subst. m. and f._, madman,
mad woman (_or_ girl); cada -- con su tema, everybody (_lit._ every
fool) has his hobby.

locuela, _f._, madcap.

locura, _f._, madness.

lograr, to bring about, succeed.

loma, _f._, hill, hillock.

lomo, _m._, back; _pl._, back; a --s de, on the back of.

longanimidad, _f._, longanimity, long-suffering, long-sufferance.

lonjista, _m._, grocer, shopkeeper.

lontananza, _f._, distance; en --, in the distance; afar (off).

loor, _m._, (_poet._) praise.

Lope, _m._, (_Span._) Lope (from Lupus).

losa, _f._, flag, flagstone; slab.

lobrico, -a, lewd, vile.

lucido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ lucir, brilliant, magnificent.

luciernaga, _f._, glow-worm, firefly.

Lucifer, _m._, Lucifer, Satan.

lucir, to shine, be (_or_ become) bright; to display, wear.

lucha, _f._, strife, struggle, contest, battle.

luchar, to strive, struggle.

luego, then, presently, immediately, now, at once; desde --, at once,
straightway, thereupon, immediately.

luengo, -a, long.

lugar, _m._, place, town, village, spot, region, area; time,
opportunity; dar --, to give rise, give place; dejar --, to give
place; tener --, to happen, take place.

lugubre, mournful, lugubrious.

lujo, _m._, luxury.

lujosisimo, -a, _abs. super. of_ lujoso, very (_or_ most) luxurious.

lujoso, -a, luxurious, lavish.

lumbre, _f._, fire.

luminoso, -a, luminous, of light, with a halo of light.

luna, _f._, moon; noche de--, moonlight night.

luto, _m._, mourning.

luz, _f._, light; dar a la--, to give birth to; dos dedos de--, a thin
streak of light.

Ll

llama, _f._, flame.

llamar, to call, beckon, knock; -- a la puerta, to knock (at the
door); -- la atencion, to attract the attention; _refl._, to be
called, be named.

llamear, to flame, gleam, shine.

llano, _m._, plain; por montes y -s, over hill and dale.

llanto, _m._, cry; flood of tears; tears.

llanura, _f._, plain.

llave, _f._, key.

llegada, _f_, arrival.

llegar, to arrive, come, come to a (certain) point, go so far as, go,
reach; -- a, to reach, arrive at, succeed in, go so far as to; llegue
a tener miedo, I finally became afraid; -- y besar el santo, to
succeed in a brief space of time; to find good fortune quickly.

llenar, to fill; _refl._, to be filled.

lleno, -a, full, covered (with).

llevar, to take, bear, support, get, carry, place, put, raise, bring,
lead, take away, draw on, attract; to wear; -- a cabo, to execute,
carry out, bring to a successful conclusion, terminate successfully;
-- del diestro, to lead (by the halter or bridle); -- a termino, to
succeed, carry out, perform.

llorar, to cry, weep, weep for, mourn, grieve; nos amanecia llorando,
dawn found us weeping lloron, tearful, whimpering, lachrymose, given
to weeping, apt to shed tears.

llover, to rain.

lluvia,_f_, rain, shower.


M


macizo, -a, massive.

machon, _m._, buttress, counter-fort.

madera. _f._, wood, woodwork.

madre, _f._, mother.

madreselva, _f_, honeysuckle.

maese, _m. (obsolete) _, master.

maestro, _m._, master, teacher; de capilla, choir-master, one who
composes and directs church music.

magnate, _m._, magnate.

magnifico, -a, magnificent.

majaderfa, _f_, absurd (_or_ foolish) speech; nonsense.

majestad, _f_, majesty.

majestuoso, -a, majestic.

mal, _adj._ See malo; _adv._, badly, poorly; _subst. m._, evil, ill,
spell, evil act (_or_ speech); hacer -- de ojo, to cast the evil eye;
quien (en) -- anda, (en) -- acaba, a bad beginning makes a bad ending.

maldad,_f._, wickedness, wicked act.

maldecir, to revile, curse.

maldicion, _f._, malediction, curse.

maldito, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ maldecir, accursed.

maleficio, _m._, enchantment.

malestar, _m._, uneasiness.

maleza, _f._, thicket, brake; underbrush malhechor, _m._, malefactor,
criminal.

maliciar, to suspect.

malicioso, -a, mischievous, sly, roguish, malicious, evil-minded.

maligno, -a, malignant, evil.

malo, -a, bad, poor, ill, evil, worthless, wicked.

malla, _f._, (coat of) mail.

manada, _f._, herd, flock, pack.

mancebo, _m._, boy, youth, young man.

mancha, _f._, spot.

manchar, to stain.

mandar, to order, command, send orders; to send; -- comparecer, to
summon (to appear) mandoble, _m._, two-handed sword, broadsword.

manejar, to handle, wield.

manera, _f._, manner, way; de todas --s, at all events, at any rate.

manga, _f._, sleeve; --s perdidas, loose hanging sleeves.

mango, _m._, handle.

manjar, _m._, dish, tidbit; _pl._, food.

mano, _f._, hand; de --s a. boca, all of a sudden; unexpectedly; echar
-- de, to lay hands upon, take possession of; entre sus --s, in his
hands; tomar -- en ello, to take it in hand (_or_ a hand in it).

manojo, _m._, bundle, bunch, bouquet.

mansedumbre, _f._, meekness, humility.

manso, -a, meek, soft, gentle, mild.

mantener, to maintain, keep; _refl._, to remain, continue, stay, be.

manto, _m._, cloak.

mafia, _f._, pains, care, skill; evil custom, evil way.

manana, _f._, morning; de la noche a la --, all of a sudden, when
(you) least expected (it); _adv._, to-morrow.

maquinalmente, mechanically.

mar, _m._ or _f._, sea.

maravilla, _f._, marvel, wonder, miracle.

maravillar, to astonish, be astonished, wonder, marvel.

maravilloso, -a, marvelous.

marcar, to mark, designate, stain.

marcial, martial, warlike.

marchar, to march, walk, go, advance; marchando de sorpresa en
sorpresa, ever more and more surprised; _refl._, to get off (_or_
away); to escape.

marchito, -a, withered, faded.

marfil, _m._, ivory.

margarita _f._, daisy.

margen, _f._, margin, bank, border, edge.

Maria, _f._, Mary.

marido, _m._, husband.

mariposa, _f._, butterfly.

marmol, _m._, marble; _pl._ marble, marbles.

marmoreo, -a, marble, of marble.

marques, _m._, marquis.

martillo, _m._, hammer.

martir, _m._, martyr.

martirio, _m._, martyrdom; _pl._, martyrdom.

mas, but, however.

mas, _adv._, more, most; -- bien, rather; a -- andar, at full speed; a
-- de, besides; a -- y mejor, the best they could; the most possible;
vying with one another; mientras --...--, the more .., the more; en lo
-- minimo, in the least; lo -- posible, as much as possible; -- que,
more than, other than, except, but; no -- que, no more than, no other
than; only; no -- (_for_ no -- que), only; por -- que, however much;
especially since; although; que no haya -- que oir, that nothing else
can be heard; -- que de prisa (_lit._, more than rapidly), as rapidly
as possible; sobre -- o menos, more or less; approximately, nearly,
about.

masa, _f._, mass.

mascara, _f._, mask.

mata, _f._, shrub, bush, underbrush; apinadas --s, tangled (_or_
dense) shrubbery (_or_ underbrush).

matar, to kill.

material, material, corporeal, physical.

matizar, to color, adorn, tint, paint.

matojo, _m._, bush.

matorral, _m._, field of brambles; thicket; _pl._, brambles, briers,
thicket.

matrimonio, _m._, marriage, matrimony.

Mayo, _m._, May.

mayor, greater, older, elder, better, best, greatest; main, chief,
principal; _subst. m. pl._, elders; ancestors.

me, me, to me.

mecer, to rock, swing, sway; _refl._, to balance oneself; to swing,
sway, hover, stir, shake.

mediante, by means of; in consideration of; for.

mediar, to be (_or_ come) between; to intervene.

medico, _m._, doctor.

medida, _f._, measure, proportion; a ---- que, in proportion as.

medio, -a, half, mid, middle; a -- abrir, half open; a la media hora,
within half an hour; a media voz, in a low tone; a medias, half; media
noche, midnight; _adv._, half, partially; _subst. m._, middle, means,
way, midst, medium, intermediary; de -- a --, completely; en -- de, in
the midst of; between; por en -- de, through the midst of; through.

medir, to measure; to compare; -se con los ojos, to scan each other.

meditar, to meditate.

medroso, -a, fearful, frightful.

medula. _f._, marrow.

mejilla, _f._, cheek.

mejor, _comp._ of bueno, better, best; _adv._, better, best; por --
decir, in other words; o -- dicho, or rather; rather; a mas y --,
best they could; the most possible; vying with one another.

melancolia, _f._, melancholy.

melancolico, -a, melancholy, gloomy, sad.

melodia, _f._, melody.

memoria, _f._, memory, memorial; de --, by heart; hacer -- de, to
remember; traer a la --, to bring to the memory; to remind.

menor, minor, lesser; el --, the least.

menos, _adv._, less, least; except, with the exception of; a lo --, at
least; al --, at least; la cosa no era para --, nothing less could be
expected; no poder (por) -- de, not to be able to help; sobre mas o
--, more or less; approximately, nearly, about; vuelven -- de los que
van, fewer return than go.

mente, _f._, mind.

mentecato, -a, silly, foolish, stupid; _subst. m._, fool.

mentira, _f._, lie.

menudo, -a, slight, common, small, light, gentle, slender, short;
gente menuda, servants, domestics, dependants.

merced, _f._, grace, gift, favor, thanks; -- a, thanks to.

merecer, to merit, deserve; to obtain.

merito, _m._, merit, worth.

mes, _m._, month.

mesa, _f._, table.

mesar, to pluck (out); to tear.

meseta, _f._, landing; table-land, plateau.

metal, _m._, metal.

metalico, -a, metallic.

meteoro, _m._, meteor.

mezcla, _f._, mixture.

mezclar, to mix, mingle; _refl._, to be mingled; to meddle.

mezquino, -a, poor, little, trifling, mean, wretched.

miedo, _m._, fear; tener--, to be afraid.

miembro, _m._, limb, member.

mientras, while, whilst, when, as long as; --que, while, whereas;
--mas... mas, the more... the more.

mies, _f._, wheat; _pl._, harvests, crops.

mi, my.

mi, me.

mil, thousand, a thousand, one thousand, ten hundred.

milagro, _m._, miracle.

milagroso, -a, marvelous, miraculous.

milicias, _f.__pl._, militia; army, host(s).

militar, _m._, soldier.

millar, _m._, thousand.

millon, _m._, million.

minimo, -a, least; en lo mas--, in the least.

ministril, _m._, apparitor, beadle; petty officer.

ministro, _m._, minister.

minucioso, -a, minute, detailed.

minuto, _m._, minute; a los cinco --s, within five minutes; a los
pocos --s, in (_or_ within) a few minutes.

mio, -a, mine, my; el--, la mia, mine.

mirada, _f._, glance, look; tender una--, to take a look; to look; to
glance.

mirador, _m._, mirador, belvedere, oriel, lookout, observatory.

mirar, to look, look at, gaze at; to see; --se entre si, to look at
each other (_or_ one another).

misa, _f._, mass; Misa del Gallo, midnight mass on Christmas eve.

miseria, _f._, poverty, penury; worthlessness, destitution.

misericordia, _f._, mercy.

mismo, -a, same, self, very; de un -- rey, of (one and) the same king.

misterio, _m._, mystery, secret.

misterioso, -a, mysterious.

misticismo, _m._, mysticism.

mistico, -a, mystic.

mitad, _f._, middle, midst; half.

mitra, _f._, miter.

modesto, -a, modest.

modo, _m._, manner, way; de este--, in this manner; as follows;
de--que, so that; de tal--, in such a way; so well; de todos--s, at
all events, at any rate, however.

mofa, _f._, mockery, scorn.

mofarse, to scoff, mock, make fun of.

molestar, to disturb, molest.

molesto, -a, disagreeable, vexing, vexatious.

molido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ moler, tired, fatigued.

momentaneo, -a, momentary.

momento, _m._, moment; consequence; --s antes..., a few moments
before..

monarca, _m._, monarch, king.

monasterio, _m._, monastery.

monja, _f._, nun.

monje, _m._, monk.

mono, _m._, monkey, ape; hacer --s, to play tricks, do wonderful (_or_
amusing) feats.

monotono, -a, monotonous.

monserga, _f._, gabble, gibberish, confused language.

monstruo, _m._, monster.

monstruoso, -a, monstrous.

montante, PT.., broadsword.

montana, _f._, mountain.

montar, to mount, go up, get on; -- nuevamente, to remount.

monte, _m._, mountain; cuchillo de --, hunting-knife, hunter's
cutlass; por --s y llanos, over hill and dale.

montero, _m._, hunter, huntsman.

montura, _f_, saddle.

morado, -a, violet, mauve-colored.

morador, _m._, inhabitant.

moral, _m._, morale, moral condition (state _or_ organization).

morar, to dwell, reside.

morbido, -a, soft, mellow, rich, subdued, delicate.

morder, to bite, eat into, cut, abrade, prick, gnaw.

moreno, -a, dark.

moribundo, -a, dying, faint, fainting.

morir, to die, expire, die out; _refl._, to die, die away, pass away.

morisco, -a, Moorish, of (_or_ pertaining to) the Moors.

moro, _m._, Moor.

mortal, mortal, fatal; s&t. _m._, mortal.

mortuorio, mortuary.

mosca, _f._, fly.

moscardon, _m._, large fly, horse-fly, gadfly.

mostrar, to show; _refl._, to show oneself, appear, be.

mote, _m._, motto, heading.

motete, _m._, motet, a sacred musical composition.

mover, to move; -- guerra, to make war; _refl._, to move.

movimiento, _m._, movement, motion, commotion; -- de cabeza, nod (of
the head).

mozo, _m._, boy, youth, lad, young man.

muchacha, _f._, girl.

muchacho, _m._, boy, lad.

muchedumbre, _f._, crowd, multitude.

mucho, -a, much; _pl._, many; por --s que, however many; _adv._, much,
very, greatly.

mudable, changeable, fickle.

mudo, -a, mute, silent, speechless, dumb.

muerte, _f._, death; a --, to the death; herir de --, to strike dead.

muerto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ morir, died, dead; los --s, the dead;
imuerto esta! he is a dead boar!

muestra, _f._, proof, demonstration, mark, sign.

mugir, to roar, rumble.

mujer, _f._, woman, wife.

mula, _f._, mule.

mulo, _m._, mule.

multiplicarse, to multiply, be multiplied, increase.

multitud, _f._, multitude, crowd, great number.

mundano, -a, mundane, worldly.

mundo, _m._, world; crowd, multitude; society; por el --, in society;
out; por esos --s, into the world at large; todo el --, everybody;
todo un --, a whole world; a great multitude.

muralla, _f._, rampart, wall.

murir, to die.

murmullo, _m._, murmur.

murmuracion, _f._, murmur, rumor; slander, gossip.

murmurador, murmuring.

murmurar, to murmur; _refl._, to be murmured (rumored _or_ reported).

muro, _m._, wall.

musculo, _m._, muscle.

musgo, _m._, moss.

musgoso, -a, mossy, covered with moss, moss-covered.

musica, _f._, music; _pl._, music, musical notes (_or_ sounds).

mustio, -a, sad, sorrowful.

mutuamente, mutually; each other.

mutuo, -a, mutual.

muy, very, very much, quite.


N


nacar, _m._, nacre, pearl, mother-of-pearl.

nacer, to be born.

naciente, rising, on-coming, falling.

nacimiento, _m._, birth, rise.

nacion, _f._, nation.

nada, nothing; i--! not at all; by no means; no indeed; never mind; it
makes no difference; i--, --! (_an exclamation of denial or refusal_),
nothing else will do; no ... --, nothing; not anything; en --, in any
respect; at all; -- menos, nothing less; para --, in any respect; at
all; pues --, but no; not so.

nadar, to swim, float.

nadie, no one, nobody; some one, somebody.

nariz, _f._, nose, nostrils; reirse en la --, to laugh in one's face.

narracion, _f._, narration, story.

narrador, _m._, narrator.

narrar, to relate, tell.

natural, natural; native.

naturaleza, _f._, nature.

naturalmente, naturally, by nature.

navaja, _f._, knife, clasp-knife.

nave, _f._, nave; _pl._, nave and aisles.

nebuloso, -a, misty, cloudy.

necedad, _f._, stupidity, folly.

necesitado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ necesitar, needed; needing, needy, in
need (de, of).

necesitar, to need, be in need of, want, lack, be necessary.

negro, -a, black, dark.

nervioso, -a, nervous.

ni, neither, nor, not even, nor even; even, or; -- aun, not even; --
... tampoco, nor .. either; no ... --, not ... even; -- ... --,
neither ... nor; -- tan siquiera, not even, not so much as.

nicho. _m._, niche, hole, grave.

nido, _m._, nest.

niebla, _f._, mist, fog, cloud.

nieto, _m._, grandchild.

nieve, _f._, snow: _pl_, snow.

ninguno (_or_ ninghn), -a, no, none; any, any one; either; -- (de los
dos), neither (of us); no ... --, none, not any.

nina, _f._, child, girl.

ninez, _f._, childhood.

nino, _m._, child, boy; muy desde--since (_or_ from) early boyhood.

no, not, no; -- mas (_for_ -- mas que), only; -- poder (por) menos de,
not to be able to help; -- que, while, whilst; como -- sea, unless it
be; -- sea que, lest, for fear; -- ... ya (_or_ ya ... --), no longer.

noble, noble; _subst._ _m._, noble, lord.

nobleza, _f._, nobility.

nocturno, -a, nocturnal.

noche, _f._, night, evening; en la alta--, in the dead of night; late
at night; Noche-Buena, Christmas eve; mass of Christmas eve; de -- y
dia, night and day; esta -- pasada, last night; la -- habia cerrado,
the night had come (_or_ fallen); night had closed in (around him);
ihasta la --! (good-by) till to-night; goodby; -- de luna, moonlight
night; de la -- a la manana, all of a sudden, when (you) least
expected (it); media --, midnight; por las --s, in the night; at
night; una -- y otra, night after night.

nombre, _m._, name; sin --, nameless; boundless, indescribable.

noria, _f._, sakieh, a kind of machine for raising water from wells
etc., consisting of two wheels, one horizontal and one vertical, and
of an endless chain armed with cups (or buckets).

nos, we, us, ourselves, each other, one another; to us, to ourselves.

nosotros,-as, we, us.

nota, _f._, note, tone, tune. notable, remarkable.

notar, to note, notice, observe; _refl._, to be noticed (_or_
noticeable).

noticia, _f._, notice, news, information; tener -- de, to be informed
of.

notificar, to notify.

novedad, _f._, novelty, news, fad, innovation.

novia, _f._, bride, newly married wife.

novicia, _f._, novice.

nube, _f._, cloud, film, crowd; -- de sangre, bloody film.

nublar (_for_ anublar), to cloud, darken.

nuestro, -a, our, ours; el --, la nuestra, ours.

nueva, _f._, news.

nuevamente, anew, again; montar --, to remount.

nueve, nine.

nuevo, -a, new, recently arrived, unacquainted; de --, again, anew.

numero, _m._, number.

numeroso, -a, numerous.

nunca, never, ever; no ... --, never; not at all, by no means.


O


o, or, either; -- bien, or, or else; bien ... --, whether ... or;
either ... or.

obedecer, to obey, yield to.

obediente, obedient.

obispo, _m._, bishop.

objetar, to object, oppose.

objeto, _m._, object, purpose.

obligacion, _f._, obligation.

obligado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ obligar, obliged; necessary, unavoidable,
indispensable, natural.

obra, _f._, work; matter; -- de, at (_or_ of) about, about; como --
de, a matter of; about; poner por --, to carry out, execute.

obscurecer, to obscure, blind, darken, grow dark; _refl._, to grow
dark, be (_or_ become) dark; to go out.

obscuridad, _f._, obscurity, gloom.

obscuro, -a, dark, obscure.

observar, to observe.

obstaculo, _m._, obstacle.

obstante: no --, nevertheless, notwithstanding.

obstinado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ obstinarse, obstinate, obdurate.

obtener, to obtain, secure, bring about.

ocasion, _f._, occasion, opportunity, juncture.

ocaso, _m._, west.

occidente, _m._, west.

oceano, _m._, ocean, sea.

ocio, _m._, leisure.

ocioso, -a, idle, unoccupied, bored.

octava, _f._, octave, eight-day celebration of a religious festival.

ocultar, to hide, conceal.

oculto, -a, hidden, concealed, secret.

ocupacion, _f._, occupation.

ocupar, to fill, occupy, take possession of, busy; _refl._, to busy
oneself, be busy.

ocurrencia, _f._, sally, flash of wit.

ocurrir, to happen, occur.

ofender, to offend.

ofertorio, _m._, offertory.

oficial, _m._, official, officer.

oficiar, to officiate.

oficio, _m._, trade, business, occupation, service, office, craft,
profession.

oficioso, -a, officious.

ofrecer, to offer, present; _refl._, to present itself, appear.

ofrenda, _f._, offering.

ioh!, oh!

oido, _m._, hearing, ear; prestar el --, to pay attention; to listen
(carefully).

oir, to hear; -- a, to hear from; estuve oyendo, I kept hearing; que
no haya mas que --, that nothing else can be heard; _refl._, to be
heard, be audible.

ojeada, _f._, glance, look.

ojeo, _m._, battue, beating for game; que hacian senales de --, which
were blowing to start up the game.

ojiva, _f._, Gothic (_or_ pointed) window.

ojival, ogival, characterized by the pointed arch.

ojo, _m._, eye; darse de --, to conspire, have a secret understanding;
en un abrir y cerrar de --s, in the twinkling of an eye; in an
instant; hacer mal de --, to cast the evil eye; medirse con los --s,
to scan each other.

ola, _f._, wave.

olmo, _m._, elm.

olor, _m._, odor; tener en -- de santidad, to hold (_or_ consider) as
a saint.

olvidar, to forget.

olvido, _m._, oblivion, forgetfulness.

omnipotencia, _f._, omnipotence.

onda, _f._, wave.

ondina, _f._, undine, water-sprite.

ondulante, rolling.

ondular, to undulate.

operacion, _f._, operation, act.

oponerse, to oppose.

oprimir, to oppress, press, clasp.

opuesto, -a, opposite.

opulento, -a, rich, opulent.

ora, now; -- ... --, now ... now (_or_ again).

oracion, _f._, prayer, orison, adoration; a la --, to prayers.

orden, _m._, order, regularity, decorum; _f._, order, command,
insignia.

ordenar, to order, command, lay upon; to organize.

oreja, _f._, auricle, ear.

organista, _m._, organist.

organo, _m._, organ.

orgia, _f._, orgy, revelry, revel.

orgullo, _m._, pride.

orgulloso, -a, proud, haughty.

origen, _m._, origin, cause, birth, descent.

original, original; _subst. m._, original.

orilla, _f._, bank, shore.

orin, _m._, rust.

orla, _f._, border, fringe, edge.

orlar, to border.

ornar, to adorn.

oro, _m._, gold.

os, you, to you.

osar, to dare.

oscilar, to oscillate, hover, sway.

ostracismo, _m._, ostracism.

otono, _m._, autumn.

otro, -a, other, another, else, next; alguno que --, here and there
one; a very few; some; el -- dia, the next day; un dia y --, day after
day; constantly; en --s dias, in other (_or_ former) days; once,
formerly; una noche y --, night after night; (el) uno y (el) --, both;
otras tantas (veces), as many (times); otra vez, again; una vez y
otra, again and again.

ovalado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ ovalar, oval.

oveja, _f._, sheep, ewe.


P


pabellon, _m._, tent (or canopy); bower

pabulo, _m._, food, support, aid.

pacer, to graze, pasture.

paciencia, _f._, patience.

paciente, patient.

pacifico, -a, peaceful, pacific.

padecer, to be afflicted.

padre, _m._, father; _pl._, parents; ancestors.

pagar, to pay, pay for, repay.

pagina, _f._, page.

pago, _m._, payment, recompense.

pais, _m._, country.

paja, _f._, straw.'

pajaro, _m._, bird, sparrow; _pl._, birds.

paje, _m._, page.

palabra, _f._, word; dirigir la -- , to address, speak; tomar la --,
to speak.

palacio, palacio, _m._, palace.

palafren, _m._, palfrey.

palafrenero, _m._, groom.

palidez, _f._, pallor, paleness.

palido, -a, pale.

palma, _f._, palm; batir las --s, to clap the hands.

palmera, _f._, palm.

palmo, _m._, span; cuatro --s, a small space.

palo, _m._, stick, wood; dar de --s, to beat, give a beating; to
cudgel.

paloma, _f._, pigeon, dove.

palpar, to feel, touch.

palpitar, to palpitate, quiver.

pan, _m._, bread, loaf of bread.

pandero, _m._, tambourine.

pano, _m._, cloth, table-cloth.

Papa, _m._, pope.

papel, _m._, paper.

par, equal, like; al --, at the same time; without distinction; alike;
equally; a -- de, the same as, like; near, by, at; together with, at
the same time with; al -- de, like, as; at the same time with; de --
en -- abierto, wide open; _subst. m._, pair, couple.

para, for, to, in order to; -- con, to, amongst; estar --, to be about
to; la cosa no era -- menos, nothing less could be expected; -- nada,
in any (_or_ no) respect; at all; -- que, so that, in order that; no
hay -- que decir que se fastidiaban, it is needless to say they were
bored; ?-- que? wherefore? why? for what reason?

parabola, _f._, parable.

parador, _m._, inn.

paraiso, _m._, paradise.

paraje, _m._, place.

paramo, _m._, a high bleak plateau with stunted trees and cold damp
atmosphere; (_poet._) desert, waste.

parar, to stop; _refl._, to stop, halt.

parecer, to seem, be like, resemble; al --, seemingly, apparently; a
lo que parece, as it seems; evidently; _refl._, to resemble, be like.

parecido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ parecer, seemed; similar, like.

pared, _f._, wall, partition.

pareja, _f._, pair, couple.

pariente,_m._, relative.

parpado, _m._, eyelid.

parroquia, _f._, parish, parochial church.

parte, _f._, part, portion, direction; a esta --, up to now; de algun
tiempo a esta --, for some time past, for some time now; en --,
partly; en alguna --, somewhere; por mi --, for my part; por todas
--s, in every direction; everywhere; por una --, on the one hand.

participar, to participate (de, in).

particular, peculiar, special, strange, particular.

particularidad, _f._, peculiarity.

particularmente, particularly, especially.

partido, _m._, resolution.

partir, to set out, leave, depart.

pasadizo, _m._, gallery, arcade, covered passageway.

pasado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ pasar, passed; past; last; after.

pasajero, _m._, passer-by.

pasar, to pass, while away, move, advance, go, pass through, take
place, happen, go on, be the matter; -- de, to pass, pass beyond, be
more than; -- de aqui, to go (any) further (or farther).

pasear, to move about, sweep about, cast around; _refl._, to walk
about, walk back and forth (_or_ to and fro).

pasion, _f._, passion, love.

pasmoso, -a, wonderful, remarkable.

paso, _m._, step, footstep, pace, passage, pass, difficulty,
embarrassment; -- a --, step for step; step by step; abrir --, to open
up a passage; to make way; dar un --, to take a step; dejar --, to let
pass, make way.

pastor, _m._, shepherd.

patio, _m._, court.

patrana, _f._, fable, story, tale.

patrimonio, _m._, patrimony, inheritance.

patron, _m._ See patrono.

patrona, _f._, patron, mistress, lady, patron saint, guardian,
protector.

patrono, _m._, patron, protector, master, patron saint.

pausa, _f._, pause.

pavimento, _m._, pavement, floor.

pavor, _m._, fear, dread, awe.

paz, _f._, peace.

pecador, _m._, sinner.

pechero, _m._, vassal, commoner.

pecho, _m._, breast.

pedantesco, -a, pedantic.

pedazo, _m._, piece; hacer --s, to make pieces of, break to pieces; a
--s, in bits, to pieces.

pedernal, _m._, flint, stone, flintstone.

pedestal, _m._, pedestal, foundation.

pedir, to ask, ask for, beg, request, beseech, pray.

pedrada, _f._, stoning; a --s, by stoning (them).

pedregoso, -a, stony, rocky.

pedreria, _f._, gems, precious stones.

Pedro, _m._, Peter.

pedrusco, _m._, (rough) block of stone; stone (_or_ marble) slab (_or_
block); bowlder.

pegar, to fasten, close, shut, join.

pelado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ pelar, bared, bare, bleak, treeless.

pelea, _f._, battle, fight, combat.

pelear, to fight, struggle, combat.

peligro, _m._, danger.

peligroso, -a, dangerous.

pellica, _f._, fur garment, fur coat.

pena, _f._, pain, penalty, trouble, bother, affliction, grief,
difficulty; a duras --s, with great difficulty.

penacho, _m._, panache, crest, plume(s).

penalidad, _f._, hardship, suffering.

penar, to suffer torment; andar penando, to suffer torment.

pender, to hang, be suspended; -- de, to depend upon; to wait for;
pendiente de, while waiting for; until I learned.

pendiente, _f._, slope.

pendon, _m._, banner, pennant, standard.

pendulo, m, pendulum, (_here_) tick (of the pendulum).

penetrante, penetrating.

penetrar, to penetrate, enter, gain entrance; _refl._, to enter,
penetrate.

penitencia, _f._, penance, act of mortification.

penitente, penitent.

penoso, -a, painful, distressing.

pensamiento, _m._, thought, resolution, purpose; con el --, to
oneself; in one's own mind; in thought.

pensar, to think, think over, reflect upon, consider, mean, intend; --
en, to think of.

penumbra, _f._, penumbra, partial shadow.

pena, _f._, large rock, bowlder, cliff.

penascal, _m._, rocky hill (or mountain).

penasco, _m._, rock, cliff, large rock, bowlder.

penon, _m._, rock, cliff.

peon, _m._, footman, foot-soldier, laborer, farm-hand.

pero, _comp. of_ malo, worse, worst; el --, the worst; lo --, the
worst (thing _or_ part).

pequenito, -a, very small, tiny.

pequeno, -a, little, small.

pequefiuclo, -a, small, very small, tiny; _subst. m. and f._, little
boy, little girl, little one.

percibir, to perceive, see, hear, comprehend; _refl._, to be seen
(_or_ be visible), be heard (_or_ be audible).

perder, to lose, destroy, miss, give up; -- pie, to lose one's footing
(_or_ foothold); -- de vista, to lose sight of; _refl._, to be lost;
to disappear, vanish; to die out (_or_ away).

perdido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ perder, lost, vanished; impious; falling,
wandering, lone; estrella perdida, lone (_or_ lost) star; mangas
perdidas, loose hanging sleeves.

perdon, _m._, pardon, forgiveness, excuse.

perdonar, to pardon.

perdulariote, _m._, shiftless fellow.

perdurable, perpetual, everlasting.

perecer, to perish, die.

peregrenacion, _f._, wandering, peregrination.

peregrino, -a, strange, wonderful; _subst. m._, wanderer, pilgrim.

pereroso, -a, idle, indolent.

perfectamente, perfectly.

perfil, _m._, profile, outline, contour.

perfumado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ perfumar, perfumed, odoriferous.

perfume, _m.._, perfume, odor, fragrance.

periodico, _m._, newspaper.

peripecia, _f._, peripetia, sudden change of fortune, vicissitude,
catastrophe, event.

perjurar, to protest, reiterate.

perla, _f._, pearl.

permanecer, to remain, persist, continue.

permiso, _m._, permission.

permitir, to permit, allow, consent.

pero, but.

Pero, _m._, dim. _of_ pedro. see caldera

perpendicular, perpendicular.

perro, _m._, dog.

persecucion, _f._, persecution.

perseguidor, _m._, pursuer, persecutor, foe.

perseguir, to pursue, follow, persecute.

persianas, _f. pl._, Venetian blinds.

persignarse, to cross oneself.

persona, _f._, person.

persouaje, _m._, personage, character, person, great personage.

personalidad, _f._, personality.

persouificar, to personify.

persuadirse, to persuade (_or_ convince) oneself.

persuasion, _f._, persuasion, conviction; en la firme -- de que,
firmly persuaded that.

perteuecer, to belong.

pertinacia, _f._, obstinacy.

pertrechar, to provide, furnish, equip (de, with); to give a supply
(de, of).

pesadilla, _f._, nightmare.

pesado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ pesar, heavy, ponderous.

pesar, to weigh, be heavy.

pesar, _m._, grief, sorrow; a -- de (_adv._), despite, in spite of,
notwithstanding.

peso, _m._, weight; a su --, by its own weight.

pestana, _f._, eyelash.

pestes, _f. pl._, words of vexation or threat; echar -- de, to storm
at.

peticion, _f._, petition, prayer.

piadoso, -a, pious.

piafar, to paw; _subst._ _m._, pawing.

pian pianito, gently, softly.

picacho, _m._, top, peak.

picado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ picar, pricked, piqued, excited, aroused.

picar, to prick, pique, spur.

pico, _m._, point, peak, summit; small amount, odd; balance; cortado a
--, perpendicular, precipitous; alla por los anos de mil trescientos y
--, back there in the year thirteen hundred and something.

pie, _m._, foot; footing; de --, on foot, standing; ponerse de --, to
stand (_or_ get) up; servidor de a --, footman; echar -- a tierra, to
dismount; perder --, to lose one's footing (_or_ foothold); volver
pies, to turn (one's steps); volver pies atras, to turn back.

piedad, _f._, piety, pity, mercy; por --, for pity's sake; out of
compassion.

piedra, _f._, stone, rock.

pierna, _f._, leg; a -- suelta, at one's ease; undisturbed; dormir a
suelta, to sleep soundly (_or_ deeply).

pieza, _f._, piece, part; animal, game; plantation, field.

pilar, _m._, pillar, post, column, support, abutment.

pilastra, _f._, pilaster.

pintar, to paint, picture, describe, depict.

pintor, _m._, painter.

pintoresco, -a, picturesque.

piqueta, _f._, pickax.

pisada, _f._, footstep, hoof-beat.

pisar, to tread, trample.

pista, _f._, scent, trail.

pizarra, _f._, slate.

placeme, _m._, congratulation.

placer, _m._, pleasure, content(ment).

planta, _f._, plant; sole of the foot; poner en--, to put on foot; to
arrange (or execute).

plata, _f._, silver.

plataforma, _f._, platform.

plateado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ platear, silvered, silvery, pale.

platillo, _m._, little plate, dish; subject; hacer -- de, to converse
about.

playa, _f._, shore, strand; sin --, boundless.

plaza, _f._, place, post, square.

plazuela, _f._, small square.

plebe, _f._, people, common people, populace.

plegar, to curl, purse, curve.

plegaria, _f._, prayer, supplication.

plenitud, _f._, fullness, height.

pliegue, _m._, fold, plait, wave, ripple.

plomo, _m._, lead; color de--, leaden, lead-colored.

pluma, _f._, plume, feather, quill, pen.

poblacion, _f._, town, village.

poblachon, _m._, big village.

poblado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ poblar, peopled, filled; full.

pobre, poor; _subst. m. or f._ poor man (_or_ woman).

pobrecito, _subst. m._, poor dear man; poor fellow.

poco, -a, little; _pl._, some, a few; a los --s minutos, within a few
minutes; _adv._, little, slightly, somewhat; un --, a little,
slightly, somewhat; a --, in a little while; soon; a -- de, shortly
after; -- a --, little by little, slowly, gently, softly, gradually;
-- mas o menos, a little more or less; approximately, nearly, about.

poder, to be able; can; apenas si pudiera, I could scarcely; como
pudo, as best he could; come mejor pudo, as well as possible; as well
as he could; no -- (por) menos de, cannot (help) but, cannot fail to;
_refl._, to be possible.

poder, _m._, power, possession.

poderoso, -a, powerful.

podredumbre, _f._, corruption.

poema, _m._, poem.

poesia, _f._, poetry.

poeta, _m._, poet.

polvo, _m._, dust.

porno, _m._, knob, handle, pommel.

pompa, _f._, pomp.

ponderacion, _f._, consideration; exaggeration; laudation.

ponderar, to laud, extol, exaggerate.

poner, to put, place, take on, assume; -- atencion, to pay attention;
-- en alarma, to alarm; -- encuidado, to cause apprehension (_or_
care); -- fuego, to set fire (to); -- por obra, to carry out, execute;
-- en planta, to put on foot; to arrange (_or_ execute); -- por
testigos, to call upon to witness; _refl._, to be, become; (of the
sun) to set; estar al -se, to be about to set; -se de bote en bote, to
get cram full; -- Be de pie, to stand (_or_ get) up; -se de punta, to
stand on end.

populacho, _m._, populace, rabble.

popular, popular, of (_or_ pertaining to) the populace.

poquito, -a, very little; -- a poco, gently, softly.

por, by, for, to, in order to, through, over, on, in, into, along,
about, on account of, from, out of, as, at, among, throughout; alli --
..., back therein...; de-si, by himself; for his own part; -- debajo,
beneath, under; -- decirlo asi, so to speak; -- entre, between, among,
in through; -- eso, hence, therefore; -- fin, finally; -- fortuna,
fortunately; -- mas que, however much; especially since; although; --
mi mismo, for myself; -- muchos que, however many; poner -- obra, to
carry out, execute; -- si, of itself; of its own accord; -- ser, since
it was; -- tanto, therefore, for that reason, hence; -- la tierra, on
(_or_ along) the ground; -- tres veces, three times; -- lo visto,
evidently, apparently, visibly; -- ... que, however; -- lo que,
wherefore; ? -- que? why?

porcion, _f._, part, portion; una -- de anos, a few years; a number
of years.

porche, _m._, portico, church porch, porch.

porfia, _f._, persistence; a --, in competition, in emulation.

pormenor, _m._, detail, minute account, incident.

poro, _m._, pore.

?por que? why?

porque, _m._, reason, cause, reason why.

porque, for, because; so that, in order that; bien -- ... o por ser,
whether because ... or because it was.

portada, _f._, portal, facade.

porte, _m._, bearing, deportment.

portento, _m._, prodigy, portent, micacle.

portico, _m._, portico, porch.

porvenir, _m._, future.

pos: en --, after, behind, in pursuit (de, of).

poscer, to possess.

posible, possible; en lo --, as much as possible; lo mas --, as much
as possible; lo --, as much as possible.

posicion, _f._, position, situation.

positivo, -a, positive.

posteriormente, afterwards, later.

postigo, _m._, door, postern.

postrado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ postrar, prostrated, prostrate.

postre, last; a la --; at last, finally.

postrero (_or_ postrer), -a, last.

postres, _m. pl._, dessert.

poterna, _f._, postern, small back door (_or_ gate).

potro, _m._, colt, foal.

prbetico, -a, skilled, expert, practiced, skillful.

precaucion, _f._, caution, precaution.

preceder, to precede.

precepto, _m._, order, command.

precioso, -a, precious, costly.

precipicio, _m._, precipice.

precipitacion, _f._, precipitation, haste.

precisamente, exactly, precisely, just.

preciso, -a, necessary; es -- que, I (you, etc.) must. appear.

prediccion, _f._, prediction, prophecy, warning.

predilecto, -a, favorite, beloved.

preferible, preferable.

preferir, to prefer.

pregunta, _f._, question, inquiry; hacer una --, to ask a question,
make an inquiry.

preguntar, to ask.

prelado, _m._, prelate.

preludio, _m._, prelude, forerunner, precursor.

premiar, to reward.

premio, _m._, reward; en --, as a reward.

prendas, _f. pl._, talents, accomplishments.

prender, to seize, take, arrest.

preocupar, to preoccupy, prepossess.

preparar, to prepare, make ready; _refl._, to be prepared, be (_or_
get) ready; to prepare.

presa, _f._, capture, prize; -- de, a prey to.

presagio, _m._, presage, omen, portent, token.

presbiterio, _m._, presbytery, chancel.

prescindir de, to omit, except, leave out of consideration.

presea, _f._, jewel, gem.

presencia, _f._, presence.

presenciar, to witness.

presentacion, _f._, introduction, presentation.

presentar, to introduce, present, offer, hold out; _refl._, to be
present, present (_or_ show) oneself, appear.

presente, present; hacer --, to lay before, present, state; tener --,
to bear in mind, remember; _subst._ _m._, person present; present
(time).

presentir, to foresee, forebode, have a foreboding of.

presidio, _m._, jail, prison.

preso, -a, _pp. (irr.) of_ prender, seized.

prestar, to lend, give, furnish, pay; -- homenaje, to pay homage,
profess fealty; -- el oido, to pay attention; to listen (carefully).

preste, _m._, priest.

presteza, _f._, rapidity.

presumir, to presume, suppose, boast.

presunto, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ presumir, presumed, supposed,
boasted.

presuroso, -a, hasty, quick, prompt, rapid, speedy; _adv._, speedily,
promptly, hurriedly.

pretendiente, _m._, aspirant, suitor.

pretil, _m._, railing, balustrade, battlement, breastwork.

prevenir, to warn, foresee, anticipate.

prez, _m. or f._, renown, glory.

primada, _m._, primate, archbishop; primatical church.

primavera, _f._, spring.

primero (_or_ primer), -a, first, former, best, only; _adv._, first,
before, rather, sooner.

primicia, _f._, first-fruits.

primogenito, _m._, heir (by primogeniture).

primor, _m._, beauty, charm; skill, dexterity.

principal, principal, chief, leading.

principio, _m._, beginning; a -- de, at the beginning of; early in;
dar --, to begin.

priora, _f._, prioress, superior.

prisa, _f._, haste, speed; de --, rapidly; mas que de -- (_lit._ more
than rapidly), as rapidly as possible.

prision, _f._, prison, dungeon.

prisionero, _m._, prisoner.

privar, to find general acceptance.

privilegio, _m._, privilege.

probable, probable.

probar, to prove, taste, swallow, try, test.

problema, _m._, problem, question.

procedencia, _f._, derivation, source.

proceder, to proceed.

procurar, to try, endeavor, manage, succeed.

prodigalidad, _f._, prodigality, profusion, extravagance.

prodigio, _m._, marvel, prodigy, miracle.

prodigioso, -a, marvelous, wonderful.

producir, to produce, make, arouse.

producto, _m._, product.

profanacion, _f._, profanation.

profanar, to profane, disgrace, desecrate.

proferir, to proffer, utter.

profesion, _f._, profession, practice.

profesora, _f._, professor, teacher.

profeta, _m._, prophet.

profundamente, profoundly, deeply.

profundidad, _f._, depth.

profundo, -a, profound, deep; _subst. m. pl._ depths; hell.

profusion, _f._, profusion, lavishness.

prohibir, to forbid.

prolongado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ prolongar, prolonged, long.

prolongar, to prolong; _refl._, to be prolonged; to stretch out.

promesa, _f._, promise.

prometer, to promise.

promocion, _f._, promotion.

prontitud, _f._, promptness; con --, promptly, quickly.

pronto, -a, quick, prompt; _adv._, promptly, quickly, soon, too soon;
de --, suddenly, abruptly; tan -- ... como ..., now ... now ...

pronunciar, to utter.

propicio, -a, propitious.

propiedad, _f._, property.

propio, -a, own, self, very, proper, fitting, suitable, becoming; --
de, proper to, peculiar to, suited to, befitting, belonging to; amor
--, self-esteem, self-love, conceit, vanity.

proporcion, _f._, proportion.

proposicion, _f._, proposition, offer.

proposito, _m._, purpose, plan, design, intention; a --, suited,
suitable, desirable; by the way; apropos; a -- de, with regard to,
apropos of, speaking of.

prorrumpir, to break forth, burst out.

proseguir, to pursue, continue, remain, follow.

proselito, _m._, proselyte.

proteccion, _f._, protection.

protector, _m._, protector, guardian.

proteger, to protect, guard.

proveer, to provide (a, for).

provenzal, Provencal, of (_or_ pertaining to) Provence.

proverbial, proverbial.

providencia, _f._, providence.

provincia, _f._, province, country.

provisto, -a, _pp. of_ proveer, provided.

provocar, to incite, spur on, challenge.

proximamente, approximately.

proximidad, _f._, proximity.

proximo, -a, next, near, very near, about, ready; -- a, about to;
ready to.

proyectarse, to project, be thrown.

proyecto, _m._, project, plan.

prudencia, _f._, prudence.

prueba, _f._ proof.

publico, -a, public, common; cosa

publica, well known, notorious.

pudor, _m._, shame, modesty.

pudrir, to rot, decay.

pueblecillo, _m._, small town, village.

pueblo, _m._, people, populace, village; gente del --, common people.

puente, _m._, bridge, drawbridge; -- levadizo, drawbridge.

pueril, puerile, childish.

puerta, _f._, door, gate, portal; doorway; llamar a la --, to knock
(at the door).

pues, _conj._, for, since; _interj._, then, well, therefore, why; --
bien, well, well then, very well, well now; -- nada, but no; not so.

puesto, -a, _pp. of_ poner, placed, put, granted; -- que, supposing
that, seeing that; since, because, forasmuch as

puesto, _m._, post, position, place, point, spot, seat.

pugnar, to fight, strive.

pujanza, _f._, power.

pulimentar, to polish.

pulular, to swarm.

punta, _f._, point, tip, end, sharp point; ponerse de --, to stand on
end.

puntiagudo, -a, sharp, pointed.

punto, _m._, point (of time or place), point, jot, moment, instant,
matter, object; estar a -- (de), to be ready (to); to be on the point
of, be about to; -- en boca, silence, hush; hasta el -- de, up to the
point of; until, till; al -- y hora de, on the stroke of, at exactly;
a -- de la media noche, at midnight precisely; at exactly twelve
o'clock at night; de --, see subir.

punal, _m._, dagger, poniard.

puno, _m._, fist, cuff, wristband, hilt; como --s, as large as your
fist.

pupila, _f._, eye, pupil, sight

purgar, to purify, atone, expiate, purge, clear away.

purisimo, -a, _abs. super._ of puro, very (_or_ most) pure, purest,
immaculate.

puro, -a, pure, mere; de -- viejo, from sheer old age.

purpura, _f._, purple, crimson.


Q


que, _rel._, who, which, that; el --, he who, that which, which; la
--, she who, that which, which; lo --, that which, what; a lo --, as
far as; from what; as; a lo -- parece, as it seems; evidently; lo --
esde, as for; as far as ... is (_or_ are) concerned; lo -- tiene --,
but; the fact is that; con --, therefore, wherefore, so then.

que, _adv._, as, than; tan ... --, as ... as.

que, _conj._, let, for, since, that; bien -- ... bien --, whether ...
or; either because ... or because; de --, of (_or_ at) the fact that;
that; (ello) es --, the fact is that; entonces --, then while (_or_
when); puesto --, since; -- lo creas o no, whether you believe it or
not; -- quieras -no, willy-nilly; no --, whilst; sin --, without; sino
--, but, but rather, except that; en tanto --, while; hasta tanto --,
until, until such time as; ya --, since.

?que? _interrog._) which? what? ?a --? why? wherefore? ?en --? in
what? how? why? ?por --? why? ?-- tal? how? ?--se yo --? I know not
what; all sorts of things; ?-- tiempo? how long?

ique! _exclam._) how! what! what a! i-- ... (_subst._) tan ...
(_adj._)! what a ... (_adj._) ... (_subst._,)!

quebrado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ quebrar, broken, altered, rough, rocky,
uneven; tener la color quebrada, to have lost one's color; to be pale.

quebrar, to break, alter; _refl._, to break, be broken, be altered.

queda, _f._, curfew.

quedar, to remain, rest, be (_or_ become); -- en pie, to remain
standing; -- en silencio, to be silent; cuanto queda repetido, as has
been said; _refl._, to remain; to be.

queja, _f._, complaint, murmur, plaint, sighing, sigh, moaning, moan.

quejarse, to complain, grumble, clamor, lament.

quejido, _m._, complaint, moan.

quemar, to burn, scorch, inflame.

querer, to wish, desire, want, seek, like, demand, will, be willing;
?que quereis?, ?que quiere usarced? what can you expect? que quieras
que no, willy-nilly; no quiere permitir, will not permit; a este
quiero a este no quiero, without asking permission; whether or no; --
a, to love; -- decir, to mean; _refl._, to be desired, be desirable.

querido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ querer, liked, loved, beloved, dear; el mas
--, the favorite.

querubin, _m._, cherub.

quicio, _m._, hinge; (_here_) crack, opening.

quiebra, _f._, crack, opening, fissure.

quien, _rel._, who, whom, one who, him who, whoever; a fe de -- soy,
on my honor; on the word of a gentleman; ipor -- soy! on my word (of
honor).

?quien? who?

quiera. See como, _also_ adonde.

quietecito, -a, very quiet, very peaceful.

quieto, -a, quiet, calm, peaceful.

quietud, _f._, quiet, tranquillity.

quimerico, -a, chimerical, fantastic.

quince, fifteen.

quinto, -a, fifth.

quitar, to take away, take off, deprive of, ward off, cut off, remove.

quizas, perhaps.


R


racimo, _m._, bunch, cluster.

radiar, to shine, gleam.

rafaga, _f._, gust, gale, blast, rush of wind (_or_ air).

Raimundo, _m._, Raymond.

raiz, _f._, root.

rama, _f._, branch.

ramaje, _m._, branches.

ramillete, _m._, nosegay, bouquet.

rapidez, _f._, rapidity, celerity.

rapido, -a, rapid, fleet, swift.

rapto, _m._, ecstasy, rapture.

raro, -a, rare, strange, remarkable.

rascar, to scratch.

rasgar, to rend, tear asunder.

rastrear, to go spying; to creep (_or_ crawl) (_lit._, to fly low).

rastrero, -a, cringing.

rastrillo, _m._, portcullis.

rastro, _m._, track(s), trace(s), scent, taste.

rato, _m._, moment, short time, time, while; largo --, for a long
time; un gran --, a long time.

raya, _f._, stroke, dash, line, streak; boundary, frontier.

rayarse, to break (of dawn); to dawn.

rayo, _m._, ray, beam; lightning, thunderbolt.

raza, _f._, race, family.

razon, _f._, reason, cause, account; dar -- de, to give an account of;
to inform regarding; en -- a, by reason of; on account of.

real, royal, real, actual.

realidad, _f._, reality.

realizar, to realize, execute, form, accomplish.

rebano, _m._, flock of sheep.

rebelde, rebellious, rebel.

rebosar, to overflow.

rebullirse, to move restlessly, be agitated.

recalcar, to emphasize, stress.

recibir, to receive.

reciente (_or_ recien), recent, fresh; recien venido, recent arrival.

recientemente, recently.

recinto, _m._, precinct(s), inclosure, place.

recitar, to recite, speak.

reclamar, to reclaim.

reclinar, to recline, lay, lean; _refl._, to recline.

reclinatorio, _m._, prie-dieu, prayerdesk.

recobrar, to recover, regain, obtain, assume again, resume, take up
again.

recoger, to take up, pick up, take back, receive.

recogimiento, _m._, abstraction, concentration, meditation, reverence,
modesty; examination.

reconocer, to recognize, acknowledge, inspect.

recordar, to recall, remind, recollect, remember, call to mind.

recorrer, to run over, pass through, traverse, search, scour, overrun,
roam about; have recourse (to).

recostado, -a, _pp. of_ recostar, reclining, leaning, resting.

recuerdo, _m._, remembrance, recollection, memory.

recuperar, to regain.

recurso, _m._, resource.

rechazar, to repel, drive back.

rechinar, to creak, grate.

red, _f._, net, head-dress.

redencion, _f._, redemption.

Redentor, _m._, Redeemer.

redimir, to redeem, ransom, purchase exemption from, liberate, set
free (for a price).

redonda, _f._, circle, round, neighborhood; veinte leguas a la --,
within a radius of twenty (Spanish) leagues.

redondo, -a, round, well-molded, well-formed.

reducirse, to be reduced (_or_ confined); to consist (a, in); to limit
oneself (a, to).

referir, to relate, narrate, tell, mention, describe, report; _refl._,
to refer, have to do, consist; ?a que se refiere? wherein consists?

reflejar, to reflect; _refl._, to reflect, be reflected.

reflejo, _m._, reflection.

refran, _m._, refrain; saying, adage.

refrenar, to check.

refrescar, to freshen, refresh, cool.

refriega, _f._, encounter, affray.

refugiarse, to take refuge.

refugio, _m._, refuge.

refunfutiar, to snarl, growl.

regalar, to regale, delight with.

regalo, _m._, present, gift.

regazo, _m._, lap, embrace.

region, _f._, precinct, region, place, space, tract.

registro, _m._, stop (of an organ).

regla, _f._, rule; de nuestra --, of our order.

regocijado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ regocijar, rejoicing, joyful, merry.

regocijo, _m._, rejoicing, joy, pleasure, mirth, hilarity, merriment,
amusement.

regular, common, ordinary.

rehundir, to sink, bury.

rehusar, to refuse, decline.

reina, _f._, queen.

reinar, to reign.

reino, _m._, kingdom, dominion.

reir (_or_ rierse), to laugh; to smile; -- de, to laugh at; dar que --
(con), to ridicule, make sport (of), make a laughingstock (of); y se
le rieron en sus barbas, and they laughed in his face; reirse en la
nariz, to laugh in one's face; romper a --, to burst out laughing.

reiterar, to repeat, reiterate.

rejilla, _f._, bar.

relacion, _f._, narration, story, narrative, account; relation.

relacionarse, to be (_or_ become) related (_or_ connected).

relampago, _m._, flash, flash of lightning, lightning.

relampaguear, to flash.

relatar, to relate; las relataban, would tell of hiss deeds.

relate, _m._, narration, narrative, story.

religion, _f._, religion, Christianity.

religioso, -a, religious; _subst. m. and f._, monk, nun.

relinchar, to neigh.

reliquia, _f._, relic.

reloj, _m._, watch, clock

rellano, _m._, plateau.

remanso, _m._, still water, water caught and held in the little bays
along a river-bank.

remate, _m._, end, destination, conclusion.

remedio, _m._, remedy, cure.

remolino, _m._, whirlwind, whirl, gust.

remontar, to remount, go back, go up; -- la corriente del rio, to go
up stream; _refl._, to climb; remount, ascend, rise.

remoto, -a, remote, distant, far off, ancient.

removerse, to move, move about.

rencor, _m._, rancor, animosity, grudge.

rendimiento, _m._, submission.

rendir, to subject, overcome; _refl._, to yield, give way, bend down.

renegar, to curse, swear (de, at).

renunciar, to renounce, give up, refrain.

reo, _m._, criminal, accused.

reparar, to repair, observe, notice.

repartir, to distribute, divide.

repente; de --, suddenly.

repentino, -a, sudden, unexpected.

repetir, to repeat; _refl._, to be repeated; to reverberate.

repicar, to chime, ring, peal.

repique, _m._, chime, peal.

replegarse, to bend back, wind, coil, make a detour, be centered.

reponerse, to recover.

reposado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ reposar, calm.

reposar, to rest, repose.

reposo, _m._, rest, repose, sleep.

representacion, _f._, representation; -- de, representing; in the name
of.

representar, to represent; _refl._, to be represented; to appear.

reprimir, to repress, restrain.

reproducir, to reproduce, reflect.

reptil, _m._ reptile.

repuesto, -a, _pp. of_ reponerse, recovered.

repugnancia, _f._, repugnance, aversion.

repugnante, repugnant, revolting.

requerir, to require, demand, seek, request.

res, _f._, head of cattle, etc., animal, game, deer.

resbalar, to glide, steal, slip; _refl._, to glide, slip, slide,
steal; -se a uno un pie, to take a false step; to slip.

resignar, to resign; _refl._, to be (_or_ become) resigned; to resign
oneself.

resina, _f._, resin; teas de --, pine (or resinous) torches.

resistir, to resist, baffle, oppose, endure (it); _refl._, to resist,
refuse.

resolucion, _f._, resolution, decision.

resolver, to resolve, solve, determine; _refl._, to agree, decide.

resonar, to resound, clang.

resorte, _m._, spring.

respecto, _m._, respect, regard, relation; -- a, with respect to.

respetable, respectable, influential, venerable, estimable.

respetar, to respect.

respeto, _m._, respect, esteem.

respetusamente, respectfull, with respect.

respetuoso, -a, respectful.

respiracion, _f._, respiration, breathing.

respirar, to breathe.

resplandecer, to glisten, shine, gleam, glitter.

resplandeciente, resplendent, shining.

resplandor, _m._, glow, splendor, light, gleam, flash, brightness,
reflection.

responder, to reply, answer, respond.

respuesta,_f._ reply.

restar, to remain.

resto, _m._, rest, remainder, remains; _pl._, remains, rest,
remainder; ruins.

restregar, to rub.

resucitar, to resuscitate, revive.

resuelto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ resolver, resolved, determined; ready,
prepared.

resultado, _m._, result, outcome.

resultar, to result.

retablo, _m._, reredos, retable, altarpice, altar-screen.

retirar, to retire, withdraw; _refl._, to retire, withdraw.

retorcer, to twist, wind, turn; _refl._, to twist, wind, writhe, flow
tortuously, roll.

retorcido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ retorcer, twisted, rolled, rolling,
winding, undulating, gnarled.

retozar, to flit, hover, play, sport, sparkle.

retraido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ retraer, restrained, repressed, shrinking.

retratar, to portray, depict, mirror, reflect.

retumbar, to resound.

reunion, _f._, reunion, gathering, party.

reunir, to unite, bring together, join, collect; _refl._, to meet,
unite, assemble, collect; -se a, to join; -se con, to join, associate
with.

revelacion, _f._, revelation, confession.

revelar, to reveal, manifest.

reventarse, to burst, split; (_vulgar_) to die.

reves, _m._, reverse, opposite, back al --, backwards.

revestir, to deck, adorn, put (or take) on again; to be dressed (or
clothed).

revolcar, to hurl, overturn; _refl._, to wallow, roll about, writhe.

revolotear, to flutter (_or_ fly) about; to flutter, hover; _subst.
m._, fluttering.

revolver, to revolve, turn over (in one's mind), consider; _refl._, to
roll, to stir, to move about.

revuelta, _f._, confusion, consternation, turn, turning, winding.

revuelto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ revolver, huddled together, intermingled,
pell mell, rumpled, tossed, disordered, intricate, winding.

rey, _m._, king, monarch; -- de armas, king-at-arms; los reyes, the
king and queen.

reyerta, _f._, dispute, difference.

rezador, apt to pray, given to much praying.

rezar, to pray, recite prayers.

rezo, _m._, prayer.

riachuelo, _m._, rivulet, small stream, stream.

ribazo, _m._, sloping bank; ditch.

ribera, _f._, bank, shore.

ribete, _m._, ribbon, shred, streak, line.

ricamente, richly.

rico, -a, rich, fine, delicate, costly.

ridiculo, -a, ridiculous.

rielar (_poet._), to glisten, glimmer; to shine with a tremulous
light.

rienda, _f._, rein; _pl._, reins, bridle.

rigido, -a, rigid.

rigor, _m._, heat, rigor, necessity; de --, necessary, required.

rima, _f._, rhyme; _pl._, lyric poems.

rincon, _m._, corner, angle.

rio, _m._, river.

riqufsimo, -a, _abs. super. of_ rico, very rich.

risa, _f._, laugh, laughter.

risueno, -a, smiling, laughing, charming.

ritmo, _m._, rhythm.

rival, _m._, rival.

rivalizar, to be rivals; to vie (entre si, with each other).

rizar, to curl, crisp, ripple.

rizo, _m._, curl.

roca, _f._, rock, cliff.

roce, _m._, touch, rustle, rustling.

rocin, _m._, hack, horse, nag.

rocio, _m._, dew.

rodar, to roll, move along, rotate, revolve, roll down hill.

rodear, to surround, gather round, girdle; _refl._, to move (_or_
wander) about.

rodeo, _m._, circumlocution.

rodilla, _f._, knee; de --s, kneeling.

roer, to gnaw, consume.

rogar, to beg, pray, implore, beseech.

rojizo, -a, reddish.

rojo, -a, red.

romance, _m._, Spanish (language); romance, (historic) ballad.

romeral, _m._, a place abounding in rosemary.

romero, _m._, pilgrim.

romo, -a, obtuse, blunt, flat.

romper, to break, dissipate, fracture, tear, rend, part; -- a reir, to
burst out laughing; al -- el dia, at break of day; at dawn; _refl._,
to break.

roncar, to snore.

ronco, -a, hoarse, rough.

ronda, _f._, round; circular dance, dance; andar a la --, to go the
rounds; to go around.

ropa, _f._, cloth, garment, clothes, robe, gown, loose garment worn
over the clothes.

ropaje, _m._, apparel, drapery, garment.

ropilla, _f._, jacket, kind of short jacket with double sleeves, the
outer ones hanging loose.

rosa, _f._, rose; color de --, rose-colored; de --, rosy,
rose-colored.

rosado, -a, rose-colored, rosy, flushed.

rostrillo, _m._, veil; head-dress.

rostro, _m._, face, countenance; dar a algun en el -- con, to cast in
one's face.

roto, -a, _pp. of_ romper, broken, pierced.

rozar, to graze, touch slightly, be on a level (con, with).

rubi, _m._, ruby.

rubio, -a, fair, blond, ruddy, golden.

ruborizarse, to blush.

rudo, -a, rough, hard, severe.

ruego, _m._, request, entreaty.

rugido, _m._, roar, roaring.

rugir, to roar.

ruido, _m._, sound, noise.

ruidoso, -a, noisy, loud.

ruin, _m._, wicked (mean _or_ infamous) person; en hablando del -- de
Roma, catale aqui que asoma, speak of the devil and he will appear.

ruina, _f._, ruin; _pl._, ruins.

ruinoso, -a, dilapidated, in ruins, ruinous.

ruisenor, _m._, nightingale.

rumor, _m._, noise, murmur, sound, rumor, rustle.

rustico, _m._, rustic (fellow), peasant.


S


sabado, _m._, Saturday.

sabana, _f._, sheet, shroud, plain.

saber, to know, know how, be aware, be able; can; a no --, had I not
known; ?que se yo que? I know not what; all sorts of things.

saber, _m._, knowledge; el gay -- poetry, the art of poetry.

sabido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ sabet, learned, educated.

sabiduria, _f._, knowledge, wisdom.

sabiendas: a --, knowingly, consciously, wittingly, with knowledge of.

sabor, _m._, relish, taste, savor, pleasure; a --, at pleasure, with
relish (_or_ enjoyment); a todo --, fully; with profound delight.

saborear, to relish, enjoy.

sabroso, -a, savory, delicious.

sacar, to draw, draw out, take out, arouse, bring out, rouse, put out,
remove, draw, snatch, derive.

sacerdote, _m._, priest.

saco, _m._, sack, bag; echar en -- roto, to be heedless of; not to
take advantage of; to forget.

sacrilegio, _m._, sacrilege, sacrilegious act.

sacrflego, -a, sacrilegious.

sacristia, _f._, sacristy, vestry.

sacudir, to shake, shake off.

saeta, _f._, arrow, dart.

saetera, _f._, loophole.

sagrado, -a, sacred, consecrated.

Sagrario, _m._, sacrarium, the interior part of a church in which are
kept such sacred things as relics, etc.

sainete, _m._, comedietta, farce.

sala, _f._, hall.

salida, _f._, departure, exit, sally.

salir, to go out, come out, issue, sally, leave; -- de, to go from
(_or_ out of); to go beyond; _refl_,, to go out, come out.

salmo, _m._, psalm.

Salomon, _m._, Solomon.

salomonico, -a, Solomonic, of (_or_ pertaining to) Solomon king of
Israel; columnilla salomonica, little twisted column.

salon, _m._, hall, drawing-room, parlor.

salpicar, to scatter.

saltar, to spring, leap.

salto, _m._, spring, leap, bound, jump.

saludable, salutary, wholesome.

saludar, to greet, salute, acclaim, hail.

saludo, _m._, salute, bow, greeting.

salva, _f._, burst.

Salvacion, _f._, salvation, safety.

Salvador, _m._, Savior.

salvaje, savage, barbarous.

salvar, to save, cross, pass over, leap over.

salve (_Latin_), hail, first word of prayer 'Salve Regina,' 'Hail,
Holy Queen.'

salvo, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ salvar, saved; safe; _adv._, save,
saving, excepting.

san. See santo.

San Bartolome, _m._, Saint Bartholomew; church of Saint Bartholomew.

sandez, f, folly; foolish act (_or_ speech).

San Felipe, _m._, Saint Philip.

sangre, _f._, blood.

sangriento, -a, bloody, bleeding, covered with blood.

San Huberto, _m._, Saint Hubert.

San Juan, _m._, Saint John.

San Martin, _m._, Saint Martin.

San Miguel, _m._, Saint Michael.

sano, -a, sound.

San Pacomio, _m._, Saint Pachomius.

San Pedro, _m._, Saint Peter.

San Roman, _m._, Saint Romain.

San Saturio, _m._, Saint Saturius.

Santa Ines, _f._, Saint Agnes; church of Saint Agnes.

santamente, piously.

Santa Teresa, _f._, Saint Theresa.

santero, _m._, hermit; caretaker of a sanctuary.

Santiago, _m._, Saint James.

sautidad, _f._, sanctity; tener en olor de --, to hold (_or_ consider)
as a saint.

sautiguarse, to cross oneself, make the sign of the cross.

santisimo, -a, (_abs. super. of_ santo, most holy.

santo (or san), -a, saint, sainted, holy; horror, awe, reverential
fear; -- Patrono, patron saint; Viernes Santo, Good Friday; _subst. m.
and f._, saint; llegar y besar el --, to succeed in a brief space of
time; to find good fortune quickly.

santuario, _m._, sanctuary.

sapo, _m._, toad, large toad.

saquear, to plunder, pillage.

sarao, _m._, ball, evening party.

sargento, _m._, sergeant; -- aposentador, quartermaster-sergeant.

Satanas, _m._, Satan.

satisfacer, to satisfy, gratify, answer.

satisfactorio, -a, satisfactory.

satisfecho, -a, _pp. of_ satisfacer, satisfied, gratified.

sauce, _m._, willow.

sauco, _m._, elder, elder wood.

saya, _f._, petticoat, skirt.

sazon, _f._, time, season, opportunity; a la --, at that time; then.

se, himself, herself, itself, themselves; one another, each other, to
one another, to each other; _equivalent to the passive in English, or
to the impersonal construction 'there ...'._

se. _See_ saber.

sea. See ser; -- ... --, whether ... or; no -- que, for fear that;
lest.

secarse, to dry up, wither (away).

seco, -a, dry, hard, metallic, bony, lean, thin, ardent, burning.

secreto, _m._, secret.

secuaz, _m._, follower, attendant, retainer.

sed, _f._, thirst.

seda, _f._, silk.

seducir, to entice, attract.

segar, to cut (_or_ mow) down; to crop.

seguimiento, _m._, following, train, suite, pursuit.

seguir, to follow, continue; -- con, to follow, go along with,
accompany; -- con la vista, to look after, to watch.

segun, according to (_or_ as); as, just as; the way, judging from the
way.

segundo, -a, second; _subst. m._, second (of time).

seguramente, surely, indeed.

segurarse, to assure oneself, be assured; to assert.

seguro, -a, secure, sure, safe, certain; dar por --, to assure; to
assert; de --, assuredly.

seis, six.

sello, _m._, seal.

semblante, _m._, face.

sembrar, to sow; to dot, strew.

semejante, similar, like, such, such a, same; -- a, like, similar to.

semejar, to be like (_or_ similar to); to resemble.

semicirculo, _m._, semicircle.

sencillo, -a, simple, plain.

senda, _f._, path, by-path, foot-path.

sendero, _m._, path, by-path, foot-path.

seno, _m._, breast, bosom, heart; womb, depth.

sensacion, _f._, sensation.

sentado, -a, _pp. of_ sentarse, seated, sitting; estar --, to be
seated.

sentarse, to seat oneself, be seated, sit (down).

sentencia, _f._, sentence.

sentido, _m._, sense, consciousness; falto de --, unconscious.

sentimiento, _m._, sentiment, feeling.

sentir, to feel, perceive, hear; no se siente una mosca (_lit._, a fly
cannot be heard), you can hear a pin fall.

sena, _f._, sign, signal, motion, gesture.

senal, _f._, sign, signal; que hacian -es de ojeo, which were blowing
to start up the game.

senalar, to mark, signalize, appoint, determine, fix upon, point out,
indicate.

Senor, _m._, Lord, God.

senor, _m._, lord, gentleman, nobleman, man, knight, sir; pues, si --,
yes sir-ee, yes indeed sir.

senora, _f._, lady, madam, mistress; Nuestra Senora, Our Lady
(appellation of the Virgin Mary).

senorial, seigniorial; of (_or_ pertaining to) the lord of a manor.

senorio, _m._, seigniory, domains, dominion.

senorito, _m._, young gentleman.

separado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ separar, separated, separate.

separar, to separate, divide; -- se de, to separate from; to leave.

sepulcral, sepulchral; of (_or_ pertaining to) a sepulcher (_or_
tomb).

sepulcro, _m._, sepulcher, tomb, grave.

sepulturero, _m._, grave-digger.

sequito, _m._, suite, escort.

ser, to be, become; a no --, unless it be; a no -- por, were it not
for; -- cosa de, to be sufficient cause to, be enough to; de no --, if
not; no -- cosa, not to be small (_or_ few in number), to be large
(_or_ numerous); la cosa no era para menos, nothing less could be
expected; por --, since it was; sea, be it so; como no sea, unless it
be; no sea que, for fear that; lest; sea ... sea, whether ... or;
sera, it probably is (_or_ was); que no sera dificil, which it easily
may; sera que, it is probable that; ?que ha sido de el? what has
become of it?

ser, _m._, being.

serafin, _m._, seraph.

sereno, -a, serene, unclouded.

serie, _f._, series.

serio, -a, serious.

serpear, to circle, wind, glide.

serpentear, to wind.

serpiente, _f._, serpent.

serrallo, _m._, seraglio, harem.

serreta, _f._, nose-band, head-stall.

servicio, _m._, service; household.

servidor, _m._, servant; -- de a pie, footman.

servidumbre, _f._, servants, attendants.

servir, to serve, be of service (_or_ use), avail, act; -- de, to
serve (_or_ act) as; con el diablo no sirven (juegos), (tricks) don't
work with the devil; _refl._, to deign, be pleased.

sesos, _m. pl._, brain, brains; devanarse los --, to rack one's
brains.

sestear, to take a siesta, take an after-dinner nap (_or_ rest).

setenta, seventy.

severo, -a, severe, stern, strict.

sevillano, -a, of (_or_ pertaining to) Seville.

si, if; why, indeed; cual --, as if; -- bien, although, even if; --
... que, however; -- lo decia yo, indeed I told you so; just as I told
you; apenas --, hardly, barely; apenas -- pudiera, I could scarcely;
-- ya, if indeed; -- ya no, unless.

si, himself, herself, itself, one's self, themselves; de por --, by
himself, for his own part; entre --, to himself, etc.

si, certainly, yes, indeed, of-course; pues, -- senor, yes sir-ee, yes
indeed sir.

siempre, always, still; -- que, every time that; whenever.

sien, _f._, temple.

sierpe, _f._, serpent.

siesta, _f._, siesta, after-dinner rest (_or_ nap).

siete, seven.

sigilo, _m._, secrecy.

siglo, _m._, century.

significative, -a, significant.

signo, _m._, sign.

siguiente, following, next.

silbar, to whistle, hiss.

silbido, _m._, hiss, whistle.

silencio, _m._, silence.

silencioso, -a, silent, deserted, mute.

silfo, _m._, sylph, fairy.

silueta, _f._, silhouette.

silvestre, wild, uncultivated.

silla, _f._, seat, see, diocese.

sillar, _m._, hewn stone.

silleria, _f._, seat, stall(s); 'hewn stone.

sillon, in., armchair.

sima, _f._, abyss, gulf.

simbolo, _m._, symbol.

simple, foolish, crazy; _subst. m._, simpleton, fool.

simplemente, simply.

simplificar, to simplify.

sin, without; -- duda, doubtless; -- ejemplar, unprecedented; --
embargo, however, nevertheless, notwithstanding; -- que, without.

singular, singular, strange.

sinnumero, _m._, infinite number.

sino, but (_after a negative_); but rather; if not, except; no tan
solo, -- que, not only, but also; -- que, but, but rather, except
that.

sinuosidad, _f._, turn, bend, winding, sinuosity, curve.

siquiera, even, at least, unless, even though; ni oyo --, he did not
even hear; ni tan --, not even, not so much as.

sisar, to pilfer, cheat.

sitial, _m._, seat, chair.

sitio, _m._, place, point, site, seat.

situacion, _f._, state, condition, situation, position.

situado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ situar, situated, situate.

situarse, to locate oneself, take up one's position.

soberanamente, supremely, particularly.

soberano, -a, sovereign, supreme.

sobra, _f._, surplus, excess; de --, over and above; andar mas de --,
to be more in excess.

sobrado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ sobrar, enough and to spare; _here_}
enough, sufficient.

sobre, on, over, upon, about; -- todo, above all, especially.

sobrecoger, to surprise; _refl._, to be surprised, be overtaken, be
seized upon; -se temeroso, to be seized with fear.

sobrehumano, -a, superhuman.

sobremanera, beyond measure, exceedingly.

sobrenatural, supernatural.

sobrenombre, _m._, nickname.

sobreponerse a, to be superior to; to surpass, drown.

sobresaltado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ sobresaltar, startled, frightened,
surprised; with a start.

sobresalto, _m._, surprise.

socorro, _m._, succor, assistance.

sochantre, _m._, sub-chanter, precentor's deputy.

sofocado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ sofocar, smothered, stifled, breathless,
out of breath.

sol, _m._, sun.

soldado, _m._, soldier.

soledad, _f._, solitude, solitary place, waste, wilderness.

solemne, solemn.

solemnidad, _f._, solemnity.

soler, to be accustomed, be wont.

solfa, _f._, harmony, music; esto de la --, the art of music.

solicitud, _f._, solicitude, care, concern.

solio, _m._, canopy.

solitario, -a, solitary.

solo, -a, alone, sole, solitary, single, mere, deserted; a solas,
alone.

solo, only, solely; no tan -, sino que, not only, but also.

soltar, to let loose, unfasten, untie, let go, loose, set on; _refl._,
to be loose; to fly (flow _or_ wave).

solucion, _f._, solution.

sollozante, sobbing.

sollozar, to sob.

sollozo, _m._, sob.


sombra, _f._, shade, shadow sombrear, to shade, shadow, darken,
obscure, overshadow.

sombrio, -a, somber, dark, gloomy.

son, _m._, sound; motive; en (_or_ a) -- de guerra, for the purpose of
war.

sonaja, _f._, sonaja, kind of timbrel, a rustic musical instrument
made of a thin strip of wood about four inches wide brought round in
the shape of a tube or drum, and having small metal discs fixed in
holes at regular intervals like those of a tambourine. It is generally
held in the right hand and struck with the left.

sonante, resounding, sonorous, sounding.

sonar, to sound, ring in one's ears, echo, resound, strike.

sonido, _m._, sound, noise.

sonoro, -a, loud, sonorous.

sonreir (or sonreirse), to smile.

sonrisa, _f._, smile.

sonar, to dream, dream of, be troubled with dreams; -- con, to dream
of.

soplar, to blow.

soplo, _m._, breath, blast, gust, puff.

sopor, _m._, drowsiness, sleepiness.

soportable, endurable.

sordamente, dully.

sordo, -a, dull, muffled, low, deaf.

sorprender, to surprise, astonish, discover, come upon.

sorpresa, _f._, surprise; marchando de -- en --, ever more and more
surprised.

sortilegio, _m._, sorcery, charm.

sospechar, to suspect.

sostener, to sustain, hold up, support, prolong.

soto, _m._, grove, thicket, forest.

su, his, her, its, their, your, one's.

suave, soft, gentle, smooth, delicate, sweet.

suavemente, softly, gently, sweetly.

suavidad, _f._, softness, delicacy, sweetness.

subdito, _m._, subject.

subir, to ascend, rise, mount; -- de punto, to increase; ir subiendo
de punto, to increase, keep increasing.

subito, -a, sudden.

subsistir, to exist, remain.

subterraneo, -a, subterranean; _subst._ _m._, vault, cave, dungeon.

suceder, to succeed, result, happen, take place, be the matter; -- a,
to succeed, take the place of.

suceso, _m._, event, incident, result, success.

sudario, _m._, shroud.

sudor, _m._, sweat, perspiration.

suelo, _m._, ground, floor.

suelto, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ soltar, detached, loose, flying,
free, flowing; a pierna suelta, at one's ease; undisturbed, dormir a
pierna suelta, to sleep soundly.

sueno, _m._, sleep, dream.

suerte, _f._, lot, fate; charm, spell.

suficiente, sufficient, enough; es lo--, it is enough; it is
sufficient cause.

sufrir, to suffer, endure.

sugerir, to suggest.

sujetar, to subject, hold, subdue, overcome, restrain.

sujeto, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ sujetar, fastened, fixed, held, set.

sumergido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ sumergir, submerged, buried.

sumergir, to submerge, immerse, plunge; _refl._, to submerge oneself;
to dive.

sumido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ sumirse, sunk, plunged, sunken.

sumirse, to sink, plunge, be sunk.

sumo, -a, highest, greatest, very great.

suntuoso, -a, sumptuous.

superficie, _f._, surface.

superior, superior.

supersticion, _f._, superstition.

supersticioso, -a, superstitious.

suplicante, suppliant, imploring.

suplicio, _m._, execution.

suposicion, _f._, supposition, guess, surmise.

surcar, to plow, furrow, divide.

surco, _m._ furrow, track, rut.

isus! come! courage! ho! on!

suscribir, to subscribe, yield.

suspender, to suspend, interrupt, discontinue; to hold in suspense, to
amaze.

suspendido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ suspender, suspended; hanging; in
suspense, anxious.

suspension, _f._, pause, suspense.

suspenso, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ suspender, surprised, hesitant.

suspicaz, suspicious.

suspirar, to sigh.

suspiro, _m._, sigh.

sustentar, to sustain.

sustituir, to replace.

susto, _m._, fright, terror, fear; dar --, to frighten.

sustraer, to withdraw, separate; _refl._, to withdraw, retire.

susurrar, to whisper.

susurro, _m._, whisper, whispering.

suyo, -a, his, hers, its, theirs, yours; el (_or_ lo) --, la suya,
his, his own, etc.


T


tabernaculo, _m._, tabernacle.

tabla, _f._, board, panel.

tablero, _m._, board, plank.

taciturno, -a, taciturn, silent, melancholy.

tafilete, _m._, morocco (leather).

tal, so, such, such a; -- cual, such as; ?que --? how? -- vez,
perhaps, perchance.

talabarte, _m._, sword-belt.

talante, _m._, manner, will, disposition; mal--, ill humor.

talon, _m._, heel; andar a los --es, to follow upon one's heels; to
follow closely.

tallar, to carve.

tallo, _m._, shoot, sprout.

tamano, -a, large, very large; _subst. m._, size.

tambalear, to stagger, reel.

tambien, also, likewise.

tampoco, either, neither, nor, either; ni ... --, nor ..., either;
neither.

tan, so, as, as much, such, such a (_or_ an); --... como, as... as; --
pronto ... como ..., now ... now...; -- ... que, as ... as; ique ...
(_subst._) -- ... (_adj._)! what a ... (_adj._) ... (_subst._)! mi --
siquiera, not even, not so much as; no -- solo ... sino que, not only
... but also.

tanto, -a, so much, as much; _pl._, so many, as many; _adv._, so (_or_
as) much; meanwhile; -- como, as much as; -- os da de, you think as
highly of; en --, so, to such a degree; in the meanwhile; en -- que,
while; hasta -- que, until; until such time as; por --, therefore,
for that reason, hence; un --, a little; somewhat.

taner, (of bells) to ring, toll.

tapar, to cover, conceal, cover up, stop up.

tapia, _f._, wall.

tapiz, _m._, hanging, tapestry, carpet, rug.

tardar, to delay, be late, be slow, be long.

tarde, _f._, afternoon, evening; a la --, in the afternoon; _adv._,
late; muy de -- en --, very seldom.

te, thee, you, to thee, to you.

tea, _f._, torch, piece of resinous wood.

teatro, _m._, scene, stage, theater.

tecla, _f._, key (of a musical instrument).

techado, _m._, roof, shelter.

techo, _m._, roof.

tejado, _m._, tiled roof.

tejer, to weave, spin, devise.

tela, _f._, cloth, garment.

tema, _m._, theme, topic, subject; cada loco con su --, everybody
(_lit._, every lunatic) has his hobby.

temblar, to tremble.

temblor, _m._, trembling.

tembloroso, -a, trembling, tremulous.

temer, to fear.

temeroso, -a, fearful; timid, timorous; sobrecogerse --, to be seized
with fear.

temible, dreadful.

temido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ temer, dreaded, fearful, dreadful.

temor, _m._, fear, fright, dread.

tempano, _m._, mass of ice, ice-field, ice-mountain, iceberg.

tempestad, _f._, tempest, storm, shower.

templado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ templar, tempered, softened, soft, gentle,
calm.

templar, to temper; to tune.

templo, _m._, temple, church, cathedral.

tenaz, tenacious, firm, constant, fixed.

tenaza, _f._, claw, talon.

tender, to stretch, stretch out, extend, direct, draw back, raise,
draw, aim, cast; -- una mirada, to take a look; to look; to glance; --
la vista, to cast a glance, direct one's glance.

tendido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ tender, stretched out, lying, prostrate;
_adv._, extensively, in detail.

tener, to have, hold, keep, take, hold out, lead, be the matter; --
empeno, to desire earnestly; -- en cuenta, to take into account; to
consider; -- ganas, to have a mind (de, to); no -- inconveniente, not
to consider improper; to have no objection; -- lugar, to take place;
to happen; -- miedo, to be afraid; -- noticia de, to be informed of;
-- por, to consider; -- presente, to bear in mind, remember; -- que,
to have to, be obliged to, should; lo que tiene que le preparan una
buena, the fact is that they are preparing for him a warm reception;
que de todo tenian menos de artistas o arqueologos, who were anything
but artists or archaeologists.

tentacion, _f._, temptation.

tenue, thin, tenuous, light, delicate, soft.

tenir, to tinge, dye, stain, tint.

Teobaldo, _m._, Theobald.

tercero, -a, third.

terciar, to intervene (as a third person).

terciopelo, _m._, velvet.

terminar, to terminate, end, settle, arrive at the end of.

termino, _m._ limit, boundary, goal, destination, term, terminal,
termination; llevar a --, to succeed, carry out, perform; en estos
--s, in these words; as follows.

ternura, _f._, tenderness, love; con --, lovingly, tenderly.

terrenal, earthly, of the earth, terrestrial.

terreno, _m._, ground, space, (limited) area; land, field; way,
distance; cortar --, to make a short cut; to shorten the way (_or_
distance).

terrible, terrible.

territorio, _m._, territory, country.

terror, _m._, terror.

terso, -a, smooth, polished, glossy.

tesoro, _m._, treasure, wealth.

testificar, to attest.

testigo, _m._, witness; poner por --s, to call to witness; to call
upon to witness.

testimonio, _m._, testimony, evidence.

tez, _f._, complexion, skin.

ti, thee, you.

tia, _f._, aunt; old woman.

tibiamente, weakly.

tiempo, _m._, time; a un --, at once; at the same time; antes de --,
prematurely; before it was ripe; de algun --, for some time; en un --,
once upon a time; ?que --? how long?

tienta, _f._, probing, feeling; a --s, by touching, groping, in the
dark; stealthily.

tierno, -a, tender, affectionate.

tierra, _f._, earth, land, soil, ground; en --, on the ground; por la
--, on (_or_ along) the ground.

timbalero, _m._, kettle-drummer, drummer.

timbre, _m._, crest (of a coat of arms).

timidamente, timidly.

timido, -a, timid.

tiniebla, _f._, shadow, shade, darkness, veil; _pl._, darkness,
shadow, shade.

tirante, _m._, suspension chain.

tirar, to draw, pull, cast, shoot.

tiro, _m._, throw, cast, shot, mark, aim; a -- de, within (the) range
of; -- de honda, sling shot.

titan, _m._, giant.

titere, _m._, manikin, marionette; no dejar -- con cabeza, to put
everything in disorder; to destroy everything.

titulo, _m._, title; titled person, noble.

tocar, to touch, sound, ring, play, blow, strike, reach, belong, fall
to one's lot, befall.

todavia, yet, still, however; y esta es la hora en que -- no le hemos
visto, and we haven't seen him since.

todo, -a, all, whole, every; -- el mundo, everybody; -- un mundo, a
whole world; a great multitude; a -- (el) correr, at full speed; A --
escape, at full speed; a toda voz, at the top of their voices; _subst.
m._, all, everything, whole; de un --, once for all; del --, wholly,
entirely, quite, completely; en un --, in all its parts, in every
respect; sobre --, above all, especially; que de -- tenian menos de
artistas o arqueologos, who were anything but artists or
archaeologists.

toledano, -a, Toledan, of (_or_ pertaining to) Toledo; _subst. m. and
f._, Toledan, native of Toledo.

itoma! See tomar.

tomar, to take, get; -- mano en ello, to take it in hand (_or_ a hand
in it); -- la palabra, to speak; -- el trote, to run away, make off;
itoma! well! why! here! look here!

tomillo, _m._, thyme.

tono, _m._, tone; de buen --, fashionable.

tonto, -a, stupid, foolish.

topar, to meet, happen upon.

toque, _m._, touch, blast, peal, stroke, ringing (_or_ tolling) of
bells; el -- de oraciones, ringing for prayers; call to prayers; al --
de oraciones, when summoned to prayers; when the bells rang for
prayers.

torbellino, _m._, whirlwind.

torcer, to turn, twist, wind, deflect.

torcido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ torcer, turned, twisted, crooked, tortuous,
winding.

tormenta, _f._, storm, tempest.

tormentoso, -a, stormy, storm-tossed, tempestuous

tornar, to return; -- a ... , to ... again; -- a aparecer, to
reappear; -- a decir, to repeat.

torneo, _m._, tournament, tourney, joust.

torno, _m._, turn, circumference; en -de, about, around; en -- suyo,
about him; en --, round about.

torpe, slow, heavy, dull, sluggish.

torre, _f._, tower, turret, spire.

torrente, _m._, torrent, flood; a --s, in torrents.

torso, _m._, trunk, torso.

tosco, -a, coarse, rough, unpolished.

toser, to cough.

trabajador, _m._, workman.

trabajar, to work, toil.

trabajo, _m._, work, effort, labor.

trabajosamente, laboriously, painfully.

trabar, to wage; _refl._, to be waged; to arise.

tradicion, _f._, tradition, legend.

tradicional, traditional, legendary, of legendary origin.

traducir, to translate, interpret.

traer, to draw, attract, carry, bring, take, lead, bear, wear; -- a la
memoria, to bring to memory; to remind; el cual traia una jornada de
catorce leguas en el cuerpo, who had made that day a journey of
fourteen leagues.

tragar, to swallow.

tragico, -a, tragic.

trago, _m._, draught, drink; echar un --, to have a drink, take a
dram.

trailla, _f._, leash.

traje, _m._, dress, robe, garb.

trampa, _f._, trap, snare.

trance, _f._, peril, extremity.

tranquilamente, tranquilly, quietly.

tranquilidad, _f._, tranquillity.

tranquilizar, to tranquilize, calm.

tranquilo, -a, tranquil, calm, gentle.

transcurrir, to pass by, transpire, elapse, pass away.

transfigurar, to transfigure.

transformacion, _f._, transformation, metamorphosis.

transformar, to transform, change, metamorphose.

transparentar, to cause to shine through; to disclose; _refl._, to be
(_or_ become) transparent; to shine.

transparente, transparent, clear.

transponer, (of the sun) to set.

tras, behind, after.

trascurrir. See transcurrir.

trasfigurar. See transfigurar.

trasformacion. See transformacion.

trasformar. See transformar.

trasgo, nr., goblin, evil spirit, malicious elf.

trasparentar. _See_ transparentar.

trasparente. _See_ transparente.

trasplantar, to transplant; _refl._, to be transplanted; to migrate.

trasponer. _See_ transponer.

trastornar, to turn upside down, overturn, overthrow, confuse.

tratar, to treat, deal, try; -- de, to treat as, consider; _refl._, to
treat, be a question (_or_ matter), be concerned.

traves, _m._, obliquity, bias; a -- (_or_ al) de, across, through,
between.

trazar, to form, plan; mal trazado, of evil appearance.

trebol, _m._, trefoil, clover.

trece, thirteen.

treinta, thirty.

tremendo, -a, tremendous, awful.

tremulo, -a, tremulous, trembling.

trenza, _f._, braid (of hair), hair; _pl._, braids, braided hair.

trepador, climbing.

trepar, to climb, crawl up.

tres, three.

trescientos, -as, three hundred.

tribuna, _f._, tribune, pulpit, gallery, organ-loft.

tribunal, _m._, tribunal, court.

tribute, _m._, tribute, tax.

trigo, _m._, wheat.

trinar, to trill.

trino, _m._, trill.

tripas, _f. pl._, viscera; hacerse de -- corazon, to pluck up courage.

triple, triple.

triste, sad, mournful, melancholy.

tristeza, _f._, sadness.

tristisimo, -a, _abs. sup, of _ triste, very sad.

triunfar, to triumph.

triunfo, _m._, triumph.

trocar, to exchange, change, put off.

trocha, _f._, narrow path, path, by-path, crossway.

trofeo, _m._, trophy.

tromba, _f._, whirlwind, whirl, eddy.

trompa, _f._, trumpet, horn.

trompicon, _m._, stumbling; a --es, stumbling.

tronco, _m._, trunk, log, branch, shaft.

trono, _m._, throne.

tropa, _f._, troop, herd, band, body of soldiers.

tropel, _m._, noise, bustle, confusion; troop, troops, body, crowd.

tropezar, to stumble (con, upon).

trote, _m._, trot; tomar el --, to run away, make off.

trovador, _m._, troubadour.

trozo, _m._, piece, slice.

trueno, _m._, thunderclap, burst of thunder.

trueque, _m._, exchange; a -- de, in exchange for.

truhan, _m._, buffoon, clown.

tu, thy, your.

tu, thou, you.

tubo, _m._, tube, pipe.

tumba, _f._, tomb, grave, sepulcher.

tumbo, _m._, tumble, fall; somersault; dar --s, to tumble; whirl head
over heels.

tumulto, _m._, tumult, noise, clamor.

tumultuosamente, tumultuously.

tunica, _f._, tunic, (flowing) garment, gown.

tupido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ tupir, dense, densely twining.

turba, _f._, crowd.

turbacion, _f._, confusion, trouble.

turbar, to disturb, trouble, confuse, alarm, startle.

turbio, -a, turbid, muddy, disturbed, troubled.

turco, _m._, Turk.

turqui, adj., used _only in the expression_ azul --, dark blue,
indigo.

tuyo, -a, yours, thine; el --, la tuya, yours, thine.


U


u (before o- _and_ ho-), or.

ufano, -a, proud.

ultimamente, finally, ultimately.

ultimo, -a, last; este --, the latter; hasta lo --, to the utmost;
por --, at last, finally.

ultraje, _m._, outrage, insult, affront.

umbral, _m._, threshold; lintel.

umbria, _f._, dense thicket.

un, una, a, an; _pl._, some.

uncir, to yoke, harness.

unicamente, only, solely, merely.

unico, -a, only, sole; el --, the only one.

unido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ unir, united, smooth; mal --, rough, uneven.

unir, to unite, join; _refl._, to unite, join, touch.

uno, -a, one; _pl._, some; (hasta) --s cien, (up to) about a hundred.

uno, una, _pron._, one, some one, a person; (el) -- y (el) otro, both.

unto, _m._, ointment.

usar, to use.

usarced, _contr. of_ vuestra merced (_antiquated_), you.

uso, _m._, use.

usted, _contr. of_ vuestra merced, you.

usura, _f._, usury.

util, useful.


V


vaciar, to empty.

vacilante, staggering, unsteady.

vacilar, to vacillate, stagger, sway, reel; waver, doubt, hesitate.

vacio, -a, empty, void, free; _subst._ _m._, space, void.

vagar, to wander, saunter, flit, hover.

vago, -a, vague.

vaina, _f._, scabbard.

valentia, _f._, boasting.

valer, to be worth, be valuable, be responsible for; mas vale incomodo
que ninguno, better comfortless quarters than, none at all; _refl._,
to avail oneself (of), make use (of).

valiente, valiant, strong, brave.

valor, _m._, worth, courage, valor.

valla, _f._, barrier.

valladar, _m._, rampart, defense, embankment, barrier.

valle, _m._, vale, valley.

vamos, ivamos! See ir.

vandalismo, _m._, vandalism.

vanidad, _f_, vanity.

vano, -a, vain; en --, in vain

vapor, _m._, vapor, fumes, perfume.

vaporoso, -a, vaporous.

vara, _f_, wand, staff, verge, yard.

vario, -a, varied, varying, various, different.

varon, _m._, man.

varonil, vigorous, manly, spirited, loud.

vasallo, _m._, vassal.

vaso, _m._, vessel; pitcher; jug; (water) glass; lamp.

vastago, _m._, scion.

vasto, -a, vast.

ivaya! See ir.

vecino, -a, neighboring, adjoining; _subst. m. or f._, neighbor;
_pl._, neighbors, residents, citizens.

vehemencia, _f._, vehemence, violence.

veinte, twenty.

veinticuatro, twenty-four; _subst. pl. m._, aldermen, the twenty-four
city councilors of Seville or other cities of Andalusia.

vela, _f._, watch, vigil; candle; grito de --, watch-cry.

velada, _f._, vigil, wakefulness, watch.

velar, to watch, wake, keep guard, watch over; to veil, cover, hide.

veleta, _f._, weather-cock (_or_ vane).

velo, _m._, veil, mist.

vellon, _m._, fleece, wool.

vena, _f._, vein.

venablo, _m._, javelin, spear.

venado, _m._, deer, stag.

vencedor, _m._, conqueror, victor.

vencer, to conquer, overcome.

vendaval, _m._, vendaval, strong wind (south by west); strong wind
from the sea.

vender, to sell.

vendido, -a, _adj. pp, of_ vender, sold, bartered.

venerable, venerable.

venganza, _f._, vengeance.

venido, _subst. m._, comer, arrival; recien --, recent arrival.

venir, to come, occur; -- al mundo, to be born; -- a romper, to break.

ventajoso, -a, advantageous.

ventana,_f._, window.

Ventura, _f._, chance, fortune; por --, by chance, perchance.

ver, to see, look at, watch, observe; por lo que veo, as I see;
evidently; ia -- a --! let's see! come now! estar viendolo, to see it;
to be present; _refl._, to be seen, be visible; no -se con, to have
nothing to do with, have no connection with.

veracidad, _f._, veracity.

verano, _m._, summer.

veras,_f. pl._, truth, seriousness; con todas --, in all truth (_or_
seriousness).

verdad, _f._, truth; con --, really, truly; -- es, it is true; the
truth is; ?sera --? can it be true?

verdaderamente, truly, in truth.

verdadero, -a, true, real, genuine, regular.

verde, green.

verdura, _f._, verdure, green.

vereda, _f._, path, foot-path.

vergueenza, _f._ shame.

veridico, -a, truthful, veracious, authentic.

verja, _f._ grating, railing, altar-rail.

verosimilitud, _f._, probability, likelihood, verisimility.

versado, -a, versed, skilled.

verso, _m._, verse, line.

verter, to shed, pour, pour forth, emit, cast.

verticalmente, vertically.

vertiente, _f._, waterfall, cascade.

vertiginoso, -a, vertiginous, dizzy, confusing, producing dizziness.

vertigo, _m._, vertigo, dizziness.

vestido, _m._, clothing; _pl._, clothes, clothing.

vestidura, _f._, dress, apparel, gown; robe.

vestigio, _m._, vestige, ruin.

vestir, to clothe, dress; to adorn, deck, hang (de, with).

vetusto, -a, old, ancient.

vez, _f._, time, place, stead, turn; a la --, at (one and) the same
time; a su --, in (its, his, her, their, _or_ your) turn; alguna --,
sometimes; cada --, constantly, continually, ever; cada -- que, every
time that; whenever; cuantas veces, as often as; de -- en cuando, from
time to time; every now and then; at intervals; de una --, at once,
suddenly, abruptly wholly, once for all; iacabaramos de una --! well
and good! en --, in place, instead; una -- mas, once more; otra --,
again, once more; or dos veces, twice; tal --, perhaps, perchance; una
-- y otra, again and again; unas veces, sometimes.

via, _f._, way.

viaje, _m._, trip, journey, voyage.

vibora, _f._, viper.

vibrante, vibrating.

vibrar, to vibrate.

Vicente, _m._, Vincent. _See_ donde.

victima, _f._, victim.

victoria, _f._, victory.

vida, _f._, life; a --, alive; con --, alive; dejar la --, to die.

vidriera,_f._, window, window-pane.

vidrio, _m._, glass, pane, window pane; --s de colores, stained glass
(windows).

viejo, -a, old; de puro --, from sheer old age; _subst. m. and f._,
old man, old woman.

vientecillo, _m._, breeze, gentle wind.

viento, _m._, wind, breeze.

viernes, _m._, Friday; Viernes Santo, Good Friday.

vigilancia, _f._, vigilance.

vigilante, _m._, watch, guard.

vigilia, _f._, vigil, waking, sleeplessness.

vil, base, vile.

villa, _f._, city, town.

villancico, _m._, Christmas carol.

villano, -a, common, low-born, base-born; _subst. m._, villein (or
villain), serf.

vino, _m._, wine.

violencia, _f._, violence; con --, violently, loudly.

violento, -a, violent.

violeta, _f._, violet.

vira, _f._, dart, arrow.

virgen, _f._, virgin.

visera, _f._, visor.

visible, visible, evident, apparent.

vision, _f._, vision, sight, scene, fancy.

visitar, to visit.

viso, _m._, appearance.

vispera, _f._, eve, day before; _pl._, vespers.

vista, _f._, sight, view, glance, gaze, vision; dar -- a, to come into
view of; perder de --, to lose sight of; tender la --, to direct one's
glance; to look, glance, cast a glance.

visto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ ver, seen, visible, familiar; no (or nunca)
--, not (_or_ never) seen (before); extraordinary, wonderful, strange;
por lo --, evidently, apparently, visibly.

vistoso, -a, pleasing to the eye, delightful, showy.

viuda, _f._, widow.

vivir, to live, dwell; no vivo hasta ver, I am dying to see.

vivir, _subst. m._, living, life.

vivo, -a, alive, living.

voceria, _f._, clamor, outcry.

volante, flying; columna --, flying column.

Volar, to fly, fly away, go by, pass, run.

volcan, _m._, volcano.

voltear, to turn, whirl, revolve, wander, flit, glitter, swing.

voluntad, _f._, will.

voluptuosidad, _f._, voluptuousness.

voluptuoso, -a, voluptuous.

volver, to turn, turn over, return; -- a ... (_infin._), to ...
(_infin._) again; -- en si, to come to oneself; to regain
consciousness; -- grupas, to turn back; -- pies, to turn (one's)
steps; -- pies atras, to turn back; _refl._, to turn, turn round,
return.

vos, you.

vosotros, -as, you.

voz, _f._, voice, tone, sound, cry, word; a grandes voces, in a loud
voice; loudly; a -- herida, in clanging tones; a media --, in a low
tone; softly; a toda --, at the top of their voices; dar una gran --,
to call out loudly.

vuelo, _m._, flight; al --, flying; on the wing; abatir el --, to
alight; levantar el --, to rise in flight.

vuelta, _f._, turn, return; lining; _pl._, cuffs, lapels, etc. (that
part of a garment turned back and showing the lining), lining; dar una
--, to take a turn, take a walk; dar --s, to turn, wind, whirl,
revolve.

vuelto, -a, _pp. of_ volver; --de espaldas, with (his) back turned.

vuestro, -a, your, yours; el --, la vuestra, yours.

vulgar, common, ordinary.

vulgarmente, vulgarly, commonly.

vulgo, _m._, people, common people.

vulnerable, vulnerable.


Y


y, and.

ya, already, now, soon, longer, indeed; -- ... --, now ... now (_or_
again); either or; no ... -- (_or_ -- no ...), no longer; -- que,
since; si --, if indeed; si -- no, unless; -- alli, when they had
arrived there.

yacer, to lie.

yerto, -a, stiff, rigid, motionless, lifeless, desolate.

yo, I.

yunque, _m._, anvil.


Z


zagal, _m._, shepherd boy.

zambomba, _f._, zambomba, a kind of rustic drum consisting of a skin
stretched over the mouth of a jar, with a reed fastened at the center.
This rubbed up and down with the moistened hand produces a strong,
hoarse, monotonous sound.

zampona, _f._, rustic flute.

zarza, _f._, bramble, brier, thorny bush, bramble-bush.

zarzal, _m._, bramble, brier, bramble thicket.

zigzag, _m._, zigzag.

zumba, _f._, jest, joke, raillery.

zumbar, to buzz, hum, murmur, whistle, sound, resound, vibrate.

zumbido, _m._, humming, buzzing.

zurron, _m._, bag, pouch, provision-bag.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Legends, Tales and Poems
by Gustavo Adolfo Becquer
Edited with Introduction, Notes and Vocabulary, by Everett Ward Olmsted

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEGENDS, TALES AND POEMS ***

***** This file should be named 10814.txt or 10814.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/8/1/10814/

Produced by Keren Vergon, Arno Peters and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year. For example:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


