The Project Gutenberg EBook of The White Waterfall, by James Francis Dwyer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The White Waterfall

Author: James Francis Dwyer

Release Date: January 29, 2004 [EBook #10862]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WHITE WATERFALL ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Harold Lawson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team





THE INTERNATIONAL ADVENTURE LIBRARY

THREE OWLS EDITION



THE WHITE WATERFALL

An Adventure Story

BY JAMES FRANCIS DWYER


TO L.G.D. and G.M.D.


  "THAT'S THE WAY TO HEAVEN,
   THAT'S THE WAY TO HEAVEN,
   THAT'S THE WAY TO HEAVEN OUT
   OF BLACK FERNANDO'S HELL."


PREFACE

It is perhaps inadvisable to mix fact with fiction, but, it appears,
some reference to certain portions of "The White Waterfall" that might
strain the belief of the average reader will not be out of place. In the
wonderful islands of the Pacific many things happen that seem improbable
to the minds of those who dwell close to the heart of civilization. The
mysterious Isle of Tears is not altogether a dream. There are several
islands in Polynesia that have been looked upon from time immemorial as
islands of the dead. These places are shunned by the islanders, and the
centuries have invested them with the same atmosphere of brooding
mystery that Professor Herndon and his party felt when they landed upon
the silent isle where the Wizards of the Centipede performed their weird
rites without interference from the outside world.

Nor is the Vermilion Pit created out of thin air. The savage has used
many startling methods to separate the born warrior from the coward, and
the author has seen a place just as wonderful as the pit, where the
young men of the tribe were tested in the same manner as that related
in this story. The cunning savage has always thought it inadvisable to
pick his fighting men till their courage had been thoroughly tested, and
in dull days of peace the headmen of the tribes racked their brains to
discover nerve-shaking ordeals to try the daring of the growing youth.
The safety of the tribe depended upon the valour of the fighting line,
and it would have been an inexcusable blunder to put the nervous ones in
the front rank.

The strange stone structures similar to the one upon which Holman and
Verslun narrowly escaped being offered up as sacrifices to the Centipede
are to be found in many islands of the Pacific at the present day. In
the Tongan, Caroline, and Cook groups these peculiar stone ruins remain
as evidence of the existence of an ancient people of superior
intelligence to the islanders of to-day. As to the meaning or use of
these structures we are entirely in the dark. The natives of these
groups know nothing concerning them, and the Polynesian builder in that
dark past was too busy clubbing and eating his neighbour to write
histories. Scientists are in doubt, as in the case of the great ruins at
Metalanim, whether they were built as sacrificial altars or as monuments
to ambitious chiefs, and there are no records to enlighten us. But these
relics are convincing proofs that the islands have been inhabited for
many hundreds of years, and we are left to conjecture regarding the
origin and history of the people.

The Dance of the Centipede, which Holman and Verslun witnessed in the
Long Gallery, can be seen to-day by any tourist who leaves the beaten
paths. Every missionary to the islands can tell of "devil dances" that
take place in secluded groves, and in which, to his great disgust, his
converts often take part. It takes time to turn the savage from his old
beliefs. Although the South Seas constitute the last fortress of
romance, and a mention of the coral atolls immediately conjures up a
vision of palms and rice-white beaches, the sensitive person senses the
dark and bloody past when the wizard men were the rulers, and death
stalked in the palm groves.

J.F.D.
New York, March, 1912.


[Illustration]


CONTENTS


CHAPTER

   I. The Song of the Maori
  II. The Professor's Daughters
 III. A Knife From the Dark
  IV. The Storm
   V. I Make a Promise
  VI. The Isle of Tears
 VII. The Pit
VIII. The Ledge of Death
  IX. Into the Valley of Echoes
   X. A Midnight Alarm
  XI. Kaipi Performs a Service
 XII. The Devil Dancers
XIII. Tombs of Silence
 XIV. Back to the Camp
  XV. A Day of Skirmishing
 XVI. The Stone Table
XVII. Beneath the Centipede
XVIII. Barbara's Messenger
  XIX. Leith Scores
   XX. The Black Kindergarten
  XXI. Together Again
 XXII. The White Waterfall
XXIII. The Wizard's Seat
 XXIV. The Way to Heaven




THE WHITE WATERFALL



[Illustration]

[Illustration]


CHAPTER I

THE SONG OF THE MAORI

There is a Tongan proverb which tells us that only fools and children
lie awake during hours that could be devoted to slumber, and it is a
wise proverb when you judge it from a Polynesian standpoint. No special
preparations are required for slumber in the last haunts of Romance, and
as one does not lose caste by dozing in public, the South Sea dweller
sees no reason for remaining awake when he could be peacefully sleeping.
The shade of a palm tree furnishes an ideal resting place, and if a dog
fight occurs in the grass-grown street, he becomes a box-seat spectator
without moving from his couch. Levuka, the second largest town in the
Fijis, was dozing on the afternoon of December 14, 1905, and I decided
to follow the example set by the inhabitants. The thermometer in the
shack at the end of the wharf registered 98 degrees, but the picturesque
little town, with its white and vermilion-tinted houses, looked restful
and cool. The hot, still atmosphere weighed down upon the Pacific,
ironing out the wind ruffles till the ocean resembled a plain of glass,
in which the Union Company's steamer _Navua_, from Auckland, appeared to
be stuck fast, as if the glassy sea had suddenly hardened around her
black hull.

A thin strip of shadow huddled close to a pile of pearl shell at the end
of the wharf, and I doubled myself up and attempted to sleep. But
hardwood planks don't make an ideal resting place. Besides, the rays of
sun followed the strip of shadow around the pile, and each time I
slipped into a doze I would be pricked into wakefulness. At last,
maddened by the biting rays, I collected half a dozen copra bags,
splintered a piece of _kauri_ pine, and after rigging up one bag as an
awning, I spread the others on the planks and fell asleep.

But another disturbing element awakened me from a short slumber. From
the sea end of the deserted wharf came a big, greasy Maori and a
fuzzy-headed Fijian, and their words went out into the silence like
sound projectiles. The Maori had such a high-pitched voice that I
thought, as I rolled over restlessly, he would only have to raise it a
little to make them hear him up in Sydney, eighteen hundred miles away.
It was one of those voices that fairly cavort over big distances, and I
buried my head in the shell as the pair came closer.

It was useless to attempt to shut out that voice. I stuffed a piece of
bag into the ear that wasn't jammed against the pearl shell, but the
noise of that fool talking fairly sizzled in my brain. Finally I gave up
all hopes of trying to sleep till the pair had left the wharf, and I lay
upon my back as they came slowly up the sun-bitten structure.

It was only when I gave up all thoughts of sleep that I recognized that
the Maori was talking English. Up to that moment I thought the pair were
arguing in some unfamiliar tongue, but suddenly their conversation
gripped me, and I strained my ears to listen.

"There's the white waterfall," chanted the Maori.

"Yes, the white waterfall," repeated the Fijian.

"An' you go along sixty paces."

"To the right?" questioned the Fijian.

"No! To the left, you fool!" screamed his companion.

"All right, you go to the left," muttered the rebuked one. "An' that's
the way to heaven!" cried the Maori.

"The way to heaven," echoed the Fijian; then the two lifted up their
voices and chanted:

  "That's the way to heaven,
   That's the way to heaven,
   That's the way to heaven out
   Of Black Fernando's hell."

The incident stirred my curiosity. If I had only heard the words of the
chant I would not have puzzled my brain to determine their meaning, but
it was the manner in which the Maori instructed his friend as to the
direction in which one must walk from the white waterfall that made me
interested. I turned the words over in my mind as I watched them saunter
slowly toward me. Black Fernando's hell and the white waterfall were
places that I had never heard of. I thought of all the missionary hymns
that I had ever listened to afloat and ashore, but the lines that the
pair had chanted were not familiar.

The two walked on in silence for a few minutes after they had lifted up
their voices in the chant, then the Maori began to cross-question his
companion concerning the information he had just given him.

"How many paces?" he asked.

"Sixty," answered the Fijian.

"To the right, isn't it?"

"Yes, to the right," stammered the learner. "You fool nigger!" screamed
the instructor. "It is to the left, pig! Do you hear me? You must go to
the left from the white waterfall! Oh, you blinded fool! you make me
sick! Sing it now with me!"

The Fijian, who was apparently afraid of the bully, hurried to obey the
order, and I wondered as I listened.

"Sixty paces to the left," squeaked the Fijian.

"Sixty paces to the left," roared the Maori. "Now together!"

  "That's the way to heaven,
   That's the way to heaven,
   That's the way to heaven out
   Of----"

I was the cause of the interruption. I lifted myself into a sitting
position, and the movement disturbed the heap of shell. Part of the pile
rattled down upon the planks of the wharf, and the Maori and his pupil
stopped singing and stared at me as if they were much surprised at
finding any one within hearing distance. The wharf had appeared
deserted, and I gave them a start by crawling from underneath the awning
I had made from the copra bag. The Maori wore a dirty khaki coat, with a
pair of trousers reaching to his knees, while the Fijian, instead of
being short-rigged in shirt and sulu, sported a full suit of duck.
"Good afternoon, boss," said the Maori, trying to wipe the look of
surprise from his face with a grin. "Mighty hot afternoon, isn't it,
boss?"

"It is," I answered. "If I knew where that white waterfall is I'd go and
stand under it for a few minutes."

The small Fijian gave a little gurgle of surprise and looked up at his
big teacher, who regarded me with eyes of wonder.

"What white waterfall, boss?" he asked blandly.

"The one you were singing about," I cried.

The Maori smiled sweetly. "We weren't singing about a white waterfall,
boss," he spluttered. "I just guess you were asleep an' dreamed
something."

That didn't improve my temper. I had an edge on the fellow on account of
the high-powered voice he owned, so when he suggested that I had been
dreaming, I climbed to my feet so that I could make my words more
impressive when I started to tell him my opinion of his bluff.

The action startled the Fijian. He had an idea that I was going to use
the piece of _kauri_ pine upon his head, so he gave a yell and started
full speed up the wharf toward the town. The Maori stood his ground for
a minute, then he made a face to express his contempt for me and bolted
after his mate. I stared at his bare legs walloping the planks, and
feeling certain that I had lost all chance of finding out where the
white waterfall and Black Fernando's hell were situated, I found a new
shadow patch and lay down again.

I fell asleep and dreamed that I was chasing those two islanders in an
endeavour to find out the meaning of their mysterious chant, but just as
I had overtaken the pair, some one gripped my arm and shook me gently.

When I opened my eyes I looked up into the face of a good-looking young
fellow of about two and twenty years, who was smiling broadly as if he
thought it a great joke to wake a man out of a sound sleep on a hot
afternoon.

"Are you Jack Verslun?" he asked.

I nodded. It was too warm to use words recklessly.

"Pierre the Rat sent me after you," he continued.

"Why?" I asked.

"I have a berth for you," he answered. "I'm from _The Waif_. The mate
died on the run down from Sydney, and Captain Newmarch sent me ashore to
hunt up some one for his perch. Do you want it?"

"Where are you bound?" I asked.

"Manihiki group."

"What for?"

"Science expedition under the direction of Professor Herndon of San
Francisco."

I sat up and looked across the stretch of water at _The Waif_, and the
young fellow waited patiently. I knew the yacht. An English baronet had
brought the vessel out from Cowes to Brisbane, but he had made the pace
too hot in the Colonies. Out in Fortitude Valley one night the keeper of
a saloon fired a bullet into his aristocratic head, and _The Waif_ was
auctioned. She had taken a hand in a number of games after that. A fast
yacht is a handy vessel south of the line, and some queer tales were
told about the boat that had once shown her heels to the crackerjacks in
the Solent. But I couldn't afford to be particular at that moment.
Levuka isn't the spot where a man can pick and choose, so I wiped the
shell grit from my drill suit and told myself that I had better accept
the berth instead of waiting in expectation of something better turning
up. Pierre the Rat, who ran "The Rathole," where penniless seamen and
beachcombers lodged, was my creditor, and when Pierre was very
solicitous in obtaining employment for one of his boarders, it was a
mighty good intimation that the boarder's credit had reached highwater
mark.

"Well," I said, climbing to my feet, "I might as well take it. I thought
I had enough of the Islands, but as this has turned up I'm your man.
Say," I added, "did you ever read Pilgrim's Progress'?"

The young fellow looked at me and grinned. "Yes, I did," he answered.

"Do you remember much of it?" I asked.

"Not much," he replied.

"Is there anything in it about a white waterfall that is on the way to
heaven out of Black Fernando's hell?" I questioned.

The youngster put his head on one side and looked as if he was turning
things over in his mental storehouse, then he gave me a quick, shrewd
glance and burst out laughing.

"Well?" I growled. "What's the grin for?"

"What has Bunyan got to do with my business?" he asked. "I came to sign
you up for a mate's job on _The Waif_, and I am in a hurry."

"Yes, I know," I grumbled, "but I thought you might have heard something
of a white waterfall. I'm not sure that it is mentioned in 'Pilgrim's
Progress,' but it seems to taste of Bunyan."

"P'raps so," said the youngster, "but Bunyan isn't in our line at
present. Captain Newmarch told me to hurry back to the yacht, as he
wants to get away by sunset, so if you're ready we'll make a start. My
name is Holman, Will Holman."

We walked up the quiet street together and I began to like Will Holman.
One couldn't help but like him. He had the frank, open ways of a boy,
but the cut of his jaw and the manner in which he minted his words led
you to believe that he would give a man's account of himself if any one
pushed him up against a wall. While he made some purchases in the little
stores, I went up to the broken-down shanty where Pierre the Rat ran his
house of refuge, and, after I had collected my few belongings, I went
back to the wharf, where a boat from _The Waif_ was waiting to take us
aboard the yacht.

It was when I was climbing into the boat that I got a surprise. One of
the two natives at the oars was the little Fijian who had been the pupil
of the Maori, but he didn't bat an eyelash when I stared at him.

"What's up?" asked Holman. "Do you know Toni?"

"He's one of the brace that were singing that song about the white
waterfall," I growled.

The Fijian let out a volley of indignant denials, and Holman laughed.

"You might be mistaken," he said. "Toni came ashore with me about two
hours ago, but I don't think he left the boat."

"I'm not mistaken," I said, as the Fijian kept on protesting that he had
never moved from the boat, "but it doesn't matter much. Let it go."

We were about a quarter of a mile from the shore when a man raced down
from the town, ran along to the sea end of the wharf and waved his arms
as if he was signalling us. Holman turned and looked at him.

"I wonder who it is?" he muttered. "Perhaps it is somebody with your
board bill, Verslun."

I started to laugh, then I stopped suddenly. The man on the wharf was
shouting to us, and when my ears caught a word I recognized him. It was
the big Maori who had been instructing the Fijian earlier in the
afternoon.

I told Holman, and he looked at Toni, but Toni's face was blank. For
some reason or other he wished to ignore his instructor who was
screaming on the end of the wharf.

"He must be mad," muttered Holman. "The darned fool thinks we--Listen!"

A land breeze brought the last line of the chant to our ears as we
neared _The Waif_, and the words seemed to stir me curiously as they
swirled around us. I had a desire to memorize the chant, and even after
we had got out of range of the high-powered voice of the singer I found
myself murmuring over and over again the words:

  "That's the way to heaven out
   Of Black Fernando's hell."

[Illustration]



CHAPTER II

THE PROFESSOR'S DAUGHTERS

In the old days, when slave-carrying was a game followed by gentlemen
with nerve, the officer with the best nose on board the man-o'-war that
overhauled a suspected slave carrier was always sent aboard to make an
examination. It was his business to sniff at the air in the hold in an
endeavour to distinguish the "slave smell." No matter how the wily
slaver disinfected the place, the odour of caged niggers remained, and a
long-nosed investigator could always detect it.

Now the trouble odour on board a ship is the same as the slave smell. An
experienced investigator can detect it immediately, and when I climbed
over the low bulwarks of _The Waif_ I got a whiff. I couldn't tell
exactly where it was, but I knew that Dame Trouble was aboard the craft.
It's a sort of sixth sense with a sailorman to be able to detect a
stormy atmosphere, and I felt that the yacht wasn't the place that the
dove of peace would choose as a permanent abode. I don't know how the
information came to me. It seemed to filter in through the pores of my
skin, but it was information that I felt sure was correct.

Captain Newmarch was a bilious Englishman with a thin, scrawny beard. He
endeavoured to make one word do the work of two--or three if they were
very short words--and working up a conversation with him was as tough a
job as one could lay hold of. Sometimes a word came to the tip of his
tongue, felt the atmosphere, as you might say, then slid back into his
throat with a little protesting gurgle, and after a ten minutes'
conversation with him, those little gurgles from the strangled words
made me look upon him as a sort of morgue for murdered sentences.

Professor Herndon, the head of the expedition, was on the deck when the
captain and I came up out of the cabin, and Herndon was everything the
comic papers show in the make-up of science professors, with a little
bit extra for good luck. He was sixty inches of nerves, wrinkles, and
whiskers, with special adornments in the shape of a blue smoking cap,
and a pair of spectacles with specially ground lenses of an enormous
thickness.

Newmarch grunted something which the Professor and I took to be an
introduction, and he put a skinny hand into mine.

"You have been a long while in the Islands?" he squeaked.

"Longer than I care to say," I replied.

"Have you been around the spot we are making for?" he asked.

"I was on Penrhyn Island for three months," I answered. "I was helping a
German scientist who was studying the family habits of turtles."

I made a foolish break by admitting that I possessed any knowledge of
Polynesia. The Professor had left his home at sunny Sausalito, on the
shores of San Francisco Bay, in search of that kind of stuff, and before
I could do a conversational backstep he had pushed me against the side
of the galley and was deluging me with questions, the answers to which
he entered in shorthand in a notebook that was bulkier than a Dutchman's
Bible. The old spectacled ancient could fire more queries in three
minutes than any human gatling that ever gripped a brief, and I looked
around for relief.

And the wonder is that the relief came. I forgot the Professor and his
anxiety concerning the "temba-temba" devil dance when my eyes happened
to catch sight of the vision that was approaching from the companionway.
A boat carrying a science expedition to one of the loneliest groups in
the Pacific was not the place where one would expect to find the
handsomest girl in all the world, and my tongue refused to mould my
words. The girl was tall, of graceful build, and possessed of a quiet
beauty that had a most peculiar effect upon me. Only that afternoon, as
I lay in the shadow of the pile of pearl shell on Levuka wharf, I had
thought of crossing to Auckland and shipping up to 'Frisco so that I
could hear good women laugh and talk as I had heard them in my dreams
during the years I had spent around the Islands, and now the woman of my
dreams was in front of me. But I was afraid of her. When she came toward
me I thought of the years I had wasted down in that lonely quarter where
ambition is strangled by lassitude bred in tropical sunshine, and the
ghost of the man I might have been banged me fair between the two eyes.

"My daughter, Miss Edith Herndon," squeaked the Professor, and when I
put out my big hand to take her little one I thought I'd fall down on
the deck on account of the Niagara of blood that seemed to rush to my
brain.

It's funny how all the little imperfections in your dress and manner
rise up suddenly and bang you hard on the bump of observation when you
find yourself in front of some one whose good opinion you want to earn.
I felt it so the moment I stood before the girl in the cream serge suit.
My drill outfit, that I had thought rather clean when I brushed the
shell grit from it after my sleep on the wharf, looked as black as the
devil's tail when she appeared. My hands appeared to be several degrees
larger than the prize hams that come out of Kansas, and my tongue, as if
it recognized the stupidity of the remarks I attempted to make, started
to play fool stunts as if it wanted to go down my throat and choke me to
death.

The girl guessed the sort of predicament I was in at that moment. God
only knows how many months had passed since I had spoken to a woman like
her. Not that good women are lacking in the Islands, but because they
were on a different plane to me. I had been belting native crews on
trading schooners between the Carolines and the Marquesas, and when
ashore I had little opportunity for speaking to a woman of the type of
Edith Herndon.

And she understood the feeling that held me tongue-tied. To make me feel
at my ease she started to tell of everything that had happened from the
moment that _The Waif_ had cleared Sydney Heads, and the time she
spent in that recital was as precious to me as the two-minute interval
between rounds is to a prize-fighter who has been knocked silly the
moment before the round ends. I had shaken the dizziness out of my head
when she finished, and I had obtained control over my tongue.

"You must tell us a lot about the South Seas," she cried. "You have been
down here such a long time that you must have many interesting things to
relate. Captain Newmarch will not talk, and Mr. Leith refuses to see
anything picturesque in the sights he has seen during his wanderings."

"Who is Mr. Leith?" I asked.

"He is father's partner in this expedition," she said quietly. "He has
lived down here for many years, but he will not tell us much. And
Barbara is anxious to know everything she can."

"Barbara?" I stammered. "Then--then there is another lady aboard?"

"Oh, yes! my sister," cried the girl. "I think I hear her coming now."

There was no question about the latter part of her remark. A burst of
laughter that was more infectious than influenza came from the
companion-stairs, and immediately in its wake came a girl who made me
think, as I compared her to Miss Edith, of a beautiful yacht alongside a
stately liner. Barbara Herndon was sunshine personified. Laughter went
with her wherever she went, and a pair of Tongans, polishing brasses,
immediately put their molars on view, as if they had understood what
caused the smiles upon her pretty face as she came toward us.

"Oh, you are the new mate?" she cried, as I was introduced. "Mr. Holman
was just telling me about you. He said that you repeated a chapter of
'Pilgrim's Progress' every time you woke up after a sleep."

I blushed as I made a mental resolve that I would punch the head of that
youngster when I had a suitable opportunity, and in between my
stammering explanations I made notes on the differences between the two
girls. Edith was as stately as Juno, with a face that was so sweet and
restful that a glance at it was better than an opiate for a man whose
nerves were all out of tune. She had that kind of repose that you see
sometimes on the face of an Oriental statue, the repose that comes to
women who have met great trials or for whom great trials are waiting.
Barbara was altogether different. She found the world rather an amusing
place, and it seemed as if she took it for granted that her sister was
capable of shouldering the cares of the family, leaving her free to
smile at all the amusing incidents she found in the course of the day.

It appeared to me that I was an amusing incident to her at that moment.
She returned to the fool story that Holman had told, and I couldn't
sidestep her questions.

"But it is true that you were quoting Bunyan on the wharf when Mr.
Holman found you, isn't it?" she asked mischievously.

"No, it isn't true," I spluttered. "I only asked Mr. Holman a question
to see if he was familiar with 'Pilgrim's Progress'."

"Why did you ask him that?" she quizzed. "I'm sure he looks a perfectly
respectable young man."

Miss Edith was smiling, but she took pity upon me at last and
endeavoured to rescue me from my tormentor.

"Oh, Barbara!" she cried reprovingly, "Mr. Verslun will think you are
very inquisitive. You must not pry into his private affairs."

"But it is nothing private," I gurgled. "I simply asked Mr. Holman a
question in an endeavour to find out what a Maori and a Fijian were
talking about."

"Oh, it is something mysterious!" cried the younger girl. "I knew it! I
knew it! We are getting into the region of mystery at last! Oh, Mr.
Verslun, you are a perfect treasure! It has been a nasty, dull, old trip
from the moment we left Sydney Harbour, and you are the first person to
bring a little colour into the voyage."

She was so worked up at the thought of hearing something wonderfully
mysterious and romantic that I started to make a long yarn out of that
incident on the wharf just for her benefit. Miss Edith was interested
too, but I was convinced, as I polished up the points of the little tale
and endeavoured to pull in a thrill, that the elder sister was deriving
her pleasure from watching the face of the younger one, and not from my
story.

"It pleases Barbara," she cried, when I had told how Toni had denied all
knowledge of his friend, and how the Maori had sent the farewell chant
after the boat. "She thinks she will see and hear wonderful things
before we get back to civilization."

"I hope she will," I said, and little did I dream that the wish I
expressed at that moment should come true in such a remarkable manner
before we had returned.

"And you don't know what they meant by their song about the white
waterfall and Black Fernando's hell?" murmured Barbara.

"No, I don't," I replied. "The Maori ran away when I attempted to
cross-examine him, and Toni denies all knowledge of the duet on the
wharf."

"Oh, we must ask him again!" she cried. "There he is near the wheel.
I'll go and bring him!"

She raced madly after the Fijian and hauled him before us in triumph. I
was more convinced than ever that it was Toni who had blundered over
his lesson on the wharf, but Toni denied the charge more vehemently than
he did on the boat. He asserted in reply to Barbara Herndon's questions,
that he could not sing a note, that he was absolutely ignorant of white
waterfalls, and the only hell he knew was the one spoken of by the
missionary in Lower George Street, Sydney; and the girl sighed as she
gave up the effort.

"It seemed such a nice mystery to unravel," she murmured, "but if Toni
persists in saying that he knows nothing of the white waterfall the
investigation falls to the ground."

The Fijian was backing away with renewed protestations when a head came
round the corner of the galley, and a voice that was deeper than the
caves of Atiu fired a question at us.

"What about the white waterfall?"

"Oh, Mr. Leith," cried Miss Barbara, "we have just been investigating a
mystery. Mr. Verslun discovered it this afternoon in Levuka. But you
haven't met Mr. Verslun yet, have you?"

"I haven't," growled the owner of the voice.

"Mr. Verslun, this is Mr. Leith, who is father's partner," said Miss
Barbara. "He knows a lot about the Islands, but he refuses to tell any
of his experiences."

I looked at the man who stood in front of me, and a curious thing
flashed through my mind. I was reminded at that moment of a story I had
read of a man charged with an attempt upon the life of a prince. The
would-be murderer informed the judge that a terrible hate of the
princeling had gripped him the moment he put eyes on him, and he had
made the attempt upon his life before he had managed to control the
unexplainable surge of hate. I understood the emotion that had gripped
that unfortunate as I stood face to face with Leith. A feeling of
revulsion gripped me, and I experienced a peculiar squalmy sensation as
I took his hand. It was unexplainable. Perhaps some ancestor of mine had
unsatisfactory dealings with a man of the same unusual type in a faraway
past, and the transmitted hate had suddenly sprung into the conscious
area. I do know that you can keep a secretary-bird away from snakes till
it grows old, but the first reptile it sees it immediately starts out to
beat him up. I had the inherited hate that makes the secretary-bird rush
madly at a snake that may be the first of its species that it has ever
seen, and I guess that Leith had no love to spare for me from the moment
he took my hand.

He was a huge brute, fully six feet tall, and he was the possessor of
two of the strongest-looking hands I had ever seen. They were claws,
that's what they were. The great fingers were slightly crooked, as if
waiting, like the tentacles of an octopus, for something to get in their
grip. The body was heavy, and, in a manner that I cannot explain, it
made me think of animals that lived and died in long past ages. The big
brute looked so capable of making an inexcusable attack that one's
primitive instincts warned one to keep in a state of readiness for the
onslaught that seemed imminent.

But it was the face that was specially unattractive. It was a sallow,
flat face, and the strange eyes did nothing to lighten it. They were
dead, lustreless eyes. They had a coldness in them that reminded me of
the icicle eyes of the crocodile, and, curiously, I associated that
reptile's notions of fair warfare with Leith as I looked at him. That
sullen face, with the eyes that would never brighten at a tale of
daring, or dim from a story of pathos, belonged to a man who would
imitate crocodile tactics by lying quiet till his prey was within
striking distance.

"What is all this about the white waterfall?" he repeated, after the
crooked fingers had dropped my hand.

"Oh, it's something that happened to Mr. Verslun," replied Miss Barbara.

"Where?" asked Leith.

"On the wharf over there," I answered coldly, nodding toward the
structure as I spoke. "It's really nothing important though, and I
related it solely for Miss Herndon's amusement."

"But Toni?" he growled, turning toward the two girls.

"Oh, Toni puts forward an alibi," laughed the youngest sister. "He
asserts that he was in the boat when the incident happened and he
persists in saying that he knows nothing about the matter."

Leith again turned toward me, and his brows straightened as he looked me
in the eyes. "Can't you tell the story over again?" he asked.

"I'd rather not," I said, somewhat rudely. "I'm tired of it. It was
really only a small happening that I am afraid I expanded a little in an
endeavour to thrill Miss Herndon, and the story is now her personal
property."

"But the bare facts?" he growled.

"There are no bare facts," I replied. "I covered them with fiction, and
I think Miss Herndon is going to copyright the whole."

He took the remark as a direct refusal on my part to give him an outline
of the affair to satisfy his curiosity, and I felt elated at noting the
sudden glint of anger that appeared in the lustreless eyes.

The two girls stood silent for a moment while Leith and I surveyed each
other without speaking, then a Tahitian boy broke the awkward silence by
informing me that the captain wished to see me in the cabin, and I
hurriedly excused myself to the sisters and went below.


[Illustration]


CHAPTER III

A KNIFE FROM THE DARK

It was after nine o'clock that evening before I again saw young Holman,
and by that time Levuka was far behind. We had taken advantage of a
stiff breeze that had sprung up about sunset, and _The Waif_ was
plunging through a moon-washed ocean, sending furrows of foam from her
forefoot while the wind snored through her canvas. I forgot the
happenings of the day as I felt the quivering vessel that seemed to
thrill with the ecstasy of life as she flung herself at the watery
wastes ahead. The tremor in her boards seemed to crawl into my body and
warm me like wine, and I felt inclined to bless Holman instead of
punching his head as I had thought of doing during the baiting I
received from Miss Barbara Herndon. The youngster had saved me from days
and nights of weary monotony in sleepy Levuka, and I welcomed him gladly
as he joined me on the poop.

"Say, you made a hit with the ladies!" he cried. "Your fame as a
story-teller is set upon a solid foundation. And I don't suppose you are
inclined to thank me for giving you the opportunity to tell of the
wonderful things that happened while you slumbered on the wharf?"

"Drop it," I growled; "I've had enough of the joke. By the way, what
position do you hold in the expedition?"

The boy laughed. "I hold none," he cried, "but I'm trying to make myself
useful to the Professor so that he'll invite me to come ashore with him.
The Professor and his daughters, with Leith and half a dozen natives,
comprise the full strength of the expedition, and I'm trying hard for an
invitation to the field of wonders."

"But what are you doing aboard?" I asked.

"My uncle owns _The Waif_," answered the young fellow, "and he thought
this trip would be a nice cheap holiday for me. I wanted to take a run
to the States, but that would have cost him money, so I allowed myself
to be forced aboard the yacht. But, Gee! I'm mighty glad I came now."

I glanced at his face as we turned in our walk, but he moved his head
away quickly.

"So it has been pleasant?" I said.

"Pleasant?" he cried. "Why it has been a little foretaste of heaven.
Say, I like you, and I know you like her by the manner in which you
explained everything to her. Don't you think she's a jolly nice girl?"

"Who?"

"Why, Miss Barbara Herndon," he cried.

"Oh!" I gurgled. "You took me by surprise, and I hardly knew--well, I
didn't know what had made the trip so pleasant."

He put out his hand, and I gripped it warmly. There was something clean
and good about the youngster. When he glanced up at me as I took his
hand, I looked into a face that was as open as the day--a face that
possessed all the passionate purity of youth, and my grip was sincere.
One didn't ask for credentials in dealing with Will Holman.

"I liked you from the start," he said, "but I wanted the opinion of the
girls. That's why I put Miss Barbara up to the game of firing questions
at you about that silly business on the wharf."

"And did I pass muster?" I queried.

"Sure you did!" he cried enthusiastically. "Miss Barbara Herndon says
that you are true blue, and Miss Edith--"

He stopped and looked at a patch of shadow near the galley. "Some one is
hiding there," he whispered. "I saw him sneak into it."

"Nonsense!" I growled. "The moon and something else are affecting your
brain."

"But I'm sure of it," he gasped.

He sprang for the spot as he finished speaking, but he found nothing. He
returned to my side shaking his head as if only half convinced about the
matter.

"Some one was listening to us talking, but whoever it was he managed to
slip away while we were arguing the question."

"Well, he didn't learn much," I said. "It was probably one of the
islanders, and you've scared the life out of him now."

Holman gripped my arm as I turned away, and he put a question in a tense
whisper.

"What do you think of Leith?" he asked.

Somehow the question did not surprise me, but I was not in a hurry to
give my opinion of the, Professor's partner.

"I have only spoken a few words to him," I countered cautiously.

"But your impression?" stammered the youngster. "Don't you think--well,
of course you haven't got the lay of things yet."

I smiled at the guilelessness of the boy who was making a confidant of
a stranger. "What's wrong with Leith?" I asked. "What are you hinting
at?"

Holman glanced at the Tongan at the wheel, then at the shadow patch that
had disturbed his nerves a few moments before.

"He's the devil!" he whispered.

I felt inclined to laugh. Leith was certainly not a person that one
would take to the moment an introduction was given, but the manner in
which the young fellow had imparted his opinion was amusing. But it was
evident that I had not guessed wrong when I divined trouble the moment I
came over the side of the yacht.

Holman caught my coat with his left hand as we turned, and he spoke
excitedly.

"Do you know what we're after?" he queried hoarsely.

"It's a scientific expedition," I replied. "That's what you and Captain
Newmarch told me, and I have not questioned any one else."

"But do you know the particular line we are after?"

"No," I replied.

"Well, we're after skulls. Leith has told the Professor about some
ancient boneyard that he knows of, and he's dragging old Herndon down
there."

"I cannot see the crime now," I said. "I've gone after skulls before
to-day. I brought a hundred of them up to Vavau for a German scientist
last year. He was taking them home to European museums to prove that the
Polynesians of ten centuries back had bigger brains than the niggers of
to-day."

"Yes, I know that," gurgled Holman; "but Leith--oh, damn it! I can't get
you to understand! He pulled the Professor into this deal, and the old
man is as green as grass. Herndon supplied the money and all that, and
he's that much of a silly old doodlebug that this fellow is buncoing him
out of his good gold."

"Yes," I muttered; "and what do his daughters say?"

"Say?" cried the youngster. "They can say nothing that will do any good
when they are talking to a madman. He sees Fame coming down the pike,
and he's blind to all the tricks of that devil. It's a fact, Verslun!
Leith is after the old man's cash--and after Edith Herndon as well."

I stood and looked at the youngster. His boyish face was aflame with
indignation, and any suspicions I had regarding his good intentions were
swept away immediately.

"After Edith Herndon?" I repeated slowly.

"Yes!" he gasped. "Oh, I knew you didn't like the big, sallow brute.
Miss Barbara told me how you turned him down cold when he wanted you to
repeat that yarn to satisfy his curiosity. He's a bad egg, do you hear?
He's out for trouble, and we're going to run into it head on before we
finish the trip. Only for the girls I would have stayed ashore at
Levuka."

"And the captain?" I questioned.

"We don't know about him," he snapped. "He's Leith's captain. I mean
Leith put him in his job when the Professor chartered the yacht. Anyhow,
he doesn't say enough to let any one know which side of the fence he is
on. He has only learned to say yes and no, and he is mighty particular
about the number of times he will use those words."

I laughed at the bitterness the youngster threw into his speech. It is
good to be young. One can love and hate with some intensity, and it
appeared to me that Holman had found marks for both adoration and hatred
on the yacht that was slipping into the mysterious islands of the South
Sea.

"You mustn't look at the black side of things," I said. "Leith's face is
not a likable one, I will admit, but a lot of good fellows have ugly
dials. It seems that the Professor wants skulls, and it appears that
Leith knows of a spot where he can gather up the oldest specimens in
Polynesia. There's nothing wrong about that. As to Miss Herndon, she
struck me as being a young lady who was well able to look after
herself."

"That's all right," stammered the youngster. "Perhaps I said too much,
but I had to speak to you."

"And I'm mighty glad you did!" I cried.

He gripped my hand and turned away, leaving me to my own reflections. It
was a wonderful night. The silvery sea through which _The Waif_ drove
a path with plunging forefoot awoke strange dreams and fancies within my
brain. All the mystery of the tropic night welled up around me, and my
soul seemed to have suddenly awakened to the beauty of life. The veil of
morbid pessimism that came before my eyes during the weary days I had
spent upon the beach at Levuka was torn aside, and a wave of gladness
entered my being. I felt that the voyage would be an eventful one to me,
and I tramped the poop with a light step. Occasionally the sallow
features of Leith persisted in rising before my mental vision to blot
out the dream face that was continually before me, but I resolutely put
the Professor's partner from my mind and fed myself upon the visions
bred by the splendour of the night.

Holman had left me about an hour when I happened to glance at the patch
of shadow that had attracted his attention while he was talking to me.
I stopped and watched it intently. Some one had crawled into the
velvety strip and was lying perfectly still.

"Who is there?" I asked.

There was no answer. The strip of shadow broadened and narrowed as _The
Waif_ plunged, but I could discern nothing. Outside the captain and
myself, the crew of _The Waif_, together with the six men that were with
the Professor's party, were all natives, and I wondered as I watched the
shadow why one should be crawling around as if afraid of being seen. It
was possible that he was attempting to thieve something from the galley,
and it was also possible that he was spying, as Holman had suggested.

I picked up a small iron pin and tossed it at the spot where I felt sure
the islander was hiding. I didn't throw the pin with any force, although
the yell that came out of the shadow would convince an onlooker that I
had thrown it with murderous intent.

I sprang forward while the shriek of pain was still vibrating in the
air, but the native was determined to have revenge for the rap from the
iron pin. A knife flashed in the moonlight, and I staggered as the blade
touched my forehead like a tongue of flame. A dark figure dashed along
the deck toward the forecastle, and brushing the blood from my eyes I
started in pursuit.

At the head of the companion-stairs I collided heavily with Newmarch,
who had just rushed up from the cabin, and the force of the shock nearly
threw him off his feet.

"Confound it!" he cried. "What's the matter with you?"

"One of the Kanakas nearly cut my eye out!" I roared. "He flung a knife
at me and ducked for the f'c'stle."

I left him standing in angry astonishment and rushed forward. I stood at
the top of the ladder and listened. The only noises that came up were
the shrill snores of the islanders, but the blood that streamed down my
face made me forget prudence, and I scrambled down into the stuffy
quarters, where the odour of natives was overwhelming.

A swinging lamp dimly illuminated the place, and I snatched it from its
hook and swung it over the face of the naked occupant of the first bunk.
A glance convinced me that his sleep was genuine. His mouth was wide
open as he snored, and the native who feigns sleep hasn't enough sense
to make his imitation more real by opening his mouth.

The man in the next bunk, a muscular Kanaka, had his face turned away
from me, and in spite of his prolonged snore my suspicions were aroused.
I thrust my hand beneath the single blanket that covered him, and was
immediately convinced that I had discovered the culprit. The blanket was
cold.

"Here, you scoundrel!" I yelled, dropping the lamp and poking him
roughly in the ribs. "What the devil do you mean by trying to knife me?"

He opened his big eyes and stared at me stupidly, while the occupants of
the other bunks, who were aroused by my shout, sat up and rubbed their
eyes.

"Why did you throw that knife?" I screamed.

"I no throw knife," he muttered. "Me sleep, very tired."

The pain of my wound maddened me, and I seized him roughly and dragged
him toward the ladder with the intention of bringing him before the
bilious captain.

I had grasped a rung to haul myself up when a heavy boot came down on my
fingers and the voice of the captain screamed an objection.

"Stop that business!" he shrieked.

"But this devil tried to knife me!" I protested.

"Let him go!" yelled Newmarch. "Do you hear me? Let him go this
instant!"

I let go my grip of the Kanaka, who immediately dived for his bunk and
curled himself up as if he had no further interest in the proceedings.
The captain was beside me then, and his quick breathing betrayed his
excitement. As I lifted the lamp back to its place the light fell upon
his thin features; their pallor surprised me as much as his words.

"Too many wonderful things happen to you!" he stammered.

"Why--what do you mean?" I queried.

"Never mind!" he snapped. "If you start a rough house on board this boat
I'll stop you before you get well under way."

I was too astounded to reply. The blood upon my face and hands was plain
evidence of the wound I had received, and the captain's indifference
left me breathless. Without another word he turned and scrambled up on
deck, and I followed.

Once out of earshot of the listening crew I determined to make another
effort to show him that my conduct was justified.

"That devil was sneaking in the shadow of the galley all the evening," I
cried. "I attempted to stir him out and he jerked the knife at me."

He stopped in front of me, made one of his conversational feints by
opening his mouth and shutting it again, then dived hastily for the
companion, leaving me to search for sympathy in the moonlit night. I
remembered as I endeavoured to staunch the wound, the question which I
had put to Holman concerning the captain only an hour before, and I
smiled grimly as I bound my handkerchief about my forehead. Captain
Newmarch of _The Waif_ hadn't risen in my estimation since the moment I
made the inquiry.


[Illustration]


CHAPTER IV


THE STORM

Holman glanced inquiringly at the piece of sticking plaster above my
right eye when he met me on the deck the morning after the knife
incident, and I grinned sheepishly.

"You were right about that patch of shadow last night," I remarked.

"How?" he queried.

"This came from it," I replied, touching the plaster with my finger as I
spoke.

The boy whistled and looked around cautiously. "You'll be getting wise
in a day or two," he murmured. "She said you would when I told her this
morning about our conversation of last night."

I laughed, and he turned suddenly toward me. "Do you think we'll put in
anywhere in the Samoan Group?"

"I don't think so," I replied. "Why?"

Holman came closer. "If we do I'm going to get the girls ashore and keep
them there," he muttered. "I don't care what you think of the
proposition. This trip is going to be a tough one, and I'm certain there
is some deviltry afoot."

I tried to laugh at the serious face upon the youngster, but the
conviction which he threw into his words choked my mirth. Whether it was
the little brush with the Kanaka or the gloomy forebodings of the boy I
couldn't tell, but I felt a trifle anxious after my first night aboard
_The Waif_.

"But there is nothing to be gained by running away if we do put in to a
port," I growled.

"How is that?" stammered Holman.

"Well, if Leith is an admirer of Edith Herndon, as you say," I argued,
"and if the captain is in league with Leith, the yacht wouldn't leave
till the girls came aboard. Besides, the Professor wouldn't go on
without them."

"I don't know about the Professor," grunted Holman. "That old doodlebug
only thinks of the silly specimens that he is going to collect down
here. If he had any love for his daughters he wouldn't have brought them
along."

"But you told me they insisted on coming."

"So they did!" he retorted savagely. "But they knew that the poor old
fool was in the hands of a scoundrel and they wouldn't let him go alone.
They think they can protect him from that devil, and it nearly makes me
cry to hear them say so."

Miss Edith Herndon and her sister came up on deck at that moment, and if
I was impressed by the calm sweetness of the elder girl's face on the
previous afternoon, the strength and beauty of it as I saw it in the
fresh morning sunlight made my heart pound violently against my ribs.
The prettiness of Miss Barbara made the quiet dignity of the elder
sister more noticeable, and that apparent strength of character made me
doubt Holman's contention that she would be unable to help the scientist
if Leith's motives were discovered to be criminal.

It was Barbara's keen eyes that detected my plaster, and I squirmed as I
saw the light of curiosity in her eyes.

"Oh, tell us how it happened!" she cried. "Please make it a night attack
upon the yacht, Mr. Verslun! I heard a wild cry just after I retired and
I felt sure that war canoes had surrounded us. They always surround the
ill-fated ship, don't they?" she continued merrily. "And the ship is
always ill-fated in all the really thrilling sea stories I have read!"

Leith came sauntering aft as she fired her questions at me, and he
stood near Miss Edith with his dull eyes fixed upon me as I answered.

"I'm afraid I cannot feed your imagination to-day," I replied. "I
tripped over a coil of rope, and the deck sprang up and bumped me."

I glanced at Leith as I spoke, and I fancied I detected a glint of
amusement in the lustreless eyes that were turned in my direction.
Whether it was caused by my hastily constructed lie or by the girl's
inquiries I could not tell, but my dislike for the clumsy giant made me
suspicious about his knowledge of the incident of the preceding evening,
and I felt certain that he was smiling at my fib.

As if he wished to do something which would convince me of his ignorance
of the happening, he hastily changed the subject.

"The captain thinks we are in for a spell of bad weather, Mr. Verslun,"
he drawled; "are you of the same opinion?"

"If signs go for anything we are," I replied. "We are running into a
zone of trouble."

He walked away without further speech, and the two girls went below in
response to a message from their father. The Professor was slightly
indisposed, and he demanded that his daughters remain with him in the
cabin. The selfishness of the scientist irritated Holman exceedingly,
and he made bitter comments about him during the hour or two he kept me
company.

"I never yet met one of those scientific gazaboos who didn't think he
was something more than mortal," he growled. "I try to keep on good
terms with the old bone measurer, but his vanity nearly turns me sick.
Do you know what he told me yesterday?"

"What?" I asked, amused at the youngster's annoyance.

"Said that he might mention my name in the report of the expedition that
he would send to some old research society in the States. When I didn't
show any signs of elation he got offended, so I guess I'm cut out of the
history."

He went grumbling down into the cabin, and I watched the ocean. The
barometer was low, and out of the west a pack of fat black clouds
swarmed up from the horizon, stacking themselves one upon another till
they resembled a huge pile of rounded boulders which a sudden puff of
wind might bring toppling down upon us. The faint scouting puffs of
air--"the devil's breath" of the poetical Polynesians--whined through
the stays, but the small waves that tried to rise in expectation were
clouted back by the heavy, oppressive atmosphere that ironed out the
ocean till one's imagination pictured it waiting for the word like a
strained runner on his mark.

It burst at last. Three violent blasts ripped over us like projectiles,
and the "song of the dead men" was twanged upon the straining ropes.
_The Waif_ stopped for an instant, as if debating whether she would run
or cower before the onslaught, then she dipped her nose into the mad
lather that rose around her and plunged forward. That jump seemed to be
a challenge to the storm. It burst upon us in all its fury, and the
yacht became a tiny seesaw upon the murderous Himalayas that rose around
us.

Great chunks of green water came hurtling over the rail, thundering down
upon us till _The Waif_ was buried in a boiling turmoil from which she
would leap and shake herself, only to be pulled down again when the next
sea fell upon us. When she sprang out of the lather, those devilish,
snarling, snaky waves sprang after her, slapping at her flanks, tearing
and biting at her like a pack of wolves. There's an awful likeness to a
wolf pack about storm waves. When you see them all foam-lathered
stretching out like a pack in full cry, or watch them leaping up as if
they were trying to see whether the unfortunate ship had been torn down
by one of their band, you begin to credit them with some sort of
intelligence.

_The Waif_ was no poppycock yacht, built to dodge about the Solent and
run for Cowes if the wind blew a capful. She had been built to hold her
own with the hardest slamming seas that ever chased a shattered hull,
and it was lucky for us that she was. The storm that came screeching
after us from way across the Coral Sea was one of those high-powered
freak disturbances that juggle with lumps of water like a vaudeville
performer juggling with cheap crockery. It took the tops off those
rollers and pelted them at us, and the wind seemed to yell in triumph
when the yacht was buried in the whirlpools in which she dived headlong.

All through the night we raced before it, and through the following day
_The Waif_ never paused for an instant in her mad race to the eastward.
The Kanakas became demoralized with fear, and I forgot the trouble
hanging over the heads of the girls and their father as I helped
Newmarch drag the crew from their bunks to cut away the wreckage of the
vessel.

I saw a new side of the captain during those hours. A very devil of
energy took hold of him with the coming of the storm, and he became a
human dynamo. He pounded the frightened crew unmercifully, dragging the
screaming islanders back to their work by the hair of their heads, and
heaping upon them curses that were strange and blood-curdling. That he
was a good sailorman I had little doubt. He handled _The Waif_ with
skill and patience, while the crew, with rolling eyes and quivering
lips, were so terrorized by his wrath that they fled to do his bidding.

I had been wondering since the moment when he had ordered me to let go
my grip of the Kanaka in the f'c'stle, if he was afraid that any
disagreement between me and the knife-thrower would start trouble with
the crew, but from the way he hazed the niggers during the storm I was
convinced that it was not through any fear of them that he ordered me to
leave my assailant alone. The conviction did not increase my love for
him. As I viewed the happening he was inclined to shield the big brute
who threw the knife simply because the offence did not appear to be one
that merited punishment, and this view was not pleasing to my nerves.

It was on the second day of the storm that a little incident happened
which is worth mentioning. Toni, the small Fijian who had chanted the
song of Black Fernando's hell, was caught by a huge wave and pounded
hard against the cabin. The mad turmoil of water swept his nearly
lifeless form into the scuppers, but before another comber could snatch
him overboard, I managed to reach his side and drag him into safety.

I forgot the incident in the whirl of happenings that followed, but the
Fijian had a longer memory. Late that afternoon he was holding the wheel
with Soma, the big Kanaka who had jerked the knife at me, and as I
stopped to peer at the binnacle he beckoned me toward him.

"That was me that sing," he shrieked, as I put down my head. "I tell
damn big lie you an' Miss Herndon."

"Why?" I asked, amused at the peculiar manner in which he tried to
express his gratitude for the rescue of the morning.

"Big Jacky tell me not say anything," he screamed. "He tell it to me one
big secret all that talk about waterfall. Tell me not to tell any one.
You know why?"

I glanced at Soma and found that he was straining his ears to catch the
words the other was shrieking, and as I was more than suspicious of him,
I promptly closed the conversation.

"I'll see you in the morning," I roared.

The Fijian nodded and I fought my way forward, wondering as I clung to
the rigging what the pupil of the Maori had to tell me about the song.

The wind had ceased somewhat on the morning of the third day, but the
snaky rollers were still racing after the flying yacht. A watery sun
peeped out from between the driving cloud masses, the rays glinting
through the heads of the waves that curled menacingly as the battered
yacht drove through them.

Newmarch hailed me from the poop when I came on deck, and there was a
peculiar look upon his scrawny features as he addressed me.

"Do you know that nigger you rescued?" he asked.

"Toni?"

"Yes."

"What about him?"

"You did your heroic stunt for nothing," he remarked. "The fool can't be
found, so I guess he went overboard in the night."

The news came as a shock to me. Toni's last question that he had put as
he clung to the wheel with Soma had flashed through my mind several
times through the night. He had asked it in a manner that insinuated
that I might be interested in the reasons why Big Jacky, his companion
on the wharf at Levuka, wished the whereabouts of the white waterfall to
remain a secret, and now his disappearance blocked my inquiries. I felt
annoyed with myself for not listening to what the Fijian had to say at
the moment he confessed that he had lied, and then the face of the
listening Soma came up before my mental eye. Soma was a person that I
was beginning to cordially dislike.

I turned to Newmarch and fired a question at him.

"Do you think he was helped overboard?"

"Why, no," he said slowly. "Why do you think that?"

"Oh, nothing," I replied. "I thought his narrow escape of the morning
would have made him careful."

It was a few hours after this conversation that I had my first chance
of speaking to Edith Herndon since the moment we had run into the
disturbance. The girl poked her head out of the companionway, and I
hastened to assist her out on deck. It was her first sight of the damage
which the storm had done to the yacht, and she gave a cry of alarm as
she looked at the splintered spars and the cordage that cracked in the
wind like the whips of invisible devils.

"Oh, Mr. Verslun, we are a wreck!" she cried.

"Not quite," I said, gripping her arm to steady her as _The Waif_ took
a header. "We've weathered the worst of it and we're still sound. The
storm centre has slipped away to the north, and we can count ourselves
out of the ruction for the present."

Her shapely hand clutched my wet oilskins as the yacht plunged from the
back of an enormous swell, and I was so busy noting the beauty of the
hand that I had no eye for the sallow face that peeped from the
companion. Leith's bass voice rose above the noise of the waves, and
there was an angry note in it.

"This isn't a nice place for you, Miss Edith!" he cried.

The girl half turned her head, looked at him for a second, then without
any intimation that she had heard what he said, she turned again toward
me and started to cross-examine me upon the amount of damage we had
sustained. I thought that the white, shapely hand tightened its grip
upon my wet sleeve at the moment Leith's bass voice came booming to our
ears, and I blessed the big brute's interference for the thrill which I
derived from the pressure of her fingers upon the greasy coat.

But Leith was not to be denied. The cold stare, instead of driving him
back into the cabin, only roused his temper. Very cautiously he climbed
along the heaving deck to the point where we were standing, and,
clutching a rope, he swayed backward and forward immediately behind us.

"Miss Edith!" he called.

The girl turned her head sharply. "Well?" she cried.

"This isn't a proper place for you!" roared Leith. "One of those seas is
liable to come aboard at any moment, and you might be washed away before
any one could assist you."

Edith Herndon's lips showed the slightest trace of a smile. "You had
better be careful too, Mr. Leith," she retorted. "Mr. Verslun is holding
on to me in case one of those old gray rollers should make a sudden
leap, but you have no one to hold on to you."

A frown passed over Leith's face like a cloud shadow across a yellow
plain. He slackened his grip on the rope and lurched toward us.

"You must go below at once!" he screamed, addressing the girl. "Your
father is too ill to look after you at this moment, so the duty is mine.
There is danger here, and I order you below!"

He touched her shoulder with his big fingers that resembled talons, but
the girl made a quick side movement and slipped from his grip.

"Do not touch me!" she cried fiercely. "How dare you put your hand on
me!"

But Leith's temper was up at that moment, and he was angry enough for
anything. He made a spring for the girl's hand, and I thrust my shoulder
forward to bump him off. _The Waif_ nearly stood on her end at that
instant, and her acrobatic feat combined with the push flung Leith off
his feet and sent him rolling ludicrously along the deck.

Miss Herndon gave a little cry of alarm and sprang for the
companion-stairs, down which she disappeared without taking a glance at
the brute on the wet planks. Leith picked himself up, gripped a loose
backstay with his left hand and swung himself toward me, striking out
viciously with his free right hand when he came within hitting distance.

The blow landed on my shoulder, and I returned the compliment with an
uppercut that jerked him from his swing rope and sent him stumbling
backward against the rail. The fall stunned him for a few moments and he
rolled about in the wash; then Soma, the Kanaka who jerked the knife at
me, rushed from the galley door and dragged him to his feet. The native
steered him to the companionway, where he stood for a moment glaring at
me as if undecided whether to continue the fight or beat a retreat, but
the wild plunging of the yacht convinced him that the spot was not one
where he figured to advantage, so he stumbled below.

I looked around and saw Holman clinging to the rigging, his boyish face
wearing an expression of extreme pleasure.

"You're getting wise," he cried, as he scrambled toward me; "but don't
think you've walloped him. He'll come back at you when he has a better
opportunity of beating you up."


[Illustration]


CHAPTER V

I MAKE A PROMISE

The morning following the unpleasant incident with Leith broke clear and
sunny. The Pacific, as if tired after its mad pranks of the preceding
three days, was a shimmering stretch of placid blue water, and the
shattered spars and loose cordage of _The Waif_ were the only reminders
of the terrific storm that had swept us before it.

Captain Newmarch set all hands at work to repair the damage, and before
midday we were bowling along under as much canvas as we could spread.
The storm being directly from the southwest had not carried us from our
course, and Newmarch chuckled when he had taken an observation.

"We'll strike it in the morning," he growled.

"What? Penrose Island?" I asked.

"No, the Isle of Tears," he answered sharply.

"The Isle of Tears?" I repeated.

"That's what I said," he remarked sourly. "And now you know as much as I
know. It was kept a little secret by the orders of my employers, but we
are so close to the spot now that I don't think it will matter if I let
the cat out of the bag."

"And is it there that the Professor will conduct his search?" I asked.

"You had better ask that question of Professor Herndon," he replied. "I
know nothing about what they'll do ashore."

He left the poop before I had time to put another question to him, and
as I walked up and down I turned over in my mind the tiny morsel of
information I had received. The captain's secrecy was peculiar, to say
the least, and as I reasoned that Professor Herndon knew absolutely
nothing of the Islands, it was quite evident that the orders prohibiting
Newmarch from making known the exact destination of the yacht had come
from Leith. It was not the first time I had heard of the Isle of Tears.
Strange stories floated across the Pacific concerning the little islet
east of the Suvaroff Group, and out of the reticule of the mind I
attempted to drag these stories and piece them together during the
minutes that passed after Newmarch had given me the information. They
were not pleasant stories as I remembered them at that moment. The
island had a "past." The mention of it brought hazy recollections to
natives--recollections that were too misty to put into words, but which
the untutored mind connected with happenings that were anything but
pleasant. And I recalled a night at "Tonga Pete's" place on the Rue de
Rivoli at Papeete, when a sailor from a copra schooner in the bay, who
had been marooned upon the island by Captain "Bully" Hayes, told a wild,
weird story of unexplainable happenings that he had witnessed during the
two days and two nights he had spent ashore.

Holman came hurrying upon deck as I was endeavouring to remember all the
story that the sailor had told, and the youngster immediately rushed me
with the news.

"The captain has just told me," I said.

"Well, Leith has just given the information out in the cabin," he cried.
"They must have decided to give it out at the same moment."

"But the Professor?" I asked. "Surely he knew. Do you mean to say that
he was ignorant of the fact that it was the Isle of Tears and not
Penrose Island that we were making for?"

Holman laughed at my question. "You haven't spoken much to him, Verslun.
He couldn't remember the name of a place three minutes. He only knows
that there are archaeological treasures on this island we are going to,
and he doesn't care two cents about its name. Leith has told him some
tall stories about the camp, judging by the way the old man's eyes shine
when he mentions it. Yesterday he read me Leith's description of stone
_hamungas_ and things that are supposed to have been built before Julius
Caesar invaded Britain, and he's pop-eyed with joy as he thinks how
he'll yank Fame by the tail when he gets on the ground and snapshots the
affairs. Gee! I'm glad I haven't got a kink for digging up relics and
dodging about places that went to smash thousands of years ago. A vice
like that is more expensive than the poker habit."

"Well, Newmarch says we'll strike it early in the morning," I said, "and
then we'll see whether your suspicions are correct."

"I'm infernally afraid they are," snapped the youngster. "I wouldn't
care ten cents about the brute only that the girls are aboard. I felt
sorry when I saw him climb to his feet yesterday. If you hit him again
hit him with something that will crack his skull. He's a devil, Verslun,
and before we are much older we will find it out."

I laughed at his gloomy forebodings, and as Miss Barbara Herndon came on
deck at that moment he raced away and left me to my own meditations.

My thoughts were mixed. I had pleasant and unpleasant ones. If Leith
was the scoundrel that Holman suspected, the two girls were in danger,
and now as we neared the island where they would leave the yacht to
accompany their father, the clutch of fear was upon me. On _The Waif_ I
felt that I had some little power, but on land, more especially on the
lonely island toward which we were heading, that feeling of
protectorship which the sailorman has for his passengers would be lost.
If Leith knew the island, and it was evident that he had visited it
before, any villainy that he contemplated would be held in check till he
was ashore and in command of the expedition and I would be powerless.

I recognized that Holman's fears were without solid foundation. They
were transmitted through Barbara Herndon, but I also recognized that the
elder sister would hardly support the statements unless she had good
grounds for her anxiety. Her woman's intuition had branded Leith's
motives in bringing the Professor into the Islands as bad, and the
sallow-faced giant could not erase the impression. The actual reason for
trickery was a matter of speculation. Professor Herndon was wealthy; it
was his money that had fitted out the expedition, but how Leith expected
to benefit himself by treachery was more than I could tell. Still, try
as I would to fight off the impressions that Holman's tongue had fixed
within my mind, I was unable to alter the opinion I had formed of the
man the moment I met him. There was an atmosphere about the yacht that
was unexplainable. Try as I could to find legitimate grounds for fears I
could not. The Professor was a scientist who wished to study certain
things the whereabouts of which were known to Leith. Apparently the
Professor was satisfied with the bargain he had made. Leith, as the two
girls had informed Holman, had called upon their father at the Langham
Hotel in Wynyard Square, Sydney, and, after fascinating the old man with
his stories, had presented his credentials and made a bargain with him
which resulted in the chartering of the yacht. His former life was a
mystery that he guarded jealously from the probes which the girls had
skilfully endeavoured to use. It was clear that he had spent many years
in the Islands, but that fact is not one that is generally put forward
as a recommendation of good character. The South Sea holds a large
percentage of the nimble people who manage to be in another spot when
Dame Justice throws her lariat. The Law of the Fringe has made curiosity
a criminal offence, and a new name covers more than charity.

I had had little chance of speaking to Edith Herndon since the moment I
came aboard, but I determined, after I had looked at the matter from
every side, that I would ask her point blank if I could be of any
assistance. Leith's face was the only prop he put forward as a support
to his claims of respectability, and his face betrayed him.

My chance came early that evening. A big tropical moon rose out of Asia
and spread a silvery wash upon the ocean. Professor Herndon and his
eldest daughter were leaning over the rail, but the moment I joined them
the old man informed us that he had to see to his scientific outfit so
that everything would be in readiness for the landing on the following
morning, and he hurried off and left us together.

The girl did not speak for a few minutes, and I made no attempt to break
the silence. Somehow I felt that her intuition had already told her that
I wished to speak about the happenings of the morrow, and her opening
remark proved that my surmise was correct.

"You will stay with the yacht, I suppose?" she questioned.

"I cannot say," I replied. "Captain Newmarch hasn't spoken to me about
the matter. Does your father intend to go far inland?"

"Father has just told me that the actual distance is not great, but the
travelling is very hard. It seems that it is only a few miles to the
spot where Mr. Leith says that father can see all the sights and obtain
all the specimens he desires, but those few miles will take us four days
to travel. There are all kinds of obstacles in the way."

"And you are not afraid?" I stammered. "You do not dislike the idea of
going?"

She lifted her head and looked me in the face, the big amber eyes
shining softly in the moonlight.

"I dread it," she said quietly. "It is foolish to say so, but--"

She stopped speaking and turned her face away from me. In the little
silence that followed I heard the _plop plop_ of the waves against the
side of the yacht. A native chanted a Samoan love song in the fo'c'stle,
but that and the soft whine of the pulleys were the only sounds that
disturbed the night. We seemed such a long way from civilization at that
minute, and a great pity for the girl's plight gave me sufficient
courage to make a proffer of my services.

"Miss Herndon," I spluttered, "if I could do anything to help you,
please tell me. I might help you if you wish. Tell me what you think is
best."

"If you stay with the yacht you can do nothing," she murmured.

"Then you want me to go?" I cried. "You would like me to go with----"

"Father and Barbara and me," she said softly. "Mr. Holman is coming,
and if you could come too--"

"I can!" I cried. "I will go with the party if you say so."

"But if Captain Newmarch orders you to stay with the yacht?"

"He can order away," I spluttered. "I am going where Leith is going,
that is as long as Leith accompanies you and your father."

Something moved on the top of the galley as I put my resolution into
words, and I sprang up quickly. The moon made every inch of the yacht as
bright as day, yet I was not quick enough in my rush. A tin pan, knocked
down by the eavesdropper, rolled across the deck, but the spy had fled.

"Some one was listening to us," I explained as I returned to the girl's
side.

"I am sorry then that I asked you to accompany us," she murmured. "I am
dragging you into our troubles, Mr. Verslun, and it is not right."

"Hush!" I cried. "Your troubles are mine just because you are a woman
out on the very fringe of the earth where you can get no one else to
help you bear them. You see I can claim a right in this spot. This is
the jumping off place of the world down here, and an offer of assistance
must not be refused."

She stood in front of me, a tall, splendid figure, the moonlight
silvering the piled masses of hair and giving one the impression that
her head was surrounded by a shining halo. Suddenly she put out her hand
and took mine.

"I accept your offer gladly," she said softly. "You are very, very kind,
Mr. Verslun. It may be, as you say, the jumping off place of the world
down here at the very outposts of civilization, but the power that
protects one in the crowded cities is surely here as well. Good-night,
friend."

It was an hour after the time when Miss Herndon went below that I asked
the captain's permission to go along with the expedition. He plucked his
scrawny beard with a nervous hand as he stood staring at me.

"What the devil do you want to go for?" he asked.

"For the fun of the thing."

"I don't know," he muttered. "I'll see Leith."

He turned away and I walked for'ard. The beauty of the night was
extraordinary. The yacht seemed to be veneered with a soft luminous
paint that gave us the appearance of a ghostly ship skimming over a
ghostly ocean.

At the top of the fo'c'stle ladder I found a native stretched full
length and sobbing mightily. He walloped his head against the planks
when I endeavoured to get him upon his feet, and the sobs shook his
frame.

"What's the matter?" I asked.

"Toni! Toni! Toni!" he wailed. "Toni he gone. Toni, my brother, all same
come from Suva, now him dead."

"I'm sorry, but it can't be helped," I said. "He should have been more
careful."

The native lifted himself from the deck and glanced around fearfully.
Satisfied that there were no listeners he dried his eyes and crawled
upon his knees to the spot where I was standing. "He not washed
overboard," he whispered. "Soma stick one knife in him, then he tip him
over. Me see him, very much afraid."

"When?" I asked.

"Night afore last," he gasped. "Captain see him do it. Very bad thing.
Toni, my brother, all same work one time Suva."

Holman joined me when I relieved the captain late in the night; I told
the youngster what I knew about the disappearance of Toni.

"Who knifed him?" he asked.

"The big Kanaka who pulled Leith out of the scuppers when he fell
yesterday."

"Holy smoke!" cried the boy. "I'd like to get the strength of things on
board this boat. Why, that big nigger is going to be the guide of the
expedition on shore."

"Who says so?"

"Leith pointed him out to the Professor this afternoon," answered
Holman. "I was talking to the old scientist at the time."

I whistled softly. If Soma was a henchman of Leith's it was clear to me
why the captain had shielded him the night he jerked the knife at me
when I dropped the pin upon his woolly head, but why Toni had been put
away was a mystery.

"Is it any good of attempting to convince the Professor?" I asked.

"Not a bit," snapped Holman. "The girls have been imploring him to turn
back this last three days while we were stuck in the cabin, but he won't
listen to them. He's a maniac, that's what he is. He doesn't know what
those two women are suffering through his darned foolishness, and if he
did know it wouldn't trouble him. If you want the real extract of
selfishness you must make a puncture in a scientific guy with a hobby,
and you can get as much as you want."

"Well, I'm going along to see what happens," I said. "If Leith refuses
to accept me I'm going just the same."

Holman gripped my hand--gripped it fiercely, then he left me hurriedly.

I tramped backward and forward as _The Waif_ sailed steadily through the
waves of glittering mercury. A few days before, when I was an occupant
of "The Rathole" in Levuka, life seemed to be empty and cold, but a
wonderful change had come in those few days. Although I had not spoken
to Edith Herndon more than half a dozen times, it appeared to me that it
was those few short conversations that had chased the loneliness and
morbid thoughts from my mind. Her very presence stimulated me in a
manner that I could not express, and as I stared out across the
moon-whitened ocean I started nervously at the thought which had sprung
suddenly into my brain. It was an insane thought, and I tried to laugh
it away. Edith Herndon was as far above me as the moon was above the
waves that were silvered by her beams. I pictured myself lying like a
beachcomber upon the pile of pearl shell when the strange chant of the
Maori and the dead Toni concerning "the way to heaven out of Black
Fernando's hell" had come to my ears, and I blessed the new influence
which had come into my life.

"My way to heaven lies in this direction," I soliloquized, and the
quivering yacht went bounding on as I allowed wild dreams to race
unchecked through my brain.


[Illustration]


CHAPTER VI

THE ISLE OF TEARS

A sleepy Samoan in the main cross-trees screamed a message to the deck
while the pink flush of the tropical dawn was still in the sky, and _The
Waif_ plunged through the water toward the island. One after the other
the members of the expedition came on deck. Leith stumbled up when
Newmarch shouted down the information, and the big brute watched the
tiny spot that came gradually nearer; the Professor danced up like an
adventurous boy, and he gurgled ecstatically as he peeped over the rail;
while the two girls came up arm in arm and looked in silence across the
dawn-reddened waters. Holman's gaze travelled from the island to Leith
and back again to the island as if he was trying to trace a criminal
connection between the two.

As the yacht drew closer a strange silence seemed to fall upon the
vessel. The Professor's gurgles of joy died away slowly, and none of the
others seemed inclined to break the stillness. The crew and the half
dozen islanders that Leith had brought to carry provisions and specimens
were also silent. They were grouped for'ard, but not a murmur came from
them as _The Waif_ crept slowly ahead, feeling her way cautiously into
the little bay on the north side of the island which Leith had suggested
to Newmarch as a good anchorage.

The peculiar stories that had gone abroad concerning the Isle of Tears
were responsible for most of the wide-eyed looks of wonder which the
imaginative Polynesians directed upon the shore; the strange predicament
in which they were placed tied the tongues of the two girls; the
Professor was thinking of the archaeological treasures, while thoughts
that one could only guess at prevented Leith and Holman from speaking.

The island had a strange, wild beauty that seemed to throttle speech.
The underlying coral reefs were of colours that ran from pure white to
gorgeous crimson, and the effect upon the water above them was wonderful
to behold. _The Waif_ seemed to make her way over a floor of beautiful
parquetry which Mother Nature had been constructing for centuries.
Chameleon-tinted seaweeds stretched upward, waving backward and forward
like the hair of sea nymphs hidden in the crevices of the multi-coloured
rocks.

The vegetation on the shore was weird and wondrous. The trees
immediately near the edge of the bay were covered with riotous lianas
that looped themselves like pythons from limb to limb, and from whose
green masses blazing red flowers appeared at intervals like watchful
eyes. Scarlet hibiscus and perfumed frangipanni were everywhere, while
climbing jasmine tried to cover up the black basalt rocks in the
foreground as if to hide everything that was ugly from the eyes of the
visitor. The sweet, intoxicating odours came out to us in greeting, yet
the place seemed to inspire us with a feeling of awe and mystery that
became more oppressive as the yacht moved lazily across the bay.

I glanced at Edith Herndon at the moment the anchor plunged down into
the bed of coral, and the look of perplexed wonder upon her face
startled me.

"It looks a nice place, yet it feels an awful spot," she murmured. "All
those snaky creepers with their coloured flowers seem to be hiding
something."

I understood her feelings regarding the place. That look of weird
expectancy, common to places that are cloaked with a tremendous silence,
had gripped the two girls, and the yacht seemed homelike when they
compared it to the shore.

"Oh, Edith," cried the younger sister, "I wish father wouldn't go!"

"So do I, dear," murmured the elder girl, "but it is useless to attempt
to persuade him to give up the quest."

"But I hate the place!" cried Miss Barbara. "Don't you?"

"Oh, no," stammered Edith, bravely attempting to cheer the spirits of
the younger girl. "You will not be lonely, Barbara. Mr. Holman and
father and I will be with you, and perhaps Mr. Verslun will be in our
company."

Newmarch approached at the instant and squeaked out an answer to the
request I had made the previous evening.

"I asked Mr. Leith if you could go with him," he said, "but he doesn't
think you would be of any use. He has all the help he requires, so you
had better stay on the yacht."

There was a slight grin on his thin face as he imparted the information,
and his merriment tickled me. I had made up my mind without waiting for
Leith's decision, and I was more pleased than annoyed at knowing that my
presence was not desired with the party that went inland.

The anchor had hardly touched the bottom before Leith started to
transship the provisions that were required for the trip across the
island. The sight of land seemed to stir the sallow-faced giant out of
the lethargy that had gripped him on the way down from Levuka. He
suddenly discovered that the mantle of authority was upon his shoulders,
and he bullied the island boys as they lowered the stores.

Holman was right when he stated that Soma was the man that Leith had
picked as first assistant. The big Kanaka was placed in charge of the
other five carriers, and he immediately imitated Leith by shrieking out
orders and strutting about in a manner that was ludicrous. Professor
Herndon was bubbling over with excitement. The stories which Leith had
fed to him continuously concerning the remains of an extinct
civilization had worked him up to a pitch that bordered on insanity, and
it was pitiful to watch him as he made endless notes in the bulky
notebook.

"I shall be known throughout the world inside three months," he
whispered to Leith.

"In less than that," drawled the giant.

"Yes, you're right!" snapped the dream-fed scientist. "If everything is
as you say our task will be an easy one. Are you ready Edith? Barbara,
come along!"

He climbed down the ladder with a haste that was nearly his undoing, as
he let go his grip before the boat was directly beneath him. Holman
saved him from a ducking, but his solar topee, which had a distinctly
scientific look, was soaked in salt water before it could be rescued.

Captain Newmarch stood by with a look of unconcern upon his thin face as
the two girls went over the side, and he gave an unintelligible grunt as
Leith followed. Within two hours after _The Waif_ had cast anchor the
two boats containing the stores and the ill-assorted explorers were
making for a small promontory that stretched out like a green tongue
into the sparkling waters of the bay.

Once on shore, Leith put Soma and the carriers in the lead, Holman and
the two girls next, with himself and the Professor bringing up the rear,
and in that order they moved across the little strip of white sand that
glittered like diamond dust. The heavy green foliage came out to meet
them, dropped over them like a veil, and left us staring at the riotous
creeper masses with the brilliant flower eyes that appeared to be
watching _The Waif_.

Newmarch gave a peculiar chuckle as he turned toward me when the party
had disappeared.

"Now, Mr. Verslun," he cried, "we have plenty work to keep us busy for
the week or so we will be here. Get about it the moment the boats
return, and keep the men on the jump."

I nodded, and he went below without another word, leaving me still
staring at the spot where the explorers had dived into the leafy wall.
The strange loneliness of the place seemed to clutch me hard at that
moment, and I mentally abused myself for not making a stronger protest
against the whole affair. But I knew as I damned my own inactivity that
protest would have been useless as far as the Professor was concerned,
and the filial affection of the two girls would not allow the old
ancient to wander off alone.

I had planned to allow the party a few hours' start before I made any
attempt to follow, feeling certain that I would be able to find the
track, and, moreover, I wished to catch up to the expedition at a point
where Leith would have no chance of verifying the story I would tell to
account for my presence. The big brute would probably think I was lying
when I told him that Newmarch had sent me after him, but the Professor's
desire to push on would probably prevent him from making an effort to
check my story by sending a runner back to the boat. And luck was with
me at that moment. As I racked my brain in the construction of a
suitable excuse to account for my appearance, my eyes fell upon the
Professor's camera that had been overlooked in the hurry of departure,
and I sprang upon it joyfully and hid it till the time had elapsed.
Knowing the importance which the old scientist attached to the
photographs which he intended to take, I knew that he, at least, would
reason that the captain had acted wisely in sending me in pursuit with
the instrument, and I trusted that his gratitude would move him to get
Leith's permission to allow me to remain with the expedition.

The party had been gone some six hours when I slipped over the side into
the dory. Newmarch was below, and only one of the crew was on deck. I
seized the oars and struck out for the shore, but I had hardly covered
twenty paces when the captain rushed to the rail, took one glance at me,
and then dashed toward the companion-stairs.

I sensed the motive in that mad dash for the cabin, and I pulled madly.
Thoughts of Edith Herndon thronged my brain, and I drove the dory toward
the promontory with every ounce of strength I possessed. To return to
the yacht while she was in the eerie jungle-growth under Leith's
protection would be worse than death, and I didn't pause for an instant
when the captain's squeaky voice hailed me.

"Come back at once!" he shouted. "Are you coming?"

I bent my back to the oars and pulled with every muscle strained. The
perspiration half blinded me, but one glance upward convinced me that I
had sensed the captain's motive when I saw him rush from the side. He
was standing on the poop, taking deliberate aim at me with a Winchester
rifle that he had taken from the rack in his own cabin.

It seemed an age before he fired. The bullet missed the side of the boat
by about three inches, and I shrieked my defiance. The devil had my
nerves on edge, but the green tongue of land was close, and I pulled as
never man pulled before.

A bullet lodged in the stern of the boat, another splintered the end of
an oar, and then the rifleman's nerves must have got the better of him.
The succeeding shots fell wide, and I whooped like a madman as I drove
the boat on to the green tongue of land. Springing out hastily I made a
dash across the white strip of sand, and dived into the moist creeper
growth.

I lay there panting, watching the yacht to see what Newmarch would do.
It was impossible for him to leave the yacht to follow me, but I guessed
that he would make an attempt to communicate with Leith. And I guessed
rightly.

I had not been five minutes in the bushes when a boat put off for the
shore. It contained three of the crew, two Tannese and the Fijian that I
had found mourning the death of Toni, his "all same brother who had
worked with him at Suva." They pulled for the spot where I had left the
dory, and here the Fijian sprang out, while the others proceeded to tow
the dory back to _The Waif_. I surmised that Toni's "all same brother"
had been sent to carry a message to Leith, and I lay in the bushes
waiting as he raced toward me.

Cautiously he clawed his way through the undergrowth, and when he was
certain that the creepers had completely veiled him from the eyes of
watchers on the yacht he picked up a small flat stone from the ground,
drew a yachting knife from his belt and crouching on his heels started
to sharpen the blade. As he rubbed industriously he sang a weird tune in
his native tongue, rounding off each verse with five words in English
that explained his industry. The words were: "Now I'll kill you, Soma,"
and the chant was a poem of consolation to the spirit of the dead Toni,
assuring it that the hour of vengeance was at hand, and that Soma would
go to the great unknown the moment he got within reach of the yachting
knife.

I poked my head from my hiding place, and the Fijian turned quickly.

"I think the captain told Soma to kill your brother," I said softly. "If
the captain didn't tell him, Leith did, Kaipi."

Kaipi stopped sharpening the blade and fixed his big eyes upon me. "I
not to speak to you," he said. "Kapitani tell me not to. I go catch up
Leith, give him one piece of paper the Kapitani gave me."

"But Soma?" I asked.

"I kill Soma when chance comes," muttered Kaipi.

"Well, we're of the same mind, Kaipi," I said pleasantly. "Soma is no
friend of mine and I'll help you as much as I can if you turn over the
note which the captain gave you and do just what I tell you. Otherwise,
Kaipi, I have a revolver, and a knife is no match for a revolver."

The Fijian considered the matter for a few moments, his dreamy eyes
watching me the while. At that moment duty was forgotten in the thirst
for vengeance upon Soma, and the debate with his conscience was of short
duration. He pulled a note from the folds of his pareo and tossed it to
me with a short laugh.

"Me not care about that," he grinned. "Me catch Soma, that's all."

The note was exceedingly brief. It read:

  "The mate is following you,--NEWMARCH."

Kaipi had returned to the job of sharpening his knife in which I had
interrupted him, and at intervals he assured the dead Toni that
vengeance was only a matter of a few hours. As far as I was concerned
the captain could not have chosen a better messenger.

"Kaipi," I said, tearing the note into small pieces, "you have been
sent to help me find Leith and the Professor. See, I have the
Professor's picture maker. He forgot it this morning, and the captain
sent you and me to take it to him. Do you understand?"

The Fijian grinned, tried the edge of his knife blade with the ball of
his thumb, then sprang to his feet.

"And don't be in too great a hurry to fix Soma," I cautioned. "Toni's
spirit can wait a few days till you get a suitable opportunity. Now,
we'll strike the trail."

Kaipi grinned again, put his sharpened knife into his belt and plunged
into the dense undergrowth. The snaky, moist lianas made progress next
to impossible. They clung around our legs like live things, and I damned
the Professor's idiotic craving for notoriety as we waded through the
clammy creepers in search of the trail made by the party. The prickly
rope-like vines seemed to be in league with the devil who was leading
the aged scientist and his daughters into dangers that made my brain
dizzy as I attempted to dissect the possibilities which imagination put
forward.

At last we found the traces of Soma's handiwork with an axe, and guided
by these signs we hurried forward. The ground rose gradually toward the
centre of the island, where columns of basalt loomed like the towers of
feudal castles against the pure Venetian blue of the tropical sky. But
the sky was visible only for moments that were far removed from each
other. The crawling vines that overran the trees made an impenetrable
barrier against the sunlight, and most of the time we were stumbling
along in a mysterious twilight that increased my nervous agony. Masses
of rock of volcanic origin were thickly strewn around, and anything like
fast travelling was impossible.

The sun dropped slowly toward the west, and we had great difficulty in
holding to the path. The axe marks and the branches broken by the
carriers were really the only signs that we had to go by, but the eyes
of the Fijian were exceedingly sharp in detecting the slightest evidence
left by the party. We passed the spot where they had lunched, and
increased our speed in an endeavour to overtake them before nightfall.
The silence and unexplainable mystery of the place made me anxious to
catch up with them before the darkness came down, while hunger and
revenge made Kaipi move at a speed that was most unusual.

Darkness came down like a suffocating blanket, and we halted.

"No go farther," muttered Kaipi. "Better make fire and sleep. Catch um
to-morrow."

I sat down while the Fijian gathered a pile of rotten wood, but before
he could set fire to the heap I was on my feet clawing my way into the
darkness in front. From somewhere out of the inky night came the voice
of Edith Herndon lifted up in a little Italian melody that I had heard
her singing the night we left Levuka. It seemed to me that she suspected
my near presence, and that she was singing to guide me to the spot where
the party had camped.

Five minutes afterward Kaipi and I stumbled into the circle of light
round the fire, and Leith sprang to his feet with a growl of rage.

"What's this?" he cried. "Who the devil gave you permission to come
here?"

"The captain sent me," I replied, looking straight at the giant as I
fired the lie at him. "The carriers forgot Professor Herndon's camera,
and Captain Newmarch sent Kaipi and me after you."

Leith's mutterings were drowned by the scientist's cries of joy as he
took the camera from my hand, and the big brute had time to recover
himself before the Professor had stopped chattering. I guessed that he
reasoned that it would be bad policy to show that he was angry at my
arrival, while the camera partly convinced him that I had told the
truth. His surprise and the Professor's evident pleasure made me think
it an opportune moment to put forward a request to stay with the party,
and I put my wish into words.

"Captain Newmarch said that Kaipi and I might go along if you and
Professor Herndon had no objections," I lied. "He thought we would prove
useful."

Leith scowled angrily, but the Professor gave an immediate assent to the
request. His short-sightedness prevented him from noticing the frown
which passed over the face of his partner, but the sour look fled
immediately the two girls expressed a desire to keep me in the party.

"Oh, please let Mr. Verslun come," cried Miss Barbara. "It will make it
ever so much more pleasant."

"I was thinking of the stock of food," growled Leith, as if attempting
to explain his evident displeasure.

"I'll go on half measure and let Mr. Verslun have the other half,"
laughed Holman.

"And he can have some of mine," cried Miss Barbara.

"And mine," murmured Edith.

Leith grinned as he noted the feeling of the party. It would not be
diplomatic to go against the wishes of all, and he knew it. With a wave
of his hand he ordered Kaipi to the fire where Soma and the other five
islanders were sitting, and nodded his head as an intimation that I
could stay.

"By the way," he growled, as I fell upon the plate of tinned salmon
which Edith Herndon handed to me, "who was doing the shooting this
afternoon?"

"I was," I replied. "I fired my revolver half a dozen times when we got
off the trail and couldn't find our way back to it. I thought on account
of the way that the path wound in and out that your party might be near
the spot where we were bushed."

He made no further comment and I breathed a sigh of relief. Unless
Newmarch sent a second messenger to make sure that the news of my
desertion would reach Leith, I felt that I was safe.


[Illustration]


CHAPTER VII

THE PIT

We were under way early on the morning after I joined the party. Leith
had the camp astir by daybreak, and after a hasty breakfast we trailed
off behind Soma and the carriers, heading directly toward the basalt
towers that rose up in the middle of the island.

I for one was not sorry that we were making an early start. All through
the night I lay awake expecting another member of the crew to rush into
camp with a message from Newmarch to Leith, and when we started on the
trail, I took particular care to lag behind the procession for the first
few hours so that I would be in a position to intercept any diligent
runner from _The Waif_. I took the first opportunity of telling Holman
of the manner in which the bilious Englishman had hastened my departure
with the Winchester, and the youngster's face wore a perplexed
expression.

"That precious captain is Leith's partner in villainy," he cried, "but
our hands are tied. The Professor is simply crazy with delight over the
things that the brute is going to guide him to, and all our suspicions
don't amount to much when you put them together. You see we've got
nothing definite to go on at present. All we can do is to watch and
wait, and be ready to act when the moment comes. Soma and his five mates
are Leith's pets, you can bet your life on that, but we have one ally in
your friend Kaipi."

The path of the preceding day was smooth compared to the ground we
climbed over that morning. There was no trail as far as we could see.
Soma, who was in the lead, found his way by occasional marks that could
only be visible to the eye of a native. Barbara Herndon remarked on one
occasion that there was danger of our getting lost, but Leith grinned at
the remark.

"Soma has been here more than once," he replied. "What he doesn't know
about this place isn't worth knowing."

The path continued to ascend, but the thick tropical growth did not
lessen during the tramp of the morning. Leith walked with the
Professor, who appeared to be in a state of joy bordering upon hysteria,
while Holman and I in the rear tried to assist the two girls over the
roughest sections of the road. I thought as we scrambled through
impenetrable scrub and crawled over rocky piles that it was the
strangest expedition that had ever set forth. If Leith was the wicked
devil that we suspected him to be, four persons were risking their lives
to gratify the whim of a half-crazy scientist who was dying for
notoriety. He would not be turned aside from his pursuit of the
specimens which Leith had told him of; his daughters would not desert
him, and their resolve had brought Holman and myself. We were blind
automatons that the fame-seeking archaeologist was dragging at his heels.
He did not consider the sufferings of the two girls; least of all did he
think that Holman or myself was doing anything to safeguard his life or
property. He was blind to everything but the natural curiosities around
him, and he made frequent entries in the notebook that was to be his
crutch to Olympus.

Leith did not allow me to remain long in the rear. He called me up to
the front, and very politely asked me to help in hustling along the
carriers who were inclined to dawdle as the way grew rougher, and,
although I would much rather have had the task of helping the two
girls, I had to accept the position without demur. Leith was in charge,
and Holman and I were only intruders who had on standing, and whose food
was paid for by the Professor.

We halted at midday in an ugly-looking spot far up the shoulder of the
mountain that we were climbing, and through a break in the trees we
caught a glimpse of the Pacific. The ocean seemed directly beneath us,
and yet, as Edith Herndon expressed it, we seemed to be a thousand
leagues away from it.

[Illustration: "We halted at midday in an ugly-looking spot far up
the shoulder of the mountain."]

"This horrible silence makes me long for the clean sound of the waves,"
she whispered, as I rolled a stone over to make her a seat. "This
stillness stops one from speaking. Do you know that Barbara and I
haven't spoken a word during the last hour? We simply hadn't the courage
to make the effort."

Under the watchful eye of Leith I endeavoured to cheer her up, while
inwardly I cursed the prattling old Professor who chattered of the
honours he expected as the rewards of his discoveries. The affair was
enough to bring tears to the eyes of a man with a heart of stone.

"I'm just thinking we should have stopped this business before it got
this far," muttered Holman, as he reached closer to get a light for his
cigarette.

"What should we have done?" I asked.

"I don't know," he growled. "We should have done something though. Pity
we didn't lose Leith overboard with your friend Toni."

"What's wrong now? Has anything happened?"

"No, nothing has happened," he replied. "I wish something would. This
silence is beginning to put my nerves on edge, but I'm afraid to yell
out for fear that I might wake something that has been dead for
centuries. Does it strike you that way?"

"Very much."

"Well, it's the same with the girls," muttered Holman. "The stillness of
the place has brought their ordinary conversational tone down to a
whisper."

Leith lurched across and interrupted our conversation. "Get the boys
going, Mr. Verslun," he said. "We want to cross the Vermilion Pit while
the light is good, and it is hard going from here on."

We started forward up the boulder-strewn slope, and with each step the
difficulties of the ascent became greater. I took an axe and helped Soma
chop a path which would make it easier for the two sisters, but no
matter what amount of trouble we took, they found it a difficult matter
to follow. Once, goaded into fury by Leith's attempts to hurry the girls
when Holman was assisting them over a particularly rough stretch, I
turned upon the old scientist who was puffing along with the natives in
the lead.

The half-insane ancient heard my outburst to the end, staring at me
through the thick lenses of his glasses as if I was some new kind of a
bug whose appearance he wished to implant firmly within his mind.

"Science calls for sacrifices," he squeaked. "If my daughters are
heroines who wish to share my hardships in the pursuit of information
that will be of great benefit to the world, I fail to see what it has to
do with you, sir!"

"But they have no interest in your silly discoveries," I cried. "They
are doing this infernal tramp to look after you. Do you hear?"

"Confound you, sir!" he screamed. "Mind your own business and don't
interfere with mine!"

I choked down my wrath as Leith came crashing through from the rear, and
the old egoist, flushed and ruffled, dropped back to meet him, evidently
convinced of my insanity through my inability to appreciate his efforts
to prove that the skulls of long-dead Polynesians possessed peculiar
formations they were foreign to the islanders of the present day.

It was about four o'clock in the afternoon when we began to draw near
the Vermilion Pit which Leith had mentioned when he had urged haste at
the midday luncheon. The surroundings became more strange and mysterious
with each step we took. The basalt peaks that we had noticed from the
deck of _The Waif_ were now quite close to us, and they seemed to move
in upon us from both sides. The trees and lianas became less numerous,
and the black rocks came toward us in a sinister manner that conjured up
thoughts of a dead something toward which the encircling ridges were
guiding us like the arms of a corral. The place was fear-inspiring. It
had the unearthly appearance that made the imaginative minds of the
ancients people the silent woods with devils and dryads. The soft
moaning of the Pacific was barred out by the leafy barriers, and we
walked in a silence that was tremendous. The ticking of our watches
sounded to our strained ears like the blows of a hammer, and once, when
the Professor sneezed mightily, Miss Barbara gave a scream of fear
before she realized what had caused the noise.

The ascent became still more difficult. The natives puffed under their
loads, and Holman rushed angrily to the front and demanded a halt on
behalf of the girls struggling in the rear. During the few minutes that
Leith grudgingly allowed them in which to recover their breath, the
youngster hurried up to the spot where I was busy fixing the loads of
the natives, and in a nervous whisper he asked my opinion of the route.

"Where the dickens are we going?" he cried.

"This is the most eerie-looking patch of country that I have ever seen
in my life."

"Leith said that we had to reach the Vermilion Pit before the sun went
down," I replied. "I guess it is somewhere at the end of this staircase
that we are trying to climb."

"Oh, Gee!" cried the boy. "Say, this game has got those two girls scared
to death. There's something wrong with the place, Verslun. My skin feels
it. The island looks as if it has been left too long by itself, and I'm
beginning to think that all those rocks and trees are watching us and
wondering what we want here."

That was how it felt to me from the moment I had left _The Waif_, and I
had tried vainly to overcome the feeling. The island seemed to resent
the appearance of human beings. It possessed a personality through being
too long by itself. It had wrapped itself round a dead past, and we were
filled with the awe which suddenly strikes the unimaginative globe
trotter who wanders into the cool recesses of a Hindu temple. And I was
of the same opinion as Holman regarding the trees and rocks. Traders in
the lonely spots of the Pacific have gone insane through becoming
convinced that the mountains and the trees were watching their
movements, and the trees and rocks upon the Isle of Tears struck me as
possessing a watchfulness that smacked of the supernatural. I thought
of the story which the sailor told in the cafe chantant at Papeete just
then, and I was inclined to give it more credence than I had at the
moment he narrated it.

But I tried to rally Holman so that he would cheer up Edith Herndon and
her sister.

"You're like an old woman," I growled. "Go back to the girls and make
them laugh over some funny stories instead of getting nightmares about
the scenery. Why, this place reminds me of a real pretty bit of scenery
near my home town in Maine."

Of course I lied when I said that. You couldn't find any scenery like
that outside the tropics. That place was queer; there wasn't the
slightest doubt about that. I recalled as I stumbled along how a trader
at Metalanim in the Caroline Islands had swam out to our schooner when
we were down there the previous year, and how the poor devil had told
old Hergoff, the captain, that a chatak tree at the back of his hut had
begun to make faces at him, and I began to understand the complaint that
had gripped that trader as I climbed along by the side of the puffing
islanders. He had been jammed up too close against a personality. When a
place has been too long by itself, as Holman had remarked, it cultivates
a strength that tries the nerves of an explorer, more especially if it
is situated near the equator. Places like Papua, the Caroline Islands,
parts of Borneo, and the Never Never country in inland Australia seem
to possess a fist that attempts to push you off when you endeavour to
bring the atmosphere of civilization into a silence that has been
unbroken for centuries.

Holman went back to the sisters, and we moved slowly forward. The basalt
rocks came closer, showing plainly through the breaks in the lianas that
grew less thickly on the higher slopes. The creepers fell away slowly,
as if they had done the work they were required to do, and before we
realized it we were walking between two natural walls of rock about
eighteen feet high, above which the sky looked like a strip of blue
paper that rested upon the marvellously even tops of the barriers.

The Professor was gurgling joyfully as we tramped through that miniature
canon. He was bumping up against new wonders at every footstep, and he
stumbled continuously as he endeavoured to jot down his impressions in
the fat notebook. The Professor felt nothing mysterious about the place.
He had the bullet-proof skin of your cold analyst who yearns eternally
for facts.

"Wonderful geological formation!" he chattered. "My friend Professor
Hanlaw of Oakland would enjoy a glimpse of this spot. A geologist could
spend a lifetime here."

Leith's sallow face was disturbed by a grin as he listened to the old
science-crazed ancient disbursing information regarding the formation of
the rock. It troubled me little at that moment whether feldspar and
augite were the two largest components, and I knew that Holman and the
two girls were not interested. We knew that the place was ugly and
sinister, but feldspar and augite didn't give it that look.

The height of the walls increased as we advanced. We were in a narrow
roadway scarcely more than twelve feet across, while on each side rose
the nearly perpendicular rocks that blocked our view of the country
immediately beyond. The ground beneath our feet was covered with small
bits of lava from the crevices of which the moist flabby leaves of the
nupu plant stuck up like fat green fingers.

As we stared ahead we noted that the road seemed to dip suddenly as if
the highest point of the island was reached at that spot, and the
prospects of a walk upon a down grade were cheering after the stiff
climbs. As we neared the place, Soma, who was walking about ten paces in
front of the carriers, slackened speed, and the islanders dropped back
till Leith and the Professor led the procession.

Leith halted and beckoned to the two girls and Holman, who were some
distance in the rear. "Hurry up!" he cried. "You'll get the sight of
your lives in a few moments."

"What is it?" gurgled the Professor.

Leith grinned as the scientist dipped his lead pencil into his open
mouth so that he would be able to dab down first impressions the moment
he turned his thick lenses upon the wonders.

"You'll see in a moment," replied the big brute, as he walked slowly
forward, and just as he spoke, we did see.

A ridge of bright vermilion came up suddenly about one hundred feet from
the point where the road seemed to dip, and we walked forward wondering
what lay between the spot where the track ended and the bright barrier
of rock that appeared to rise higher as we approached the end of the
trail. We seemed to sense the approach of something that chilled and yet
attracted. The place possessed a devilish fascination. It seemed to
repel with its very uncanniness, and yet I was aware that I was
imitating Holman in thrusting forward my head in an endeavour to see
what filled the space that was hidden from our eyes.

The desire was soon satisfied. Fifteen paces brought us to a point that
left the strange curiosity naked to our eyes. The vermilion walls,
thirty yards in front of us, formed part of the sides of an enormous
circular crater, and we stood spellbound as we pulled up within a few
feet of the ledge and looked into the fearsome depths beneath.

"Ladies and gentlemen," drawled Leith, looking around at us with the
air of a cheap showman springing a novelty upon a gaping mob, "you are
on the edge of the Vermilion Pit, the greatest wonder between Penang and
the Paumotus."


[Illustration]


CHAPTER VIII

THE LEDGE OF DEATH

I suppose that Leith was not far wrong when he gave that place the
credit of being the most wonderful spot in Polynesia. None of us felt
inclined to contradict him as we stood near the lip of the crater and
gazed into it. The thing appalled us. It looked as if some fiend had
bored it between those barriers of black rock as a trap for man and
beast. The entire inner walls, probably from the action of intense heat
upon a peculiar kind of rock, were of a bright vermilion near the top,
gradually changing into darker shades as the eye followed them deeper
and deeper till the outline was lost in the depths of the mighty
cauldron. The inky clouds, which seemed to heave like black masses of
cotton wool far down in the abyss, left the imagination to perform
acrobatic feats as it attempted to picture the possible depths that lay
below. The thing was weird, terrible, fear-inspiring. It looked like a
mighty crucible in which infernal things might have been manufactured in
the days when the world was taking shape.

The rays of the westering sun beat upon the sides directly opposite our
point of observation, and the colours seemed to leap from the rock. It
glowed in a manner that was indescribable. Sudden flashes came from it
as if the vermilion mass was studded with blazing carbuncles, but the
fascinating beauty of the part that was exposed to the rays was in
violent contrast to the cold depths where the mind pictured a body
falling through leagues of space.

For about five minutes no one spoke. The awful suddenness with which the
thing had appeared in our path throttled conversation. An inner self
connected the pit with the singular feeling of depression which had
gripped us the moment we landed upon the island, and we stood
breathless, wondering stupidly how we had sensed the vermilion-lined
horror into which the path led.

It was the Professor who broke the silence. The momentary awe which he
experienced when the strange freak of nature sprang up before his eyes
was dispelled by the vanity which prompted him to air his knowledge
concerning the cause of the vivid colours which seemed to radiate from
the walls. He prattled upon the effect of heat upon minerals till he
made us dizzy, and Holman broke in upon his chatter with a question that
he fired point blank at Leith.

"But what did we climb up here for?" asked the youngster. "Did we come
for the view alone?"

Leith grinned as he surveyed the questioner. "No, we didn't come for the
view," he answered. "It happens to be on the way to our destination."

Holman looked around at the basalt walls that hemmed us in on both
sides, and then glanced at the pit in front.

"But we can go no farther," he said.

Leith's smile spread across his ugly flat face. "You are too young to
know everything," he sneered.

The youngster's eyes opened as he looked again at the circular pit with
its brilliantly tinted sides. The answer perplexed him, and he waited
anxiously for an explanation.

"But how can we?" he asked.

Leith stood for a moment before replying, then he moved closer to the
edge of the crater and pointed down.

"The road is directly beneath you," he remarked. "If you come closer to
the edge you can see it." Holman glanced at me in amazement, and moved
by the one impulse we stepped toward the ledge. The rim of the vast pit,
at the point where Leith was standing, was composed of porphyry of a
dark-green shade, and as we neared the edge we noticed that this had
been worn to that peculiar velvety smoothness that one notices on the
pillars of Indian temples, where the sweaty hands of millions of
worshippers have helped in the polishing process through unnumbered
centuries.

Leith noticed that our glances were directed upon the peculiar polished
portion of the rim, and his grin broadened.

"You won't be the first to go over on to the track below," he drawled.
"If I had a dollar for every man who slipped over here since the world
began I wouldn't bother with specimens for American and European
museums. See, the ledge is directly beneath, and it leads away to the
right."

We stretched out our necks and looked, and I tried to thrust back the
exclamation that came to my lips. Directly beneath the polished part of
the rim, and about four feet below it, was a ledge barely three feet
wide, and this narrow path wound away to the right and disappeared
through a cavernous opening in the brightly tinted walls of the crater.
The ledge was bare and unprotected, polished to the same velvety
smoothness as the spot on the rim near which we stood, and when one
looked at it and then let his eyes glance over the infernal depths that
were immediately beneath, the brain reeled with thoughts of the danger
to which a climber would be exposed while making his way along it to the
cavern in the wall.

Holman took a great breath of air and turned savagely upon Leith.

"What sort of a fool game are you up to?" he cried. "What do you mean?"

Leith's lower jaw came forward menacingly. "You had better hold your
tongue!" he roared. "If you don't I'll--I'll----"

He stopped and glared at the young fellow, a murderous expression
creeping over his sallow face. The half-voiced objection to the route
had stirred all the sleeping devil in him, and the big stubby fingers
crooked as if certain they would be called upon to grip Holman's throat.

"You'll do what?" asked the youngster coolly.

"I'll bundle you back to the yacht!" screamed the giant. "You've been
allowed to come on this trip through the good nature of Professor
Herndon, but you mustn't think you have any voice in the direction of
affairs."

Holman did not reply. The dangers of the path over which it was evident
that Leith intended to take us dazed him, and he looked at me as if
asking confirmation of his opinions.

"But the young ladies?" I inquired, looking at Leith. "Do you expect
them to go down on to that path?"

"I don't expect the young ladies to do anything against their
inclinations," he answered blandly. "They have come with the expedition
through no urging from me. Regarding the ledge, there is absolutely no
danger, and it is the only path by which we can reach the interior of
the island. Soma, go over the rim and show them."

Edith and Barbara Herndon, with their father, moved up closer to the
edge as the grinning Kanaka stepped forward to obey Leith's order. He
walked quickly to the polished porphyry slab, moved cautiously to the
extreme rim, then, turning his back on the crater, he dropped upon his
hands and knees and lowered himself down till only his grinning face
appeared above the top.

We crept closer and watched him walk along the ledge toward the cavern,
apparently unaffected by thoughts of the death which a slip of his foot
would bring upon him. Returning to the spot beneath the polished
slipping-off place he put his muscular hands into two clefts in the slab
above and drew himself up on to the solid earth.

"No danger," he cried. "All boys go over here before they could call
themselves men. That long, long time ago."

The Professor grabbed his notebook as he heard the explanation, and he
immediately proceeded to deluge the Kanaka with questions.

"What was that?" he squeaked. "You say all the boys had to climb over
there?"

"That's so," grinned Soma. "This place make 'em test. Young boy go over
this quick he make plenty good fighting man. Feller go over slow he no
good."

The Professor's pencil moved quicker than the pen of a court
stenographer. The Kanaka's remark had brought him much copy, and the
dangers of the path were forgotten as he jotted down the information.

"And they went over here?" he cried, his eyes wide open as he gazed at
the edge of the crater.

"Right over here," grinned Soma. "See rock mighty slippery here. All
boys' hands and feet do that. Polish it mighty fine."

"But surely this test is not carried on at the present time?" cried the
scientist. "When was this wonderful custom in force?"

"About the time that Christopher Columbus was paddling to America,"
replied Leith. "There are no natives on the Isle of Tears now. Soma is
speaking of a time when these islands were inhabited."

The Professor gurgled like a drowning mule. "This is a most interesting
morsel of information," he murmured. "Hand me my camera, Barbara; I wish
to take a snapshot of the place."

The delay irritated Leith, but he kept his temper in check while the
Professor fussed and focussed to get a good view of the spot.

"The old fool should be in a padded cell," growled Holman. "He's so busy
digesting that tale that he's not thinking of the dangers of this path.
I'm going to speak to him aside."

"I hope you have better luck than I had," I whispered. "I bullied him as
we were climbing the slope, and I believe he complained of me to Leith.
He sees a mental picture of himself with bay leaves on his brow, and he
wouldn't consider the nerves of twenty daughters."

I was right in my prophecy. When Holman approached the old maniac he
ruffled up like an angry porcupine, and he screeched out his opinion
concerning people who would not mind their own business.

"You're the second person who has kindly informed me what I should do,"
he exclaimed. "And who are you, sir? You have no standing with this
expedition! This is a scientific exploration party, but it seems to me
that a number of busy-bodies have pushed their way into it. I shall ask
Mr. Leith if he cannot stop this interference!"

Leith listened till the Professor had finished speaking, then he turned
savagely upon Holman. "I've given you one chance," he roared, "and you
don't seem to profit by it. Now I'm not going to speak again! If I have
to tell you to keep your finger out of this pie on another occasion,
you'll go back to the yacht, and you'll go back without provisions, do
you understand?"

The youngster was not lacking in courage, and he stood up boldly as the
bully screamed out his threats.

"I won't go back," he said quietly. "At least I won't go back alone."

Leith's big fingers crooked ominously as he glared at Holman, but Edith
Herndon prevented the conflict that was imminent.

"Mr. Holman is only concerned about our safety," she cried, stepping in
front of the youngster. "He thinks that the path is dangerous for women,
and it is on that account he protests."

Leith recovered his temper with an effort. "It is not dangerous," he
drawled. "We will put a strong rope under the arms of each so that it
will be impossible for an accident to happen. Soma will go first with
one of the other boys, and they will guide every one into the opening.
Once through there the path leads into a valley in the centre of the
island, and the road is perfectly safe."

Edith Herndon looked at her sister as Soma unwound the strong manilla
rope which he had carried from the yacht, and they exchanged glances
that showed clearly the terror in which they viewed the journey across
the ledge.

Leith frowned as he glanced toward the pit. The colours were fading from
the brilliant sides as the sun sank lower, and the inky clouds that
seemed to heave far down in its mysterious depths fought their way
slowly upward as the invading sunbeams were driven out. It became more
terrifying as each moment passed.

Leith seemed to recognize this, and he turned upon the Professor. "If we
don't get down in half an hour we will have to postpone it till the
morning," he exclaimed. "I didn't look for a hitch like this. I tell you
that there is not the slightest danger, and the young ladies will be
just as safe upon that ledge as they are up here."

The Professor turned to the two girls as he closed his camera. The mad
hunger for notoriety evidently blinded him to the dangers which would
have been perceptible at any other time, and Holman's remarks had not
improved his temper.

"Come, come, Edith!" he entreated. "We must get along. You hear what Mr.
Leith says? There is no danger. A rope will be put around your waist,
and an accident will be impossible."

The younger girl took a glance at the terrifying abyss and shrank back
to Edith's side.

"Wait till the morning," she whispered.

"What is that?" asked the Professor.

"Barbara wants you to wait till the morning," replied Edith. "I think it
will be better. This light doesn't make the place look attractive."

Leith moved his big hands in a manner that showed he was willing to wait
till the following day, and Barbara Herndon gave a little gasp of
relief. Soma coiled the rope that he had laid out in expectation of an
immediate descent, and the whole party moved back about thirty yards
from the obstacle in our path. As I analyzed my own feelings, on turning
my back upon the spot, I felt that Barbara Herndon was not alone in
desiring to make the trip when the wholesome sunbeams were pouring into
the shadowy cauldron.


[Illustration]


CHAPTER IX

INTO THE VALLEY OF ECHOES

Holman and I had sat up late discussing the Vermilion-lined crater on
the night we halted upon its brink, and it was Leith's voice that roused
us in the morning. He showed no signs of resentment over the difference
with Holman on the preceding afternoon, and he attempted to joke with
Barbara Herndon as we made a hasty breakfast.

"I hope you slept well?" he grinned.

"I didn't," she replied. "I had dreams of that place, and they were
perfectly horrid dreams."

"Well, dreams don't amount to much," he replied, "and this sunshine will
soon make you forget them."

The sunshine, or probably the night's rest, had a wonderful effect upon
the nerves of the younger girl, and she viewed the crater with much more
composure than on the previous afternoon. Soma had the rope in
readiness when we approached the edge, and together with another carrier
he slipped down upon the slippery pathway, and, with head above the rim,
grinned an invitation to the party to follow his example.

"Now who goes first?" asked Leith.

I had settled that matter with Holman as we sat smoking the night
before, and I stepped forward while the youngster gripped the rope with
Kaipi and the other four carriers. We had decided that I should go down
to the ledge to assist the two girls to the cavern, while he should stay
above ground to make certain that no hitch would occur while they were
being lowered.

That place wasn't so bad when you turned your back upon it. After the
rope had been adjusted I crawled back carefully till my toes hung over
the edge, then thrusting my hands into the two small crevices in the
rock I slipped over, feeling at the same time that peculiar sensation in
the pit of the stomach that one gets when an elevator drops about six
floors at a fast gait. I was perfectly satisfied that a critical
examiner, reasoning on Soma's theory of courage, would not have marked
me down as a great fighter by witnessing the careful manner in which I
made the descent.

I didn't attempt to look at the gulf beneath me either. Not that one
could be ignorant of its existence. Every inch of skin seemed to be
yelling out the information to my brain, but I kept my chin up, and
tried to ignore the black depths which chilled me whenever I allowed the
mental photographs of the place to rise up before my vision.

The Professor followed me over the edge, and was guided by Soma to the
opening in the cavern. Leith came next, and when he landed upon the
smooth path he stood directly underneath the slipping off spot with the
evident intention of remaining there to assist the two girls when they
were lowered down. The post was one that Holman had assigned to me as we
talked the matter over on the previous evening, and the moment Leith
showed no inclination to leave the spot, I started toward him from the
mouth of the cavern, where I had stepped to allow the Professor to pass
me by.

The big bully immediately noticed my movement, and he waved his hand as
a signal for me to go back.

"But I'm coming," I snapped.

"What for?"

"For the fun of the thing," I shouted, and at that moment I forgot the
pit in my anxiety to reach the spot before Edith Herndon was lowered
over.

"Go back at once!" roared Leith. "I will see to the safety of the
ladies."

I was close to him at that moment, and I returned his angry glare. "I'm
going to do that," I cried, "if the devil himself ordered me out of the
way."

Leith looked like the devil at that moment. His sallow face seemed to
heave as if a disturbed emotional centre was immediately beneath the
flabby cheeks, and he cursed in an undertone as Edith Herndon slipped
from the edge and swung for a moment above the ledge before she managed
to get her footing.

Leith attempted to take her arm as her feet touched the unprotected
path, but the girl, though unnerved by the ordeal, shook off his big
claw, and with her hands clasping mine I led her across the short but
dangerous ledge of rock that led to the opening in the wall. I felt
strong enough to fight a dozen devils like Leith at that moment. The
trusting manner in which the dear girl had given her hands into mine
conferred upon me a strength which the crusader of old felt surging
through his body when his consecrated sword blade was delivered into his
hands.

I returned in time to render the same help to Miss Barbara Herndon,
while Leith still remained upon the path, his manner suggesting that he
had discovered something humorous in the situation. Holman followed Miss
Barbara, and then came the islanders, who scrambled over the ledge with
that utter disregard for safety noticeable in the actions of the
unimaginative savage. Holman's face seemed to have altered during the
preceding thirty minutes. The ready smile, which I had first noticed
when he awakened me on the wharf at Levuka, was gone, and a set, defiant
look had taken its place. The happenings of the day before, or the
possible forebodings concerning the immediate future, had changed him
from a boy to a man.

Soma stood at the mouth of the cavern as we passed through, and he
grinned at the Professor. The Kanaka had discovered that the Professor
placed a monetary value upon his information regarding the long-dead
past, and he was ready to contribute to the contents of the fat notebook
whenever the opportunity occurred.

"All good people in this party," he cried. "That's mighty plain."

The Professor dived for his lead pencil. He had a scent for copy that a
New York reporter would have envied.

"How is that, Soma?" he spluttered.

"Wizard men say so," grinned the Kanaka. "Wizard men tell much truth."

"But what did the wizard men say?"

"They say that only the bad boys can slip," answered Soma. "No good men
either. Big hole just for bad people. That what witch doctors say long,
long time ago. They call it Ledge of Death."

The Professor's pencil raced madly across the paper, and Holman looked
back at the black depths with a grim smile upon his clean-cut features.

"I suppose there have been exceptions," he remarked quietly. "There are
exceptions to every rule, and I suppose an occasional bad egg escaped a
fall into this abyss in spite of the wizard men's prophecy."

Leith looked up quickly, and he flushed angrily when he found that the
young fellow's eyes were upon him. Barbara Herndon gave a little
hysterical laugh, and the Professor stopped writing and looked around
inquiringly as if he was in doubt whether he had missed something of
importance.

"What is it?" he inquired. "I didn't hear."

"It was nothing," replied Leith, in his slow, drawling voice. "Holman
suggested that the word of the wizard men might not be infallible, and
lest we have some one who ran the gauntlet under false colours we had
better move on so as to keep the exception out of danger."

The cavern, into which we passed from the slippery ledge, did not lead
into the interior of the mountain as one would be inclined to think
after viewing it from the top of the crater. We had hardly traversed it
for more than sixty yards when we were once again in the bright
sunlight, in what appeared to be a deep, wide valley in the centre of
the island. The basalt cliffs surrounded the place on every side, and
although we had great doubts regarding Leith's veracity, we felt
inclined to accept his word that the path by which we had come was the
only one by which we could reach the spot where we stood. The circles of
black rocks above the tops of the highest trees, though indescribably
beautiful, were strangely repellent in their weird conformation. They
struck us as the walls of a prison from which the only way to liberty
lay across the path in the crater.

The trees--ebony, chatak, dakua, and sandalwood--grew here in greater
numbers than we had met them on the first day, while the lawyer-vines
and thorny creepers rivalled the devilish meshes that had held us back
as we climbed the slope to the Vermilion Pit. Like green serpents they
covered the treetops, and as we struck forward in the same order as we
had marched on the first day the solemnity of the place was more
apparent than ever. It appeared that Nature, for some reason of her own,
had made the place difficult of access, and that our invasion was
something that the trees and vines protested against.

But in spite of the strange melancholy of the place, the two girls were
in much better spirits than they had been on the previous day. The
successful passage over the ledge had brought about a reaction, and a
remark of Holman's caused Barbara Herndon to laugh with all the
spontaneity that was noticeable upon _The Waif_. The effect of that
ripple of laughter was startling. The sound rebounded from the rocky
cliffs, cannoned against the barriers opposite, and then bounced
backward and forward till the whole atmosphere of the valley seemed
alive with the laughter of sprites. For quite five minutes we stood
listening, then the silence chased the last faint echoes out across the
cliffs, and we breathed again.

"It is the Valley of Echoes," said Leith. "The cliffs throw back the
sound in a marvellous manner."

"I'll not laugh again, not in this spot," murmured Barbara Herndon.
"Those noises chilled my blood."

In spite of a blazing sun we found the air unpleasantly cool in the
shaded spots as we struggled slowly through the undergrowth. The moist
flabbiness of uncommon tropical plants startled us whenever the leaves
brushed against our faces and hands, while the constant popping of the
green pods of the nupu, the sounds resembling nothing so much as the
groans of a person in extreme pain, did not have a cheering effect upon
the party. The Professor was the only one who seemed to be actually
enjoying himself, and even his joy was tempered by a malignant Fate.
While endeavouring to dot down some information tendered him by Soma, he
had tripped upon a vine that was in wait for such an opportunity, and
he skinned his nose badly upon a projecting rock.

But rocks or vines would not dampen the Professor's ardour. He saw
himself upon a pedestal that he would build out of the Polynesian lore
and the relics which he would collect. With Spartan fortitude he would
not allow the expedition to halt for one moment while the injured nose
was being attended to, and he took up the interrupted matter with Soma
before the blood had been staunched.

Kaipi worked himself close to me just before midday, and, with one eye
upon Soma and the other five carriers, whispered a message.

"Soma much friend of big man."

"How do you know?" I questioned.

"Talk to him out back of camp last night," he murmured. "Me make believe
sleep, me watch. I think I kill him to-day."

"Kaipi," I whispered, "if you wait a little while I promise you that
you'll have your revenge for Toni's death. You watch Soma and the
others, and when the time comes you can give him all he deserves. If you
stuck a knife into him here Leith would shoot you."

Kaipi nodded his head and trudged forward as Soma came sidling toward
us. The Fijian's desire to get revenge for his "all same brother's
death" was something that might be to our advantage later on, and I
looked upon Kaipi as a staunch ally in the event of trouble.

We ate our midday meal in the sombre silence and again plunged forward.
The appearance of gayety which Barbara Herndon had tried to assume after
we had left the Vermilion Pit had passed away, and once again there was
the look of pathetic helplessness upon the faces of the two girls.
During the luncheon Holman and I endeavoured to make conversation, but
the thoughts of both were upon their surroundings, and they answered
questions with an effort. The prison-like appearance of the valley, and
the utter absence of sound, both of bird and insect life, had a
depressing effect upon their nerves.

Holman's face showed that the mental sufferings of the two sisters had
worked him into a decidedly unfriendly state of mind toward the
Professor and the big brute who was leading the old scientist on the mad
hunt, and another quarrel was barely averted during the early afternoon.
Leith suggested that Edith Herndon should walk beside him so that he
might assist her over the rough parts of the way, and in the
conversation that ensued the youngster asserted that the girl was in
better company when she was walking with her sister and himself. Leith's
voice rose to a roar as he made another threat regarding what he would
do if the youngster did not hold his tongue, but Holman was defiant, and
an immediate conflict was only averted by the tact of Edith Herndon.

The afternoon closed in with us still tramping on. The blood-red sun
slipped hurriedly toward the basalt barriers that encircled the valley,
and as I glanced at the cliffs the picture of the creepy ledge, that was
our only way back to the outer world, was continually in my mind. The
knowledge that the velvety polish upon the block of porphyry was brought
there by the hands of thousands who had once peopled the island or
visited it from the adjacent groups was not provocative of mirth, and I
knew that the feeling that they were journeying in a place that had been
of special veneration in long past centuries was producing a depressing
effect upon the two girls.

As the tropical twilight fell upon the valley we came to one of the
strange stone structures that are to be found in the Tongan and Cook
groups, and which have puzzled explorers who have sought in vain to find
a reason for their construction or an explanation of the methods by
which a savage people lifted the huge blocks of rock into position.

The one that suddenly appeared before us was situated on a small slope
that was free from trees and creepers, and as it stood there, black and
massive, one could fancy it part of the ruins of Karnak instead of a
relic left by a people that were much below the intelligence of those
who raised the wonders in the land of the Nile. The four supporting
piers of stone were about four feet square and fully fifteen feet in
height, while the immense flat rock that was laid upon them was more
than twelve feet in length and breadth, with a six-foot thickness. It
was moss-grown and gray, but the supporting pillars had not deviated one
inch from the perpendicular, although the weight upon them was
tremendous. The bed of coral rock on which they rested had proved a
reliable foundation, and the singular structure had scoffed at time.

The Professor started a lengthy discourse on sacrificial altars the
moment we halted, ranging from Stonehenge to Toluca in search of
comparisons, but we were too tired to give it much attention. Holman
remarked in a whisper that Soma could probably outpoint the Professor if
it came to an array of facts concerning the probable uses of the
gigantic table, and when I glanced at the Kanaka, as he stopped to
listen to the scientist's discourse, I felt inclined to agree with the
scoffer. Soma had an intelligence that lifted him above his class, and I
was convinced that many of the Professor's surmises caused him secret
merriment.


[Illustration]


CHAPTER X

A MIDNIGHT ALARM

I think that Professor Herndon was the only person in the company who
was quite contented with the day's doings on that evening when we camped
near the table of stone. The polished slide and the ledge along which we
had passed to the cavern stirred his imagination concerning the wonders
that were before him, and he convinced himself that he had the god of
his ambition by the heel. The fat notebook was made the repository of
countless surmises regarding the period at which the ledge was in active
use as a test for courage, and the stone structure that loomed up
immediately beside the camp was tagged with countless suppositions
regarding its uses and its probable date of construction. Soma gathered
in some easily earned shillings by raking his mind in search of
traditions and retailing them to the scientist by the light of the fire.
He made magazine prices for tales that he spun from his fertile brain,
and the Professor could hardly write fast enough in the excitement
brought about by the discovery of so much historical knowledge.

"It is wonderful!" he cried, pausing for a moment to polish the thick
lenses of his glasses upon the end of his silk coat. "The chance of
enlightening the world upon this subject is one that I would not have
missed for a million dollars."

"The dollars for me," murmured Holman. "I don't think the old world
cares three cents about anything that happened a thousand years ago in
this patch."

The Professor adjusted his glasses and turned them upon the doubter for
the space of three minutes, but Holman was blissfully ignorant of the
look which the angry archaeologist favoured him with. The youngster was
watching the firelight upon the face of Miss Barbara Herndon, and his
thoughts were probably in a dream-fed future instead of a dismal past.

Leith sat silent and gloomy, his head pillowed against the trunk of a
maupei tree, his face in the shadow of his hat, which he had pulled
down over his forehead. The supper had been eaten with little
conversation, the Professor being the only one who showed conversational
powers of any note. With the notebook already partly filled he felt
certain of a niche in the Pantheon of Fame, and he could not resist a
desire to prattle childishly about the sensation which his discoveries
would cause. It's a terrible thing for a man to get the applause craving
in its worst form. It is liable to make him do things which no craving
for treasure would allow him to do, no matter how badly he desired the
tempting gold.

The girls retired early, and soon afterward Leith wrapped himself up in
a blanket and lay down at the foot of the tree. The Professor at last
became tired of firing questions at the wonderfully well-informed Soma,
and the Kanaka, finding that the market for legends was not as good as
it was in the early part of the night, retreated to the other fire,
where Kaipi and the fire carriers were slumbering.

The heavy silence that comes in the night to the outposts of the world
fell upon the place like a cold hand at that moment. A moon that
appeared to have a pellicle across it, like the film upon a dead man's
eye, peeped over the barrier of black rocks--peeped over as if it
wondered what we were doing in that God-forgotten quarter. Sudden puffs
of wind rustled the leaves of the maupei and fled hurriedly, and from
somewhere in the coral rocks one of those red-striped lizards that are
sometimes found in the rocky parts of the Carolines sent his unearthly
_shik-shuck_ into the stillness, where one fancied it a little
projectile of sound crushed in its efforts to pierce the tremendous
silence of the night. One's imagination pictured the places where there
were lights and music, the tinkle of glasses, and the laughter of men
and women, and the wilderness suffered in the comparison. Coral atolls
with waving palm trees are delightful spots when one reads of them when
seated in a comfortable armchair in a snug library, but the real island
comes down heavily upon the nerve-centres when night falls upon the
spot. Then the fringe dweller feels that he is an outcast from the warm
places of the world where men and women meet in social intercourse.

Holman, who had been staring in silence at the fire for some twenty
minutes, turned toward me after the Professor had retired.

"Sleepy?" asked the youngster.

"Worse than that," I muttered.

"Let's turn in."

The "turning in" was an easy performance. We lay down on the pile of
leaves which the carriers had scraped together, pulled a rug over us,
and in spite of the surroundings I was soon fast asleep.

It was Holman's fist that disturbed my slumber. It came with some force
against my short rib, and I sat upright. The moonlight made it possible
to see across the valley, while every object around the camp was clearly
outlined.

Holman was sitting up on his leafy bed, and I put a question
breathlessly as I jerked myself upright.

"What's up?"

"Didn't he say that this place was uninhabited?" asked the youngster.

"Yes," I answered. "Why?"

"Well, some one has just pushed his head and shoulders up above that
stone table," whispered Holman. "He put his head up, looked across at us
for about five minutes, then dodged quickly back."

"You weren't dreaming?"

"Dreaming? Rot! I haven't closed my eyes since we retired!"

I threw off the rug and looked around. Leith lay under the maupei tree
in the same position as we had seen him in at the moment I lay down.
Near him the Professor snored dismally, probably dreaming dreams of the
greatness that would be thrust upon him in the near future. No sounds
came from the tent that sheltered the two girls, but a combination of
curious nasal sounds rose from the spot where the natives were sleeping
around their fire.

"It might be one of the niggers," whispered Holman. "Let us see."

We stole silently across the intervening space, and, crouching in the
shadows, counted the sleepers. There were seven. The prowler that Holman
had seen upon the top of the stone structure was evidently an outsider,
and the knowledge brought no pleasant feelings. Leith had assured the
Professor on several occasions that the island was uninhabited, yet it
was quite possible that natives from the adjoining groups had visited it
during the period that elapsed since his last visit. Yet we felt that it
was no stray visitor from another island that had peeped over the top of
the massive table, and it was with a suspicious eye upon the sleeping
Leith that we crept quietly over the coral rocks toward the tremendous
stone piers of the structure that rose like a monster gateway against
the gray sky. The atmosphere of that place was indescribable. We seemed
to be in the midst of relics that were older than the pyramids. The
temple of Luxor may seem impressive by moonlight, but the knowledge we
possess of Thebes in its glory somewhat modifies the awe which we would
feel if we knew nothing of the people who had raised the great monuments
in the city of Amen-Ra. And Holman and I knew nothing of the dead race
that erected the mighty stone table on the cleared slope, which by its
construction gave evidence of a knowledge of mechanics of which the
present-day Polynesian is entirely ignorant. I recalled the Nan-Tauch
ruins and the tombs of the mysterious Chan-te-leur kings Ola-Sipa and
Ola-Sopa in the Carolines, the _tolmas_ and the _langis_ of the
Marshall and Gilbert groups, and I wished the Professor anything but
pleasant dreams. The place seemed waiting for the return of its dead. The
scenery possessed that singular expectancy that compels one to turn around
every few moments to convince one's self that an unfriendly watcher is not
immediately in the rear.

Still keeping in the shadows, we circled the camp till we were in front
of the stone table, but just when I took a step into the moonlight space
before it, Holman grasped my arm and drew me back.

"Look!" he gurgled. "Look! there he is again!"

All doubts concerning the youngster's previous observations were swept
away at that moment. A head and shoulders rose suddenly above the black
line of the immense flat stone, remained there for the space of three
minutes, then dropped back so that we could not see it from the position
in which we stood.

"Take the two front pillars!" whispered Holman. "I'll watch the two back
ones. Come on!"

We dashed across the open space, the youngster rushing to the rear,
while I ran to the front columns. It was impossible for any one to
descend unless we saw him, and with nerves on a tension we walked around
the huge supports and watched anxiously for the midnight watcher to
descend.

We must have remained on guard for twenty minutes or more, but there was
no sign of the spy. Around us the massive structure cast a patch of
velvety shadow, but not the slightest sound came from above.

Holman tired of the inactivity, and stepped across to where I was
standing. "I'm going to climb that chestnut tree and see if the beggar
is still there," he murmured. "You stop here till I take an
observation."

He darted across to the big Pacific chestnut and climbed hurriedly,
while I walked round and round the square pillars and strained my ears
for the slightest sound that would give a hint that the person on the
roof of the mysterious table was preparing to descend.

A low whistle from Holman pierced the silence, and I answered.

"Come up here," he cried softly. "He's given us the slip."

I climbed the tree to the branch where the young fellow sat awaiting me.
From his position he had a clear view of the top of the big table, and
as I reached him I looked through an opening in the thick leaves. The
top of the stone was empty!

"Do you think he slipped down while I was climbing the tree?" asked
Holman.

"I'm certain he didn't," I answered. "It would have been impossible."

We stared at the stone in silence. The top was covered with short moss
that had gathered there through the centuries, and instead of being flat
as we had surmised there was a noticeable slope, so that the part that
was directly behind the camp was fully two feet higher than the rear.
This was the only peculiarity in its construction, and although we sat
in silence, staring at its moss-covered surface, we were utterly unable
to put forward the slightest supposition that would account for the
disappearance of the watcher. The incident was an extraordinary one. The
man could not have dropped from the table before we reached the
supporting piers, and we were equally certain that he had not slipped
down the pillars while we stood guard beneath.

"I'm going up there," muttered Holman. "We can get the rope from the
camp. Come along! I'd like a look at that place at closer quarters."

We climbed hastily down the tree, crept cautiously back to the camp and
took the stout rope which we had used in reaching the Ledge of Death.
The camp was quiet. The curious nasal sounds produced by the natives,
together with the rather high-toned snore of Professor Herndon, were the
only sounds that came through the still night.

Holman flung one end of the rope over a projecting corner of the flat
slab, twisted one half of it round and round the pillar to make
occasional grips which we could use in the ascent, then clutching the
hanging end he worked himself slowly up. I followed him, only to find
the upper surface of the table as bare of any signs of life as we had
previously noted from our perch in the chestnut tree. The tough moss
upon the stone was fully four inches long, and covered the slab
completely. In vain we stamped around looking for a possible hiding
place. The massive block didn't offer a cranny that a lizard could hide
in, and with an unsolved mystery upon our hands we descended to the
ground.

"What do you make of it?" asked Holman.

I shook my head. The enigma baffled me. Our suspicions regarding the
honesty of Leith made the strange appearance of the figure on the table
of stone more perplexing than it would have been under ordinary
circumstances. Leith had asserted that the island was uninhabited, yet
we were not inclined to rush to him with the news of the discovery. We
felt that it was another of the small discoveries that made us pile up
suspicions against the big bully at the head of the party. We had no
proof of the midnight visitor, and the story of his sudden disappearance
while we watched below would only provoke an unbelieving grin from
Leith, and an idiotic laugh from the foolish old Professor.

"Better keep it to ourselves," growled Holman.

"For the present at any rate," I remarked. "If Leith knows that there
are others upon the island, and if those others are friendly to him, it
will only make him more careful of his actions if we tell what we have
seen to-night."

Arriving at this decision we came back to the camp and crawled quietly
under the rug, where we watched the mystical monument till the flaming
tropical dawn lit up the valley.


[Illustration]


CHAPTER XI

KAIPI PERFORMS A SERVICE

The Professor used a roll of films in snap-shotting the stone table
while we were breaking camp. He photographed it from every point of the
compass, and made a magnificent effort to dislocate his collarbone by
falling from a tree up which Holman had urged him to climb so that he
could get a view of the upper surface. In his mad pursuit of antiquities
the Professor forgot that tree climbing was an accomplishment that he
had never mastered properly in the days of his youth, and our departure
was somewhat delayed by the shock which he received from the fall. The
camera fell upon the pile of leaves which Leith had used as a mattress,
and it escaped with abrasions that were microscopical compared to those
received by the Professor, who glared angrily at Holman as Edith Herndon
attended to his injuries.

"I thought you could climb," murmured the youngster. "'Pon my word I
did. I wouldn't have urged you to get up there if I didn't think you
could hang to a limb."

"I am acquainted with a number of persons who would look well hanging to
a limb," retorted the Professor, as he rubbed his ankles.

"Same here," said Holman, unperturbed by the sharp retort. "When I think
over their actions, Professor, I wonder how they escaped being suspended
from such places. Especially when you consider that trees are
plentiful."

We made slow progress during the morning. The Professor's accident
robbed him of a lot of the nimbleness which had been noticeable during
the two preceding days, and the other members of the expedition had to
move at a pace that would suit his stiff limbs.

"I'm unlucky," whispered Holman, as he sat beside me at the midday halt.
"I tried to show him how he could get a good snapshot, and now he's as
poisonous as a red-necked cobra just because he was silly enough to skin
his shins."

We crossed the lowest part of the valley during the early afternoon,
and commenced to ascend gradually toward the black walls on the far
side. Leith had remarked at the lunch table that we would probably reach
our destination on the following morning, and the information brought a
thrill of expectation in spite of the suspicions we entertained. The
undefined dread had upset our nerves, and I think the two girls, as well
as Holman and myself, were looking forward anxiously to the arrival at
the objective point so that our suspicions could be either verified or
abandoned. Leith was more affable than usual on that afternoon, and he
held forth in such a gloomy fashion upon the wonders that were within
reach that the Professor almost forgot his injuries and his animus
against Holman as he listened to the description.

"It is my opinion that the island was the burial ground of the chiefs of
the nearby groups," remarked Leith. "There is every indication that the
people who were buried here were not ordinary people, as you will see
when you view the wonders that will meet your eyes to-morrow."

The Professor beamed through his thick glasses, and, forgetting his
injuries, gave a little jump in negotiating an obstruction, but the look
of agony which passed across his face proved that his injured limb
objected to useless gambols.

"We may be wrong after all," muttered Holman, after he had listened to
Leith's description of the wonders of the tombs of the long-dead members
of Polynesian royal families. "I hate to be suspicious of a fellow, and
I'll be glad if he proves genuine in the end."

"So will I," I remarked. "If he measures up all right I'll be half
inclined to apologize before I go back to take a gruelling from Captain
Newmarch."

It was Kaipi who stampeded the small ray of charity that had pierced the
cluster of suspicions we had collected. The little Fijian performed the
trick about seven o'clock in the evening, and it was done in a most
effective manner. When we had made camp, Leith had sent Soma on ahead
with the ostensible purpose of locating the easiest route to the base of
the cliffs, and an hour afterward Kaipi managed to attract my attention,
and he indicated by signs that he had information to impart. I seized a
chance to help him with the small tent which sheltered the two sisters,
and as we tugged at the knots he slipped a small piece of paper into my
hand.

"What is it?" I asked.

"Soma drop it," he explained nervously. "I follow him just little way
think get good chance kill him, but no chance come. He drop little piece
of paper from his belt; me pick 'em up. I no know what it say; you
read."

I crammed the note into my pocket as Leith approached, but at the first
opportunity I dived into a thicket of leaves and opened it with nervous
fingers. It was brief, exceedingly brief, but no number of words could
have produced the same cold chill of dread which took possession of me
as I glanced over the scrawl upon the paper. The note read:

"Five babies for kindergarten. Arrange everything. Meet at the Long
Gallery."

I stumbled out on the clearing in a half stupor. The arrival of the
long-expected confirmation of our suspicions had the same effect upon me
as a blow from a sandbag. Leith was apparently everything that Holman
and the girls had suspected him of being, and as I looked around at the
nearly impenetrable jungle growth upon which the night had come down
with that appalling swiftness of the tropics, I understood the helpless
condition in which we were placed. Soma and the other five carriers were
evidently tools of the big bully; the person or persons to whom the note
was addressed would also stand behind him in a fray, and against this
little army there was Holman, Kaipi, the two sisters, and myself. The
Professor's insane craving for a sight of the antiquities would probably
make him a partisan of the big brute till his devilish tricks were laid
sufficiently bare to allow the childish mind of the scientist to see
through them. The situation was pitiful to contemplate, and sick with
terror at thoughts of the fate of the two girls, I found Holman and
pulled him out of the circle of light thrown by the fire which Kaipi was
tending.

"What is it?" he asked.

"I've got proof!" I cried. "Soma dropped a note that Leith sent him off
with when we halted. Kaipi found it and brought it to me."

I recited the few words that were now pounding madly through my brain,
but the mere recitation would not satisfy Holman. He wanted to see the
words--to stare at them, so that his eyes might confirm the information
which his ears had gathered, and together we dived deeper into the
creepers till it was safe for him to light a match by which he could
view the scrawl.

"My God!" he cried hoarsely. "He's a devil, Verslun! We're fools!
Infernal fools! Do you hear me? I'll shoot the brute now!"

He flung aside my hands and made a dash toward the fire, plunging
through the creepers with a strength born of the sudden flame of temper
which had come with the confirmation of Leith's duplicity. The boy's
love for Barbara Herndon made him a madman as he raced madly to obtain
vengeance from the brute who had led us into the trap.

Like two maniacs we rushed into the light of the fire, but only the two
girls and the Professor were seated round it. Leith was not in sight.

"Where is he?" gasped Holman.

The Professor looked up in mild astonishment. "Who?" he asked.

"Leith!" cried the boy. "Where has he gone?"

"Mr. Leith has gone forward to help Soma," squeaked the Professor. "It
will be moonlight, so he took the opportunity of making certain about
the direction we were to go in the morning. He said he would not be back
before daylight."

Holman mastered his anger, and I beckoned the Professor to one side. It
was necessary to make an attempt to convince the foolish old scientist
that we were in the hands of a scoundrel, and I determined to place the
note and our suspicions before him.

I told hurriedly of the appearance of the figure upon the stone table on
the previous evening, but before I had time to tell of the note, the
doddering old imbecile interrupted.

"What's that?" he cried. "Some one else upon the island? Well, they
can't steal the honour of the discoveries. I have first claim upon
everything we find upon the place. Mr. Leith and I made that arrangement
before we left Sydney. Besides, it is Mr. Leith's island, and if other
scientists are here--

"Oh, confound it! Who said they were scientists?" roared Holman. "It's
bad luck for us that they are not. Scientists are harmless, but these
are natives or something worse."

"Leith will fix 'em!" cried the Professor, ignoring the youngster's
comment on the inoffensive nature of men of his type. "Leith will put
them off the place--"

"Stop chattering and read that!" I interrupted. "Your precious friend
sent this ahead by Soma. He dropped it and we got hold of it."

Holman struck a match and held it over the scrap of paper while the
scientist stared at it through his thick glasses.

"Well?" he queried. "What has this nonsense to do with me?"

"The five babies," snapped Holman.

"Five babies?" repeated the Professor. "I know nothing about babies!"

His small head wagged backward and forward as he made the statement, and
his evident inability to see that the reference concerned us irritated
the youngster beyond measure.

"You're the biggest baby of the five!" he roared. "You're a madman! Come
away, Verslun; it's no use arguing with him!"

The Professor gave an indignant snort, straightened his small body, as
if he contemplated an attack upon the youngster, then dashed madly back
to the fire, where we watched him bobbing his head up and down as he
spoke to the two girls. His confidence in the rascal who was possibly
luring him to his death was pitiful to see, and we recognized at that
moment that it would be useless to waste any further arguments with him.

"We've got to get out of this scrape by our own efforts," muttered
Holman. "The girls won't leave him, worse luck. If they would I'd turn
tail this minute and make an attempt to fight our way back to the
yacht."

"And I doubt if you will find a haven there," I remarked. "That bilious
captain was in a great hurry to send word to Leith that I had got safely
by his farewell bombardment. We're in for it, old man, and we might as
well realize the fact right now."

"You're not sorry I found you on that pile of pearl shell?"

"Sorry?" I cried. "I'm glad, man--I'm infernally glad."

Holman gripped my hand, and then we crawled through the bushes toward
the spot where Soma and Leith had started off on their supposed work of
exploration.

"What can we do?" I asked.

"Wait round here and pot him when he is coming back," said the youngster
cheerfully. "But we should let the girls know something, shouldn't we?
That old fool will tell them a garbled account that will frighten them
out of their wits. One of us had better go and try to quiet their
fears."

"You go then," I remarked. "I'll wait here till you come back."

Holman crept quietly toward the campfire, and I waited in the
undergrowth. The moon was rising in the east and a soft gray light wiped
out the intense blackness that had come upon the place after the short
twilight. The tops of the cliffs toward which we were journeying were
tipped by a brilliant thread of silver as the moon peeped above their
ramparts, and I crept deeper into the shadows as the full glory of the
glowing orb turned the night into day.

I had waited some thirty minutes for Holman when I noticed a movement
beneath a small bush some fifteen paces to my right. I watched the spot
without moving, and presently a dark figure crept out of the shelter and
moved cautiously toward the camp. Convinced that the visitor was Soma, I
pulled out my revolver and waited, wondering as I watched what he
intended to do.

The black figure came closer. He paused to listen to the sounds that
came from the fire, and as he lifted his head the moonlight fell across
his face, and I put the revolver back in my pocket.

"Kaipi," I murmured.

The Fijian crept quietly to the spot where I was hiding.

"I come for you," he muttered.

"Why?"

"Funny things much," he gurgled. "Light on mountain, no see from here.
Me watch it, think it something bad. Come, I'll show you."

Holman returned at that moment and I explained what Kaipi had just told
me.

"The devil!" muttered the youngster. "The note said that he would meet
them at the Long Gallery. See, the light is not visible from our camp,
and the brute never thought that one of us would be far enough from the
camp to notice it. If it's a signal we might be able to reach the spot
and see what is actually going on. If we leave things till to-morrow I'm
afraid we'll be too late."

"But the girls?" I cried.

"We'll get back," he replied. "I told them how everything is, Verslun,
and they're not afraid. Edith has an automatic pistol that she brought
from the yacht, and she'll use it if she is forced to. Come on!"

We followed Kaipi into the shadows, the Fijian picking his way with
wonderful instinct through the clumps. At about half a mile from the
camp he stopped and pointed to the cliffs.

"Me see light flash way over there," he whispered. "You wait and see."

We crouched down and waited. The minutes passed slowly, but the black
barrier away to the east gave no sign of life.

"I think Kaipi must have sighted a star," muttered Holman. "There is
nothing--"

He broke off abruptly and gripped my arm. High up in the basalt barrier,
at a spot about three quarters of a mile from where we were crouched, a
tiny flame suddenly appeared, blazed for an instant, then died away
again. Three times it flared up and as quickly died away, but at the
third disappearance Holman and I, with the vengeance-seeking Kaipi, were
struggling through the network of damp vegetation toward the spot from
which the signal had come.


[Illustration]


CHAPTER XII

THE DEVIL DANCERS

The snaky vines seemed to us to be leagued with Leith as we tried to
force our way to the spot where the tiny flash of light had appeared
amongst the rocks. The lawyer-vines gripped our ankles and flung us upon
our faces scores of times, but we scrambled to our feet and rushed on.
Kaipi had made the discovery at an opportune moment. Now that we were
certain that Leith contemplated treachery, the wait through the long
night would have maddened us. We wanted to meet him quickly, and
instinct told us that the appointment place mentioned in the note was
identical with the spot to which we were fighting our way.

We were bruised and bleeding when we reached the foot of the black
cliffs whose perpendicular walls towered above us. We were almost
certain that the light had been flashed from a point immediately above
the spot where we came face to face with the barrier, but the scaling of
the black barricade was a proposition that seemed incapable of solution
as we rushed along the base.

"This is the spot," gasped Holman. "This big tree cluster was just to
the right of the place where the light was flashed."

"That's so," I remarked, "but how are we to get up to the point where
the signal came from?"

We raced madly up and down the front of the strange black wall, hunting
eagerly for a place that offered the slightest foothold by which we
could climb to the terraces that we could see far above, but the search
was a futile one. The tremendous mountain of ebony rock appeared to have
been driven up out of the earth during some volcanic disturbance, and as
we stumbled blindly along we thought it would be easier to scale the
outside wall of a New York skyscraper than the slippery sides of the
obstruction in our path.

It was Holman who found a key to the situation. The big clump of maupei,
or Pacific chestnut, that we had taken as a landmark when we were
running through the moonlit night, grew close to the barrier, and the
limbs of several of the trees scraped the sides of the basalt columns as
the faint night breeze moved them backward and forward.

"There's a ledge up there," whispered the youngster. "Look! It's about
fifty feet from the ground. If we could climb a tree we might be able to
reach it from one of the limbs."

He had hardly outlined the proposition before we were swarming up the
trunk, Holman in the lead by right of discovery, and the nimble Kaipi in
the rear. Higher and higher the youngster climbed into the thick green
foliage. He reached the topmost branches, and selecting one that led
toward the rocky wall, he straddled it and worked his way slowly
forward.

Kaipi and I clung to the fork of the limb and waited, and as I watched
Holman the wisdom of our actions was assailed by a cold doubt. We had
left the two girls entirely unprotected, and if Leith reached the camp
before we returned, and heard from the chattering Professor the story of
the finding of the scrap of paper, it would be reasonable to suppose
that he would consider the moment had arrived for the perpetration of
any deviltry he had planned.

But Holman's actions interrupted my mental criticism of the wisdom of
our plans. The youngster had reached the extreme end of the limb, and he
was clawing madly at the rock to obtain a footing. He succeeded after a
five minutes' struggle, and he sent a breathless whisper back to our
perch.

"There's a ledge here," he murmured. "I think we can climb up from it.
Hurry along, and I'll give you a hand."

I needed a hand when I reached the end of that leafy seesaw. I was much
heavier than the boy, and the limb could hardly support my weight when I
neared the end. Holman reached out his hand at a moment when I thought
that a drop through the air would be my reward for attempting aerial
exhibitions, and the next moment I was beside him on a little projection
that barely gave us a footing.

"It's easy climbing just above us," whispered Holman. "Wait till we get
Kaipi."

The Fijian came along the limb with the agility of a trapeze artist, and
when he reached the ledge we stared up at the dizzy heights that rose
above our little resting place. Small jutting projections, like
gargoyles, stuck out from the wall, and we looked at them hungrily.

"If we had only brought the rope!" cried the boy. "Say, Verslun, put
your face against the rock and I'll climb on to your shoulders."

I did so, and the youngster climbed up cautiously. For a long time he
stood there, peering around in an effort to discover a path by which we
could go upward and onward, but at last he stepped off, and I looked up
to find him clinging to the wall like a huge beetle. A pack of fat
clouds that had harried the moon during the earlier part of the evening
now closed in upon her, and we were in complete darkness. The threshing
limb of the maupei tree that was within a yard or two of the spot where
Kaipi and I stood waiting disappeared in the night, and the scratching
of Holman's shoes high above our heads came down to us through the
intense silence and proved that he was holding his position with
difficulty.

A small piece of shale hit me on the shoulder after a long wait, and I
turned my face upward.

"Verslun!" breathed the strained voice of the youngster. "Are you
there?"

"Well?" I asked.

"H'sh!" he murmured. "We are right near the spot, Verslun. If Kaipi
climbs up on your shoulders to this place I think the two of us could
pull you up. Are you willing?"

"Come on, Kaipi," I whispered, and the Fijian climbed nimbly upon me and
moved up into the void above.

"Now, Verslun," muttered Holman. "Reach up till we get a grip of your
wrists. Are you ready? Well, try hard, man! Think of those two helpless
girls and dig your toes in!"

I didn't need any reminder concerning the position of the two sisters
as I stood on tiptoe and scratched with my fingers at the crumbling
ledge upon which Holman and the Fijian crouched. The predicament of
Edith Herndon, and not fears for my own safety, made me scratch madly
for a foothold as I swung above the shelf I left. Kaipi and Holman
tugged till every muscle in my arms shrieked out against the way they
were being handled. But I was going up. I "chinned" the crumbling layer
of rock upon which my fingers had a perilous grip, laid my chest across
the shelf and wriggled into safety.

"That's good," whispered Holman. "Don't puff so hard, man! We're too
close to take any chances."

I got upon my hands and knees and followed him along the narrow pathway.
Over a thousand obstructions we crawled like three rock snakes, till
finally the boy halted and turned toward me.

"See the streak of light through that split in the rock?" he whispered.
"Look in front of you! Well, they're inside."

The split in the rock to which Holman had pointed was a perpendicular
crevice about four feet in length, but possessing only a width of six
inches. It separated two rock masses that were fully eighteen inches
thick, and as we wriggled noiselessly toward it we saw that it gave us a
glimpse of the interior of a huge cavern, the part of which that was
just inside our point of observation being illuminated by a swinging
ship's lamp which hung by a rope that dropped from the vaulted dome.

The lamp swung directly in front of the crevice through which we peered
breathlessly, and for a few seconds it was the only object that was
visible. Gradually our eyes became accustomed to the light, and we found
that a pair of brown legs were moving slowly along the floor past our
spyhole. A body, gorgeously decorated in mats of green and crimson
parrot feathers, followed the legs, and then came a head that was hidden
behind a mask of sennet daubed thickly with coral lime and ochre till it
appeared a ghastly nightmare.

The horror moved upon its stomach, and, viewing it as we did through the
narrow cranny, it appeared as if the film of a biograph was being slowly
dragged before our eyes. Another pair of legs followed the masked head,
another body, and another mask that was even more fear-inspiring than
the first. And the procession continued. Three, four, five, and
six--each succeeding one being arrayed in a mask of more ghastly
appearance than those which had preceded him. The sixth was followed by
the first, who had wriggled clear around the circle of light thrown by
the lamp, and in perfect silence the infernal snaky circle moved
backward round and round, the faint light shining on bare legs, on
bodies from which the parrot mats were thrust aside by the contortions,
and upon the masks that were weirdly fantastic and Mephistophelian.

They had circled the floor about ten times when Holman tugged my coat
and I wriggled back from the crevice.

"What's up?" My lips were dry as I put the question.

"Kaipi."

"Where is he?"

"Cleared out. Those human serpents scared him. Go softly, man! We must
get him before he attempts to go down that cliff or he'll break his
thick head."

We caught up to the deserter on the ledge to which Holman and the Fijian
had dragged me a short time before, and the youngster abused the
frightened native as he endeavoured to turn him back.

"No, no!" shrieked the Fijian. "Me no see dance like that. Me die if I
stay."

"Why?" I asked.

"It is 'tivo'--death dance," gasped Kaipi. "Wizard men dance it.
Something going happen, damn bad."

"But they can't get you," cried Holman, "Come back and watch them. Soma
and Leith will be there directly, and you'll get your revenge."

But Kaipi would have nothing more of the performance in the rocky
chamber. The repulsive masks and the backward wriggling of the six upon
the floor had upset his fighting stomach for the time being, and we
could not induce him to return.

"Well, you wait here," ordered Holman. "We're going back, but we'll
return in a few hours and pick you up. Don't move from this ledge."

Kaipi would promise anything if he was not forced to witness the
performance, and we left him huddled up in the darkness, and returned to
the spyhole in the wall.

The "tivo," as the Fijian called it, was still in progress. Without
noise, the six half-nude figures were describing circles upon the smooth
floor. The silence and the serpentlike motions had a peculiar hypnotic
effect upon us, and in a sort of dreamlike trance we watched them
wriggle by the narrow aperture to which we pressed our faces. With each
circle more of the brown, sweat-polished bodies showed beneath the
twisted mats. The pace was beginning to tell upon them now. Slower and
slower they moved past the crevice, till at last all movement ceased,
and, apparently lifeless, they lay face downward upon the floor.

I thought of the two girls at the lonely camp as we sat watching, and I
knew well that Holman's thoughts were turned in the same direction. We
had seen nothing of Leith, but an intuition that would not be put aside
connected Leith with the strange ceremony that was in progress within
the cavern, and we were chained to the spot.

I have no idea how long the six figures remained motionless upon the
floor. It may have been an hour, it may have been two. The mystery of
the performance we were witnessing seemed to drag us into a world where
minutes and hours did not exist. We were dumfounded by the confirmation
of our suspicions and the peculiarly devilish exhibition, and I shook
off the lethargy with an effort as Holman prodded me with his finger and
pointed at a spot beyond the body of the dancer who lay immediately in
front of the spyhole.

Looking in the direction Holman pointed I saw that another light was
approaching through the gloom of the cavern. It bobbed toward us slowly,
a tiny pin point that came nearer and nearer as the bearer walked in the
direction of the six. The distance it was away from the dancers, which
was evident from the time that elapsed from the moment we saw it till it
was close up, convinced us that the cavern was of an enormous length,
and the words "Long Gallery" in the note which Soma had dropped came up
before my mind. There was no doubt that the cave was the meeting spot
which Leith had mentioned, and as I felt Holman's body stiffen as he
shouldered against me for a share of the peephole, I knew that he
believed that the treacherous brute was one of the three that were
approaching behind the bobbing lamp.

The bodies of the dancers, or at least the parts that we could see,
became tense and rigid. A soft hiss went round the circle, and once
again the wriggling movement started. But this time the six went forward
instead of backward. They broke out of the circular formation, and in a
long glistening line moved up the cavern toward the three approaching.
The lamp halted, then it was raised high in the air as the crawling half
dozen approached, and Holman gave a curious little gurgle as the light
fell upon the three newcomers. Wrapped in parrot feathers and a white
mask, the lamp bearer stood revealed as Soma. Immediately behind him was
a tall white man in the same outlandish garb, while the last of the
three, barearmed and barelegged, and wearing an immense headdress of
plumes, was Leith!

The snaky six circled the three at a respectful distance, then, again
breaking into a single file formation, they turned toward the end of the
cave nearest our spyhole, and behind the length of creeping bodies,
Soma, the tall white who had only one eye, and Leith came slowly.

Holman's breath came faster as the procession approached. The
exhibition chilled us. There was a devilish suggestiveness in the
proceeding. In some indescribable manner it brought up mental pictures
that were nauseating, and it required something of an effort to watch
the performance. The mystery of the silent night, the thoughts of the
danger which threatened the two girls, and the glimpses of the
astounding performance within the cavern brought a dazed mental
condition that made us doubt our sanity.

I felt Holman's hand reach out across my shoulder as the procession
moved down upon us, and instinctively I understood the movement. The
cold barrel of a revolver had slipped by my face, and I gripped his
wrist and forced the hand downward. The manner in which Soma and the
one-eyed man walked in front of the big brute made it impossible to
shoot with telling effect, and Leith was the person we desired to kill
at that moment. The others seemed to be but creatures of his will, and
he stood up in our minds as a devil whose existence was a menace to
everything that was pure and clean.

The three newcomers moved to the side of the cavern, so that nothing
except their bare feet were visible, and backward and forward in front
of those feet moved the human serpents with a regularity that was
stupefying. In an unbroken line they would move forward, flatten
themselves upon the floor, then, with a unanimity that was remarkable,
they would wriggle backward, to repeat the same movement over again.

Holman pulled me away at last, and we retired to a point that made it
possible for us to converse in low whispers without being heard.

"What will we do?" he gasped. "I can't stay there any longer! I want to
get inside to the devil! I don't want to shoot him; I want to throttle
him with my two hands!"

"But the entrance to the cavern is from somewhere on the other side of
the hill," I remonstrated, as the young fellow raved about our
helplessness.

"We must get there!"

"Don't lose your head about it," I remarked. "Keep cool and we'll win
out in the long run."

It was useless to speak of patience to that boy at the moment. He clawed
desperately at the slippery wall in an endeavour to find a path that
would lead us to the opening on the other side by which Leith had made
his entry, but the attempt appeared to be madness. A dozen times the
youngster scrambled up rough portions that offered a slight footing, but
each time he slipped back bruised and battered. He would listen to no
arguments. The desire to get to the mouth of the cavern, and kill Leith
before the morning, had produced an insanity, and we crawled and climbed
along the face of those basalt cliffs in a manner that chilled my
spinal marrow. Holman possessed the courage of a maniac. His imagination
was blinded to the dangers that lay alongside the crumbling shelves of
rock, and I scrambled behind him wondering dimly what would happen to
Edith and her sister if an unkind fate flung us from the ledge into the
darkness from which the soft croon of the chestnut clumps came up like a
warning against our foolhardiness.

Holman paused at the end of a wearisome climb, and he drew himself
upright. At that moment the cloud-harried moon dragged herself from
beneath the pack, and the young fellow gave a cry of joy.

"We can do it from here, Verslun," he cried. "I see a path to the top.
Come along, man!"

"What about Kaipi?" I gasped. "We'll never find our way back here."

"Let him sit there," he snorted. "Hurry or the moon will be under the
clouds before we cross the cliff."


[Illustration]


CHAPTER XIII

TOMBS OF SILENCE

For my own part I found no great liking for the moonlight. Up to that
moment I had followed blindly in the tracks of Holman, nerved somewhat
by the thought that the trail he passed over would carry me. The dangers
were hidden by the darkness, and my imagination was too stunned by the
happenings of the night to make any endeavour to torture my nerves by
picturing them.

But the reappearance of the moon brought an opportunity to my eyes, and
I wondered if we could negotiate the goat track which the youngster was
scrambling over. I turned my face to the wall and crawled timorously in
the rear. Higher and higher we went with bleeding fingers and knees, but
at last Holman reached the top, and I dragged myself up beside him.

"Get up!" he cried savagely. "We must kill the devil before morning."

We got to our feet and started to run toward what we knew to be the
direction of the cavern. The ground sloped gradually, and we reasoned
that it would continue to fall away till we reached the mouth of the
cavern by which Leith had entered from the far side. For once we had a
clear run. At that height there was little vegetation, and at a mad gait
we sped across a bare stretch where the only obstacles were lumps of
rock that were scattered around in great profusion.

"If--if we could find the place and block the devil and all his gang
inside," gasped Holman.

"That's too good a thing to entertain," I spluttered.

"We might, Verslun! We might!" he cried. "I've got a feeling that we've
been picked to put that devil out of existence. That's why I'm taking a
chance in leaving the girls back there at the camp. I believe I'm going
to kill him, but whether it is to-night or some other time I don't
know."

"The sooner the better," I stammered. "From what Kaipi said about that
dance, something out of the way is going to happen, and I've got a
hunch that the something will happen to us."

Holman remained silent, and we raced on, moving down the slope at an
angle that we judged would bring us somewhere near the entrance. At
moments my brain assured me that it was a mad proceeding, but something
of the certainty with which the youngster looked upon himself as the
Fate-appointed destroyer of Leith came to me as I raced beside him, and
I put aside the fears for Edith Herndon's safety that besieged me as I
ran. The last doubt about Leith's treachery had been chased away by the
dance we had witnessed, and I felt assured that the man was a monster, a
vile thing, who, for some purpose that I could not allow myself to
ponder over, had brought the foolish old scientist and his daughters
into a place of terrors. Treachery had been apparent from the start. It
was only the confidence of the old antiquarian that had blinded our eyes
to a score of incidents that should have convinced us that the brute had
some ulterior motive in view. During that mad race through the night the
big sallow-faced giant appeared to us as a devil, a fiend that was
connected with some sort of horrible practices that had continued to
exist in this remote islet long after all trace of such things had been
lost in those islands that were visited by traders and missionaries.
Kaipi connected the dance with death, and the same conclusion had come
to us before we had heard the words of the frightened Fijian.

Holman slackened speed, and we dodged through a mass of boulders that we
judged were in a direct line with the crevice through which we had
witnessed the happenings in the cave.

"We should be near the place if there is an entrance to it on this
side," he muttered. "This pile of rocks looks from--oh, Gee! here's a
path!"

It was a path, sure enough. It wound in and out among the rocks, a
narrow beaten trail, singularly white against the black surroundings.

Holman stopped and took up a handful of the dust. "They coat it with
coral lime to make it plain in the darkness," he growled. "Come on,
Verslun, the wriggly batch must be straight ahead."

I pulled the army Colt from my pocket and ran softly abreast of the
youngster. The corrosive terror of the earlier part of the evening had
fled then, and my nerves had taken up a sort of dare-devil attitude
toward all happenings that the future might hold in store. Besides, the
more I thought of Leith, the greater his villainy appeared to be, and to
save Edith Herndon from the slightest contact with the ugly ruffian was
a task that would give the greatest coward in the world the courage of a
warrior.

The white path wound in and out of the boulders, which became thicker
as we advanced, and suddenly it dived through a dark passage into the
side of the hill. We felt that we were at the mouth of the burrow by
which Leith and his dancers had entered, and we moved into the shadow to
reconnoitre. Leith had informed the Professor that he would not return
to the camp till the following morning, so the chances were that the
treacherous scoundrel was still assisting at the ceremonies that we had
witnessed.

"Shall we go in?" whispered Holman.

"As you like," I answered.

He moved toward the mouth of the burrow, then stopped and turned toward
me. "What time is it?"

"It's ten minutes of midnight," I replied.

"We've got six hours," he whispered. "Come along, we'll chance it."

Very cautiously we moved into the darkness of the passageway, feeling
our way along the walls that were cold and damp from the moisture which
had soaked through from the crown of the cliff. The place was not more
than five feet wide, and as I walked along on one side of the wall,
Holman, feeling his way along the other, could touch me whenever he
wished to ascertain my position. Our shoes made no sound upon the floor
of the corridor. It was covered deep with fine dust, upon which we
walked noiselessly.

An occasional bat fluttered past us, but outside the flapping of the
wings not a sound disturbed the stillness of the place. The silence of
the outside was intensified a hundredfold. In the open, one heard the
crooning of the trees as the soft winds from the Pacific played with
their heavy foliage, but in the natural passage through which we crawled
in search of Leith the air felt as if it had not been disturbed for
centuries. It was heavy and thick, possessing a faint odour that seemed
to rise from the dust beneath our feet.

We had walked about one hundred yards along the corridor when it widened
suddenly. The walls that we were following turned off at right angles,
and from the moonlight which filtered through a dozen small fissures
high up above our heads we saw that we had entered a cavern of vast
proportions. We sensed its vastness. The few streaks of moonlight that
stabbed the darkness were like so many guide-posts that enabled us to
make a mental calculation of the height and extent of the place.

We stopped and moved together instinctively. Holman put his mouth close
to my ear.

"What do you make of it?" he asked.

"It might be a cavern leading into the one that runs out to the face of
the cliff," I replied.

"But how are we to cross it?"

"I can't tell you. I'm afraid if we leave this opening that we'll get
lost."

It was rather plain that we would. The surrounding walls were as black
as the opening by which we had entered the place, and we stood with
quick-beating hearts staring out across the place through which the bars
of moonlight appeared like silver skewers.

One of these skewers fell upon a ledge of stone some few yards in front
of the spot where we were standing, and Holman stepped toward it.

"Stay where you are," he said. "If I get lost I'll whistle softly and
you can signal back to me."

He moved away and I was left standing in the opening. A bat banged
heavily against my face, and the odour from the dusty floor irritated my
nostrils so that I had difficulty in restraining myself from sneezing.

It was about twenty minutes before Holman returned. He whistled ever so
softly, and when I replied he came toward me hurriedly.

"Just walk out to that spot of moonlight," he whispered. "I'll keep
guard on the door. Feel around there and tell me what you think of it."

I did as he directed. I walked forward to the spot and felt around with
my hands. My fingers came in contact with round, smooth objects that
filled every available inch of a stone table in front of me, and with a
feeling of revulsion I hurried back to the mouth of the corridor. Holman
gripped my arm and put a question.

"Gave you a shock, eh?"

"Why, they're skulls!" I breathed hoarsely.

"Yes, hundreds of 'em," he said. "The place is chock full of them. This
island must have been the burying ground of all the adjoining groups,
and it's the atmosphere of the place that keeps the niggers away from
it. Leith has been wise to that. The present generation of islanders
know nothing of the things that happened here hundreds of years back,
but they've got an inborn horror of the place, and they keep away."

"Well, what are we to do?"

"Wait here."

"But if he doesn't come this way?"

"He must," he answered. "It's the only way out, I think. We can't go
across this wilderness, so it's safer to await developments here."

We hadn't long to wait. From a point directly opposite our position, and
at a distance that we judged to be two hundred yards away, a bobbing
light broke into the wall of darkness and moved directly toward us.
Holman gripped my arm and pulled me forward to the stone tables upon
which the skulls were laid, and side by side we crouched and waited.

It was the ship's lantern that Soma had carried in front of Leith that
was now moving upon us. Its yellow light showed the parrot-feather mat
and headdress of the big Kanaka, while the hum of voices, which drifted
across the vast space of the cavern, informed us that the dancers who
had assisted at the ceremony were returning with Leith and the one-eyed
white man.

Holman's breath came hot upon my cheek. There was no necessity for
speech. I knew that he intended to seize the first opportunity to
attack, and that opportunity was at hand. Behind the bobbing lamp that
was approaching us by an irregular trail, as if Soma was winding in and
out amidst stone supports similar to the one that sheltered us, was the
brute who held us in his grip, and after the events we had witnessed it
seemed impossible to reconcile his actions with anything that smacked of
decency or honesty.

[Illustration: "Behind the bobbing lamp was the brute who held us in
his grip."]

I attempted to drop on my knees at that minute, but the moment was
disastrous to the ambush which we had planned. As I moved my hand
forward I dislodged a skull that was evidently resting upon a shelf
somewhat higher than the one before us. With a noise that appeared
terrific in that place, the object crashed down upon the stone, and the
bobbing lantern halted about fifteen paces in front of us.

Leith broke the silence that followed. "What was that?" he asked.

"A bat," answered Soma.

"I don't think so," droned Leith. "Lift up the light."

Soma raised the lantern high above his head, and as he did so Holman
fired.

The echoes were terrific. High in the vaulted roof of the place echoes
answered each other with the sharp reports of Maxims, and the thick air
shivered.

Leith's voice roared an order. "Put out the light!"

Soma immediately crashed the lantern upon the ground, and I heard Holman
groan.

"I missed him!" he whispered. "Move along a little, Verslun; they've got
a line on our position."

We didn't move a minute too soon. Half a dozen shots broke out from the
spot where the light of the lantern had been suddenly quenched, and we
fired twice and shifted ground the moment we pulled the triggers.

But the opposition guessed the direction of our sidestep. A bullet
lifted my hat into the darkness, and, as I scrambled away, a hand
touched my thigh and was immediately taken away.

I felt Holman's body on the other side, and then, clubbing the big Colt,
I drove it down through the darkness at a point that my imagination
suggested would be the most likely place to find the head of the
stranger whose hand touched my thigh. The blow missed, and as I made a
kangaroo-like jump sideways, a spurt of flame blazed out within a yard
of my face.

I fired immediately, and the soft _plop_ of a body settling into the dry
dust upon the floor convinced me that I had settled one of our enemies.

For about ten minutes after that there was no more firing. My skin, more
than my ears, brought to my brain the information that there were others
somewhere in the thick darkness, but the little air tremors that came to
me were so faint that it was impossible to tell in which direction they
were. I had lost all trace of Holman. With extreme caution I crawled
toward what I thought to be the spot where I had left him, but my
groping fingers found only the fragments of bone that covered the dusty
floor of the charnel house.

I sat in the dust and endeavoured to make my addled brains direct me as
to the best course to pursue. The silence led me to infer that Leith and
his party, who were evidently familiar with the cave, were making for
the passage by which we had entered the place, and a cold chill passed
over me as my imagination pictured Leith, One Eye, and the oily dancers
waiting for Holman and me in the narrow corridor. To escape from the
place immediately was our only chance, and with a courage born of terror
conjured up by the thoughts of imprisonment in that place of skulls, I
started to crawl rapidly into the dark.

I had not proceeded half a dozen yards when my hand touched a bare leg,
and I drew back hastily. With madly pounding heart I crouched in the
dust, waiting for an attack, but as I waited I convinced myself that the
leg had not been drawn back when my fingers encountered it. With my
right hand clubbing my revolver, I reached my left out cautiously, and
once again my fingers came in contact with the bare limb. The fear left
me at that moment. I was back at the spot where I had fired at an unseen
foe some fifteen minutes before, and the body near me was the victim of
my lucky bullet.

Carefully I felt the dead man. He wore a large feather cloak and a tall
headdress, and I concluded that he was one of the wriggling brutes whose
performance we had watched in the cave. In the dust, beside the body, my
fingers found his revolver, and the fact that he had been armed at the
moment his party came unexpectedly upon us was more proof, if proof were
needed, that Leith's tactics were anything but straightforward.

Securing the revolver, I started to crawl away, but a sudden inspiration
came to me. I stripped the parrot-feather mat and the headdress from
the corpse and donned them over my own clothing. In the darkness
recognition was made through the fingers, and as there were eight
enemies in the cavern and only one friend, I considered that the danger
I ran of receiving a bullet from Holman was more than counterbalanced by
the protection that the dancer's costume would give me if I ran against
the groping hands of Leith or his gang.

After a wearisome crawl I touched the wall of the cavern, and standing
upright I debated for a moment whether I should move to the right or the
left. I had no definite idea as to the position of the opening through
which we had entered the place, and I dreaded the weary circuit of the
cavern which I would be compelled to make if I turned in the wrong
direction. It was possible that the corridor was within a few yards of
me, and if I turned away from it I might get lost in other passages
leading to the long gallery where the dance of death had taken place.

I decided to move to the right, and with one hand upon the cold wall I
stumbled forward. If Holman was still a prisoner, Edith Herndon and her
sister were entirely unprotected, and my tormenting imagination made me
throw prudence to the winds. I had to reach the camp before Leith or any
of his evil bodyguard arrived, and, becoming reckless of the terrors of
the dark, I ran blindly in my desperate desire to find the path into the
open air.

I cannoned into a man who was standing with his back to the wall of the
cave, and before I could lift my arm his fingers had gripped my throat.
For a second we struggled, then he released his grip and murmured some
words in a dialect that I did not understand. His hand had touched the
parrot-feather mat that I had drawn about my shoulders, and he was
convinced that I was one of his own companions.

Still holding my shoulder he pushed me a pace or two forward, and
instinctively I knew that I was in the corridor. The faintest tremor
disturbed the heavy air, and a wild surge of joy rushed through my
being. The place of skulls had brought a terror upon me that swept away
my reason, but the knowledge that I was on the way to the open, where I
could fill my lungs with God's pure air, acted as a powerful
restorative.

As my guide's fingers slipped from my shoulder, I stood still and
listened. His heavy breathing was distinctly audible, and with a prayer
to Providence to guide my right hand, I brought the butt of the heavy
revolver down through the darkness. It must have caught him squarely
upon the crown, for he dropped without a groan.

"Holman!" I shrieked. "Where are you, Holman? The passage is here! This
way, quick!"

A revolver cracked within two feet of me, and the bullet ripped through
the tall headdress. I crouched quickly and ran along the corridor. There
was no answering cry from Holman, and although it was possible that he
would not disclose his whereabouts by replying to my yell, I decided
that I could do little to help him in the impenetrable darkness.
Besides, Edith Herndon and her sister were in danger, and the dawn was
coming rapidly. Throwing off the parrot-feather mat, which had served me
to such good purpose, I raced headlong toward the opening. A few bats,
returning early to their sleeping quarters, banged against my face, but
the way was otherwise clear, and with a cry of joy I rushed through the
mouth of the passage into the calm, clear night.


[Illustration]


CHAPTER XIV

BACK TO THE CAMP

The path, with its coating of coral lime, stretched before me, and I
fled along it. The moon had disappeared behind the hills, but the limed
track was quite distinct. My watch had stopped, but I judged that there
was still a good two hours before the dawn, and I ran as I had never run
in my life. I recognized what sort of feeling I possessed for Edith
Herndon as I raced through the lonely night, and I reproached myself
bitterly for leaving the camp. I became convinced that Leith had set out
for the resting place of the Professor and his two daughters after
placing guards at the inner opening of the corridor to see that Holman
and I did not escape from the cavern, and I realized the terror which
the two girls would experience when the big brute reached the camp.

"The devil!" I muttered. "The fiendish brute!"

A chuckle came from a boulder beside the track, and Holman's cheery
voice set my pulses beating.

"You frightened the dickens out of me, Verslun," he cried. "I thought
you were one of the evil legion. Gee! I'm glad to see you."

"How did you get out?" I gasped as we rushed on together. "I thought I
left you in the cavern."

"It was a good job you didn't," he retorted. "There was a husky nigger
at the outside entrance of the passage, and he gave me the fight of my
life. Get off this track; they might be after us at any moment."

"Do you think that Leith has made for the camp?" I asked.

"I suppose he has. We must move as fast as we can, Verslun. If he
reaches there before us we'll deserve any fate that will come to us. We
shouldn't have left them."

The utterance of the conviction that had come to both of us brought a
silence, and we rushed across the boulder-strewn ground that we had
crossed earlier in the night. We felt certain that Leith knew of a surer
and safer path back to the camp, but it was useless for us to hunt for a
new trail at that moment. We would have to find our way down the nearly
perpendicular wall up which we had climbed after leaving the crevice
through which we had viewed the death dance, and, to me at least, the
recollections of that path brought feelings that were by no means
pleasant. But Leith was making toward the camp, and the horrible
thoughts aroused by the spectacle which we had witnessed in the early
night muzzled the thrills which the dangers of the climb sent through
our bodies. The dance had terrified the Fijian by arousing thoughts of
the deeds that would happen in its wake, and Kaipi's terror became a
gauge for us to measure its dread significance.

We reached the cliffs and ran up and down the ledge in a vain search for
the spot where we had clawed our way to the top. Not that we thought the
finding of the place would solve the problem of the descent. It was hard
to conceive of a more difficult way than the one by which we had come,
and as if he had suddenly come to the conclusion that any other path
would be preferable, Holman dropped upon his knees and lowered himself
upon a ledge that was immediately below.

"Come on, Verslun!" he cried, in a choked voice that was altogether
different from his cheery tones. "If there is no path we must roll down.
There's the first flush of the dawn!"

I looked toward the east and groaned. The faint grayish tint unnerved
me. Although it was possible that Leith had already reached the camp,
still we had promised the two girls that we would return by daylight,
and although we had a hazy notion as to what we would do when we did
reach their side, the longing to get there made us oblivious of danger.
I swung down on to the crumbling foothold that supported Holman, and
breathlessly we began to scramble toward the valley.

It was a mad climb. Holman exhibited a temerity that bordered on
insanity. With reckless daring he scrambled down upon dangerous niches
that jutted out upon the face of the cliff, and my repeated warnings
fell upon deaf ears. A task that would have appeared impossible when
viewed in daylight, lost half of its terrors because we only vaguely
apprehended the dangers that threatened us when a layer of shale
crumbled beneath our feet. Our descent became a wild toboggan. Slipping
and sliding, clutching wildly at every little projection that would
decrease the speed at which we were travelling, we rolled with bruised
and bleeding bodies on to a small platform, and lay half stunned for a
moment, as a thousand pieces of rock, dislodged by our bodies, bounced
past us into the valley.

Holman picked himself up and looked around. The pink flush had deepened
in the east, and nearby objects were discernible.

"By all the gods! we are back on the ledge near the crevice!" he cried.
"Come along and we'll hunt for Kaipi."

It was wonderful how we had pulled up in our slide near the place where
we had witnessed the performance that prompted us to make the ascent.
But there was no mistake about the spot. As we crawled along the
platform we found that we had landed not more than twenty feet from the
crevice through which we had witnessed the blood-curdling "tivo," and we
hurried toward the spot where we had left the Fijian, whose nerves had
been upset by the glimpse he had had of the strange antics of the
dancers.

But Kaipi was not at the spot where we had left him. Whether his fears
had increased to such an extent that they had forced him to leave the
place, or whether he had come to the conclusion that we had returned to
the camp by some other route, we could not determine; so wasting no time
on useless conjecture we hurried toward the big maupei tree up which we
had climbed to reach the ledge.

But Holman's hurry proved disastrous. He had escaped the dangers of the
cliff descent to meet an accident when he had sufficient light to see
what he was about. In reaching for the limb of the tree that threshed
against the cliff, he lost his footing, and before I could grip him he
went crashing through the foliage to the ground, some fifty feet below!

I thought that I was an hour descending that tree, but I could not have
been more than three minutes if my skinned legs could be relied upon as
evidence of speed. I found Holman in a thorny tangle, and as I dragged
him into the open he groaned loudly and endeavoured to get upon his
feet.

"Are you hurt?" I questioned.

"No, no!" he cried. "I'm not hurt, Verslun. Get me on my feet, man.
Quick! For the love of God, quick!"

I gripped his shoulders and he managed to stand upright. The dawn came
with tropic suddenness at that moment, and I saw that he was bleeding
from a nasty wound above the right temple, while he limped painfully as
I helped him across a small cleared patch near the tree.

"I've hurt my leg," he cried, "but I'm going to get to the camp. If I
fall, Verslun, I want you to lend me a hand. Promise to help me, will
you? She--Miss Barbara, you know, old man. She is everything to me. Give
me a hand if I tumble down."

"I promise," I answered, and he wrung my hand as we started off through
the clawing, scratching vines that tripped us up as we tried to fight
our way forward.

If we had thought on the night before that the quarter mile of country
that lay between the camp and the rocky wall was a difficult stretch to
negotiate, we were more than doubly certain of its impenetrable
character now that daylight had come. How we had ever managed to get
through it in the darkness was a mystery that we tried to solve as we
attempted to make our way back. The place was a mad riot of thorny
undergrowth, laced and bound with vines that were as strong as wire
hawsers. The lianas appeared human to us; they lassoed our legs and
flung us sprawling upon our faces whenever we tried to quicken our
speed. Thorns of a strange fishhook variety drove their barbed points
into us, and each yard of the tortuous path that we cut through the
devilish vines was marked by a scrap of our clothing, which the
tormenting thorns seemed to wave aloft as an emblem of victory.

"He'll beat us!" gasped Holman. "I'm all in, Verslun; that fall has
finished me."

"Keep at it!" I said. "We must be near the camp by now."

"We've walked three miles," muttered Holman. "We've lost our way."

"No, we haven't!" I cried. "We've struck a bad patch, but we'll get
there soon."

The youngster clenched his teeth and endeavoured to forget the agony of
his leg, but the effort taxed his courage.

"We'll do it," I said. "Don't let the brute beat us."

"I--I won't!" he stammered. "If it was anything but my leg! Verslun!"

He fell on his face, and I helped him up, but once again he collapsed.
The injured limb made it impossible for him to stand or even crawl.

"You get ahead," he cried hoarsely. "Leave me, Verslun! Leave me here!"

"But I'd never find you again," I protested.

"Yes, you would! I'll crawl out after a few hours' rest. Run to the
camp, and shoot--shoot the devil the moment you put your eyes on him!"

I took a quick glance at the matted walls of the green creepers that
hedged us in on all sides. Holman was in the last stages of exhaustion,
and I reasoned quickly. If I left him in the middle of the thorny tangle
that encompassed us, it would be utterly impossible for me to find him
again, and he would probably perish from thirst. If I rushed away I
would be leaving him to certain death, and although our prospects of
leaving the island alive did not look too bright at that moment, I
considered that I would be making his demise a certainty by leaving him
in the maze.

I stopped, gripped him round the waist, and with a great effort managed
to lift him upon my shoulder. Holman's actions did not help me as I
struggled beneath him. He kicked like a madman when he understood what
I intended to do, but I held him in spite of his protests.

"Leave me here!" he screamed. "Go ahead by yourself, Verslun! What's the
use of taking me?"

"You're coming, so you can stop kicking," I muttered. "Take your fingers
out of my eyes."

But Holman's struggles ceased then, and his head fell backward. The pain
of his leg had made the plucky youngster swoon away, and with a prayer
upon my lips I sprang again at the bulwark of vicious creepers.

I have a very vague recollection of the remainder of that trip. In my
subconscious mind I have memories of an insane struggle with a jungle
that was alive, of a fight with thorny creepers that pursued us. I
became convinced that those vines were alive, because the same thorns
that we had passed hours before rose up again in our path and waved the
scraps of bloody clothing that they had torn from Holman and myself.

At last, half insane with anxiety for the safety of the girls and our
own struggles, we staggered blindly into the patch of cleared land upon
which the camp had been pitched on the previous evening. It was
impossible to mistake the site. The embers of the big fire were still
smoking and we stared with sweat-blinded eyes at the place where the
girls' tent had been standing when we rushed off with Kaipi to
investigate the light in the hills. But there was no trace of the girls
or the Professor. Leith had got ahead of us, and the big brute had
rushed the crazy scientist and his two daughters toward the hills that
stood up black and defiant above the sea of green vegetation.


[Illustration]


CHAPTER XV

A DAY OF SKIRMISHING

We lay for a few moments upon the soft grass, then Holman crawled on
hand and knees to the little spring of cold water and bathed the wound
upon his temple and his injured leg. The water revived him, and after a
brief rest he got to his feet and stared at the festooned trees that
surrounded the spot.

"I'm ready, Verslun," he muttered. "Which way did they go?"

I pointed to the marks made in the soft ground by the shoes of the two
girls, and Holman limped forward.

"But we can't follow this fashion," I protested.

"Why not?"

"We'll be shot down before we get within half a mile of them. Leith
cannot know that we have escaped from the cavern or he would have left
some one here to interview us."

"Well, we can't do any high-class tracking in this country," said the
youngster grimly. "If we stray six feet from the trail we are lost. We
had better trust to fortune and go ahead."

It was impossible to do anything else. The route by which the carriers
had marched from the camping ground was perfectly clear while we
followed their footsteps, but if we diverged ever so slightly the thick
veils of verdure hid the path from our eyes. To follow the party we
would have to hold to the trail and take the chances of an ambush which
Leith would certainly prepare for us the moment he knew we had escaped
from the Cavern of Skulls. It would be easy for him to set his one-eyed
white partner to shoot us down as we staggered along the trail which
Soma or one of the carriers had blazed with an axe.

"They cannot have more than three hours' start of us," cried Holman.
"Give me your arm, Verslun. Now let us move as fast as we can."

"But this is puerile," I protested. "We'll be running our heads into the
noose."

"I don't care if we do. I want to get near Leith."

"But we'll never get near by running after him in this fashion. If we
could find some way to get in front of him and wait."

"But what will happen to the girls?"

"Will our death prevent it?" I snapped. "If we rush after him in the
open we'll throw our chances away."

I am a sailor, absolutely ignorant of jungle knowledge, but I had sense
enough to know that Leith would not leave his rear exposed for a moment
after he had received word from the cave. I tried to recall stories of
extraordinary trailing feats as we stumbled forward, but I became
convinced that all the marvellous performances I had ever read of had
been accomplished under conditions that were altogether different from
those that confronted us upon the Isle of Tears. An open piece of
country would have been a sight of joy to our eyes that were weary of
the everlasting mesh of green which encompassed us like the tentacles of
a malignant fate. The green, sweaty leaves, the fat, bloated pods, and
the lengths of pythonesque runners produced a mental nausea. The
vegetation appeared to us to be vicious. Its very luxuriance produced
that fear of the wild which grips one in tropical countries but which is
never felt in lands situated in the temperate zones.

We had not covered a hundred yards of the path when Holman pounced upon
a strip of white bark that waved to us from the thorn of a lawyer-vine
crossing the track. A few pencilled words covered the smooth side of the
strip, and we absorbed them in a single glance.

"'We're prisoners now,' muttered Holman, reading the few words in a
whisper. 'The brute has declared himself. Barbara.'"

The boy turned to me, his face all blood-smeared and haggard, and for a
moment we stared at the strip of bark. There had been no doubt in our
minds concerning Leith's intentions from the time that Kaipi brought us
the message which Soma had dropped, but the knowledge that the brute had
declared himself to the Professor and the two girls brought us a most
horrible feeling. In my own case I had never experienced such a
sensation. The strange rites connected with the "tivo" in the long cave
had laid a foundation upon which my imagination piled skyscrapers of
horror. If I could have fixed my mind upon a definite fate that would be
theirs if they were not rescued from the big brute's clutches, I would
have found relief, but my inability to do that left me a victim to
thoughts that were enough to deprive one of his reason. We looked upon
the island as the ceremonial place for rites that were stamped out in
the groups where the missionary had pushed himself, and the message from
Barbara Herndon became a mental piledriver to ram home a thousand
doubts that had obtained a footing in our minds.

"Come on!" cried Holman. "If we don't catch up with him I'll go mad!"

He turned to hurry along the narrow path, but out of the silence behind
us came a shout that caused us to dive promptly into the bushes. The
whoop came from the direction of the camping ground, and we had hardly
crouched in the undergrowth when a nude native crashed through the vines
and raced past our hiding place. He was followed by two more, the three
running at top speed, heads forward, and their chests heaving in a
manner that suggested they had come some distance.

In the glimpse we caught of them as they dashed past we came to the
conclusion that they were three of the "tivo" dancers, and as we watched
their bare brown backs disappear in the creepers we observed something
which our position on the previous evening had prevented us from seeing.
The backs of the three were tattooed, not with the common line
tattooing, but with short scars that ran down the spine, making a ridged
representation of a centipede, and as they passed I remembered that the
Professor, when taking a photograph of the stone table on the previous
morning, had commented on the same peculiar pattern which he had
discovered upon one of the huge supporting pillars.

"They've come to tell Leith that we have escaped," whispered Holman.

"And they'll be on our trail the moment they give him the news."

"All right, we'll be ready for them. How much ammunition have you?

"Three cartridges," I replied.

"And I have four. We must make those seven--look out! There's another
beggar coming!"

We dropped quickly out of sight and peered through the leaves. Holman
was right. Some one else was coming along the path, but the newcomer was
exercising much more prudence than the three dancers. Judging by the
little intervals of silence that followed the slight noises made by the
breaking of twigs, he was investigating each yard of the way.

A woolly head at last appeared through the network, and our nerves
relaxed at the big brown eyes that rolled fearfully. The timorous
stranger was Kaipi!

The Fijian was shaking with fear when we dragged him into the bushes. In
halting words he told the story of his experiences of the night, and
Holman and I listened. Kaipi had waited upon the ledge till a few hours
before the dawn, and then he had made for the camp. With much better
luck than we had struck, he reached there before daylight, but fearful
of the happenings which would follow in the wake of the devil dance, he
had taken up a post of observation in a neighbouring tree and awaited
events.

Leith, according to the Fijian, had arrived at dawn, accompanied by Soma
and the one-eyed white man, and the big brute had immediately
interviewed the Professor. Kaipi's actions, as he mimicked the elderly
scientist, convinced us that the interview was not pleasant to the
archaeologist, and it was evident that it was at that moment Leith had
declared himself as Barbara Herndon stated in her note.

"He kick up plentee big row," explained Kaipi. "He kick porter men an'
make damn big noise outside missee tent. They come out speakee him, he
slap big missee in face, drive 'em off."

Holman was crashing through the bushes before Kaipi had finished his
recital, and I followed him, with the excited Fijian bringing up the
rear. Leith was rushing the Professor and his daughters toward the black
hills and we had to do something immediately.

For over an hour we stumbled along the track, making no effort to keep
under cover in case Leith should have prepared an ambush. It was useless
to argue with Holman, and my own feelings were such that I preferred to
take the risks of the route which Soma's axe had cut, to the delays
which the task of forcing our own passage through the labyrinth would
bring upon us. Prudence was thrust into the background by the intense
hate we entertained for the devil who had entrapped us.

It was near midday when our pursuit met with an interruption. A revolver
cracked in a clump of wild ginger directly in front, and we took cover
immediately. The bullet had whizzed close to Holman's head, and as we
lay panting in the ribbon-grass we congratulated ourselves on the fact
that we had been met with a single shot instead of a volley. We had
taken a big chance and had come off lucky. It was impossible for Leith's
party to be very far ahead, and as we watched the ginger clump we
wondered how we could circumvent the sharpshooter.

After about five minutes of absolute quiet Kaipi turned his head and
pointed to the rear, and Holman and I listened intently. The Fijian's
sharper ears had detected slight sounds behind us, and as we strained
the silence we came to the conclusion that the enemy had stealthily
worked their way around us, and were now creeping like snakes through
the maze with the hope that they would take us unawares.

We started to worm our way to the right, and our hatred of the infernal
island, where we were reduced to the condition of burrowing moles,
increased. Our eyes were practically useless. We had to depend upon
hearing alone, and when a white man pits his ears against those of a
native he finds that he has been suffering from partial deafness without
being aware of the fact. A dozen times we shifted ground on a signal
from Kaipi, whose head was continually to the earth, and that game of
hide and seek drove us frantic. Leith was hurrying toward the hills
while we were crawling backward and forward through the undergrowth to
escape a few natives who pursued their tactics with a persistency that
was maddening. The fact that the pursuers had the advantage put a raw
edge upon our tempers, and after an hour spent upon hands and knees
Holman resolutely refused to shift his ground in response to Kaipi's
signals. I was just as tired of the wormlike attitude that we were
compelled to adopt, and I waited beside Holman while the Fijian slipped
away through the creepers after warning us by many eloquent signals that
one of the search party was creeping toward us.

Holman had a "let-'em-all-come" expression upon his face that would have
been amusing at any other time, and kneeling with our backs to each
other we endeavoured to peer through the leafage to get a glimpse of the
foe.

We remained like that for about ten minutes; then our attention was
attracted to a point about eighteen inches to the right. The dry leaves
were pushed quietly aside, but instead of a head appearing, as we
expected, a bare brown leg was thrust through the creepers and remained
stationary.

The leg fascinated us. Kaipi had moved in the opposite direction, and we
were certain that the limb belonged to one of our enemies. The naked
savage was worming his way upon his stomach, and the position
immediately brought to our minds a picture of the scene in the long
gallery. When it came to a game of this sort we would be hopelessly
outclassed by a batch that, through assiduous training, slipped along
with the ease of serpents.

Holman held his revolver in readiness and watched the leg. It was
difficult to judge the position of the native's body, and the scarcity
of ammunition made us hesitate before firing a shot. The leg was pushed
farther out of the leafy tangle, and as it came toward him a change
passed over Holman's face. He handed his revolver to me, crouched on his
thighs and sprang!

There was something primitive about the action, something which caused
my heart to throb as I watched him take the pantherlike spring. On the
previous evening the youngster had expressed a desire to throttle Leith,
and the same desire had gripped him when he watched the leg come through
the vines. The devilishness of the batch made shooting a tame way of
obtaining revenge, and I possessed the same itchiness of the fingers
which had prompted Holman to take the wild leap. There was a joy in
throttling such a brute, and I delighted in the grit of the boy.

The affair was dramatic in its swift and silent ending. The native,
taken entirely unawares, had no chance against the angry antagonist who
had landed upon his back. A faint gurgle proved to me that Holman's
fingers had found the neck of the other, and in an incredible short time
the struggle was over.

We parted the bushes and examined the body. It was one of the three nude
natives that had rushed by us on the trail a few hours before, and he
clasped in his right hand a long knife of New Zealand greenstone that
had been inlaid with gold in an intricate design. We had never seen such
a weapon. The crude knives that I had seen throughout the islands were
not to be compared to the wonderfully polished blade that had been
intended to free either Holman or myself from all earthly cares, while
the metalwork showed a craftmanship that made one wonder how many
centuries had elapsed since the Polynesian artist who had fashioned the
weapon had been laid in the Cavern of Skulls. The sinnet work and the
parquetry of split bamboo, which comprise the highest handicraft of the
present-day islander, could hardly be classed with the exceedingly
beautiful work upon the blade.

Holman turned up the end of the haft, pointed to a delicate design of a
centipede, and then looked down at the back of the savage upon the
ground. The similarity of the two designs was immediately apparent, but
while the one on the greenstone had been executed by an artist, the
figure upon the back of the dancer was a crude example of scar-tattooing
that required some imagination to puzzle out what object it was supposed
to represent. As we glanced at each other the significance of the
serpentlike dance, the marks upon the bodies of the dancers and on the
knife and stone table, was plainly evident. The island was sacred to the
centipede, and in some way Leith had made himself a chief wizard amongst
the few savages who still performed the rites which had once made the
Isle of Tears a place of particular importance to the surrounding
groups.

Holman took the long greenstone knife, and we crept quietly away in the
direction taken by Kaipi. We had one enemy less upon the island. Not
counting the carriers, we reckoned that the active opposition comprised
Leith, Soma, the one-eyed white man, and either two or three of the
"tivo" dancers, and these made a formidable batch. The dancers were huge
natives, possessing all the characteristics of the Tongans, while Leith,
Soma, and the one-eyed white man possessed more than ordinary strength.

"We must try to find the path," whispered Holman. "This delay will give
Leith a chance to get to the hills."

But the finding of the path was no easy matter. So that we would be well
out of the sphere of the companions of the man who carried the
greenstone blade, we worked our way for about one hundred yards through
the leafy maze before attempting to search for it, and that search
proved a long and tiresome one. It is impossible to describe the network
of wanton vegetation through which we struggled during the hot
afternoon. Every kind of shrub and tree was woven into an ungodly tangle
by the crawling, leaping vines that shut out the sky and made it
impossible to see a person standing only a few feet away.

We stayed our appetites with wild guavas and yams, and moved slowly
forward in the direction that we surmised that Leith was moving in. Our
inability to find the path left us the only alternative of pushing on
toward the hills in the hope that we would intercept the party before it
reached the caverns which made the basalt cliffs a secure hiding place.
Once the arch villain reached the caves it would be a difficult matter
to locate him, and we damned the crazy brain of the Professor as we
thought of the lonely position of the Isle of Tears. If the captain of
_The Waif_ was in league with Leith it would be absolutely impossible to
obtain help to rescue the girls and their father, and we would be
marooned upon the island for an indefinite period.

It was within a few minutes of sunset when our despondency was suddenly
swept away. The silence of the jungle was disturbed by a shrill voice
that protested loudly against something which the owner was called upon
to do, and our hearts punched our ribs with mighty blows as we crawled
forward. The voice belonged to Professor Clinton Herndon of California.


[Illustration]


CHAPTER XVI

THE STONE TABLE

Our feelings can hardly be described as we crept closer to the spot from
which the scientist's angry protest had gone up through the silence like
a thin wire. The loneliness of that day had been appalling. I know that
Edith Herndon's quiet face was continually before my mental vision,
while Holman's actions convinced me that he was suffering acutely. If we
were certain that Leith intended to do no wrong to the party, the fact
that he was within speaking distance of the two girls was particularly
distressing after the knowledge we had gained in the night. With extreme
caution we wormed our way forward, the Professor's piping voice acting
as a verbal signpost in helping us to locate the spot where he was
engaged in holding the argument. We were close enough to hear his words,
and our nerves were on the highest tension as he shrieked a defiance
against some person near. We had only one thought as to who that person
could be. The Professor was piling charges of treachery upon the head of
a listener, and there was only one head on the Isle of Tears that
contained enough villainy to make the charges possible!

"I will not sign the papers!" cried the scientist. "I want my liberty,
sir! You are a scoundrel! Where are my daughters?"

Holman, creeping a few inches in front, had drawn his revolver. The
blood pounded madly; through my brain. We were within a few yards of
Leith, and even as we moved snakily forward, the heavy bass voice of the
scoundrel came to our ears.

"You stupid old fool!" he growled. "You can demand all day and all night
if it does you any good. Do you know who I am?"

"I know you are a ruffian!" snapped the Professor. "I know you are a
rogue who has no respect for his word and honour. I know you are a
coward who insults women!"

"Go on," mocked Leith.

"I've been a fool!" cried the old man. "I was blinded to everything
through my love of science. Now I know that you lied. I know you brought
me here to rob me and insult my daughters."

The sun had set, and the twilight made it difficult for us to locate the
two men. But we were close. When Leith spoke again, his voice sounded
so near that I started involuntarily, while Holman, resting upon one
hand, parted the branches with the barrel of the revolver which he
gripped in the other.

"But you will admit when all is over that I have shown you some
wonderful things," sneered Leith.

The Professor was silent a moment, as if endeavouring to fathom the
meaning of the words, and we moved a few inches closer in the little
interval.

"How?" asked the scientist.

Holman's hand that gripped the revolver remained motionless. Through a
rift in the leafy curtain I caught a glimpse of a bulk that was within a
yard of our hiding place, and I knew that the youngster was waiting for
the brute to speak to make certain that he was covering the right man.
The silence was nerve-destroying.

"Why," said Leith, speaking slowly and distinctly, "you are in the hands
of the Wizards of the Centipede. I am their head, and if you are not
extremely lucky you will make a sacrifice to--"

Something fell upon my head with tremendous force at that moment, but as
the blow descended Holman fired, and even as I fought to escape the grip
of the strong fingers that twined themselves around my neck, I realized
with a great wave of happiness that the bulk in front of me had pitched
forward when the shot had shattered the silence.

In a wild bedlam of oaths and shouts we fought and struggled. The "tivo"
dancers had followed upon our track through the long afternoon, and the
time that we had lost in locating Leith had given them an opportunity to
come up with us. In the gloom we threshed backward and forward, but our
efforts to escape were vain. The one-eyed white man appeared
mysteriously out of the shadows to help the huge natives, and in three
minutes Holman and I were tied hand and foot and stretched out near the
unfortunate Professor, who, with bound limbs, was sitting up in the
centre of the grassy clearing where Leith and he had been exchanging
personalities. There were no signs of the girls, and I wondered, as my
brain recovered from the effects of the blow, what had happened to them.

Holman's voice put a question that roused me from my half stupor.

"Did I kill him?" cried the young fellow. "Tell me!"

The question was answered by a stream of blasphemy that came from Leith
himself. The big ruffian had fallen into a bunch of ribbon-grass, but
now, with the assistance of One Eye, he got to his feet and staggered
toward us. From the actions of his white partner, I surmised that
Holman's bullet had struck him in the left shoulder, and the surmise
proved true. The attack of the dancers had jerked the youngster's arm,
and the wound was twelve inches above the point that Holman had aimed
at.

With One Eye and the three dancers holding him upon his feet, and the
blood dripping from the wound, he kicked us furiously, howling
unspeakable imprecations as he drove his heavy boots against our ribs.
We had met the real Leith at last. The devilishness that we had sensed
behind the lustreless eyes blazed forth in full fury, and to me,
familiar as I was with all the weird and wonderful curse phraseology
used by the skippers and mates of the island boats, his anathemas
impressed me as being the most blood curdling oaths that had ever come
to my ears. The man was a devil at that minute. His tremendous strength
made the restraining efforts of the other four useless, and we were in
danger of being kicked to death if a merciful interruption had not
stopped him. The horrified Professor, who was sitting upright during the
exhibition of brutality, lifted up his voice in protest, and his shrill
denunciations brought a cry out of the surrounding gloom.

"Father! father! Where are you, father?"

It was Edith Herndon's voice, and the note of agony in the words
maddened me. I drove my teeth into Leith's left leg as he stood quiet
for a second near my head, and the brute used the sole of his right
boot to loosen my grip. There were no gentle ways about the devil. As
Edith's cry was repeated, he had administered a farewell kick to Holman
and me, and shouted an order in the same strange dialect which the
dancer had used in addressing me in the Cavern of the Skulls when the
robe of parrot feathers had saved my life. The three natives immediately
gripped us by the heels and we were dragged off into the bushes.

It seemed to me that Edith Herndon's cry was repeated again and again as
the natives dragged me at a jog trot through the undergrowth. There was
untold anguish in the cry. It was plain that Leith had taken the
unfortunate old Professor some distance from his daughters so that they
could not listen to the conversation, and the scientist's high-pitched
protests against our maltreatment had caused the terror-stricken girls
to think that Leith was ill-using their father. I imagined that the big
ruffian had rushed us away from the spot lest the two women would escape
from Soma and run to the assistance of their father, but I know that we
were thankful that the interruption put an end to the football tactics
in which the infuriated devil was indulging.

But we had escaped from the frying pan to find ourselves in the flames.
The three dancers felt that the Fates had given them a chance to avenge
their friend, and they took full advantage of the opportunity. So that
each would have a proper share in the burden, they placed us side by
side, strapped our ankles together, and then, passing a rope through the
straps, the three laid hold of it and set off through the night, towing
us behind with an absolute disregard for our feelings. They entered into
the fun of the thing. No Norwegian peasant ever towed home a Yule log
with a greater exhibition of joy than those savages displayed as they
hauled us through the thickets. They had a contempt for open places.
They chose the most intricate paths they could find, and if a tough
liana gripped Holman or me around the throat, the fiends found great fun
in straining upon the rope till the wire-like creepers gave way.

We suffered unbearable torture. Hour after hour we were jerked over the
ground. Our clothes were stripped from our backs, our faces were torn
and bloody from the thorns, and our tormented flesh protested through
every nerve against the treatment. Once Holman put a question in a
hoarse whisper.

"Where are they taking us?" he asked.

"God knows," I gasped.

"It's my fault, Verslun."

"Why?" I groaned.

"I missed him! I missed him! I----"

His voice died away in a choking sob, and I imagine he swooned away. As
we were being towed by the legs, I guessed that Holman was suffering
excruciating pain from the limb that he had injured by the fall from the
maupei tree, and the lapse into unconsciousness came as a blessed
relief. To me the rush through the jungle seemed a superlative
nightmare. My mind played tricks with me. I thought that the three black
forms, leaping along in front, were a trinity of devils who were ordered
to torture me for my stupidity in allowing Edith Herndon and her sister
to leave the yacht. Every creeper became a whip wielded by a mocking
phantom, and I am forced to confess that I have a vivid recollection of
crying to heaven for pardon for my criminal negligence. Every horror
that the happenings of the previous forty-eight hours had germinated
within my brain sprang into lusty being as my mind trembled upon the
abyss of insanity, and Edith Herndon was the person that the legion of
horrors threatened.

I came to my proper senses to find that our towing trinity had called a
halt. Holman was repeating a question over and over again, and I
endeavoured to moisten my dry throat so that I could answer.

"Where are we?" he groaned. "Where are we? Are you dead, Verslun? Open
your eyes and take a look around; my peepers are bunged up."

I managed to open my eyes, but I could see nothing but the encompassing
jungle. For a few minutes I thought that we were alone. Then I made out
the three figures crouched in front of us upon the grass. Their heads
were turned away from us, and they were facing the east, where the faint
luminous glow of the rising moon was just beginning to appear in the
sky.

The three were motionless. They were squatting upon their hams, and
their attitude seemed uncanny when I compared it with the mad film of
action which my mental machinery had recorded during the preceding
hours. They had stopped for some purpose, but that purpose I could not
determine.

"Are they there?" asked Holman.

"Yes," I murmured.

"What are they doing?"

"Sitting in a line staring at the hills."

The youngster gave a grunt, turned his head till he managed to wipe the
mud and blood from his eyes upon my shoulder, then he peered at the
silent three. Their motionless forms fascinated him. It was hard to
connect them with the three bounding devils who had brought us on a
gallop that was more painful than the bareback ride which the Polish
nobleman gave to the intriguing Mazeppa.

"What do you make of it?" he whispered.

"They're resting perhaps."

"Not them! They look as if they're hatching some new villainy."

Minute after minute crept by, but the three remained inactive. They took
no notice of our whispered conversation. No Hindu Yogis ever sat
meditating with the absolute immovability of the three, and as our
wounds stiffened under the cold night air, we became foolishly angry at
the wait. If we had to meet death, it would please us to get it over as
soon as possible.

"If I could have one more fling at them." groaned Holman. "By all that's
holy, Verslun, I feel that I could fight a million if these ropes were
off me."

He endeavoured to get his face down to the bandages on my wrists, but we
had been strapped in such a manner that it was impossible to reach any
of the ropes with our teeth, so we lay quiet and reviewed the legion of
tormenting thoughts that marched through our minds. The jungle, like the
three natives, seemed to be waiting for a happening. The silence was
more horrible than the thunder of an earthquake. It seemed to well out
from the silent three, till we longed with a great longing for some
terrific and prolonged noise to shiver it and send battalions of echoes
to chase it into the hills.

The moon peered above the black cliffs, and the surroundings became more
distinct. We were on the edge of a clearing, and there was something
vaguely familiar about the trees that our cramped position allowed us
to see. We felt certain that we had passed this place on our journey
from the yacht, and each minute that passed strengthened the conviction.

"Seems to me that I've seen that tree before," muttered Holman.

"I hold the same impression," I said.

"And those rocks," remarked the youngster. "Why, we're going back to
_The Waif!_"

The three natives rose together at that moment and gripped the rope. We
gave a joint groan of agony as our stiffened limbs were jerked forward,
and as we were pulled from the fringe of reed-like grass our exact
whereabouts were made known to us. Standing up against the moon, the rim
of the orb showing just above the massive top, was the great stone table
that Holman and I had climbed two nights before!


[Illustration]


CHAPTER XVII

BENEATH THE CENTIPEDE

The natives moved at a slow walk across the clearing, and for this
little indulgence we were exceedingly thankful. There was no grass
covering upon the bed of coral rock in the middle of which the singular
structure stood, and our bleeding bodies could have hardly stood a swift
gallop across the prickly surface. As it was we were immensely glad when
the trinity halted in front of the edifice.

"Say," murmured Holman, "do you remember what the Professor said about
this place the other night when he was speaking about sacrificial
altars?"

I groaned as an intimation that the subject was not a pleasant one, but
Holman wanted to make public admission that he had exhibited gross
ignorance in ridiculing the Professor's assertions.

"I thought he was handing it out too strong, Verslun," he murmured, "but
it strikes me now that he had the right dope about this infernal thing.
I believe they're going to settle us."

I groaned again. Holman's airy manner of discussing our predicament
annoyed me. I hated the Professor for making the remarks about
sacrificial stones when he drew comparisons between the table and Aztec
altars, because I now thought that the very fear planted within my brain
would carry a thought suggestion to the three devils who had us
prisoners. Under ordinary circumstances I am not deficient in physical
courage, but our position in front of the strange monument on the Isle
of Tears left me with the valour of a jack-rabbit. The terror generated
by the surroundings bit into my system like an acid.

"What I'm wondering at," continued Holman, "is about that guy that we
saw on the top of the place. How he got away was a mystery."

"It was," I replied. I didn't feel disposed to trust myself to make a
longer comment at that moment.

"Well, they're going to start operations," said the youngster. "We're
going to the top, Verslun."

It was plain that we were. Two of the natives had shinned up one of the
pillars by means of small notches in one corner, and now the other cut
the bands that tied us together, promptly attached Holman's feet to the
rope his comrades lowered, and signalled that all was ready by clapping
his hands. The youngster was quickly jerked upward, and in a few minutes
I was beside him on the moss-grown sloping surface of the immense stone.

The three dancers were evidently impressed with the importance of the
work they had in hand. Their movements on the stone became more
dignified and solemn. They moved around us in a manner that would have
provoked laughter at any other time, and we watched eagerly for
developments.

With much care they placed us side by side on the upper part of the
stone, but Holman's feet were turned to my head, and as we were placed
crosswise upon the inclined surface, my body was a few inches lower than
his. That we were to be sacrificed appeared to be a certainty at that
moment, but the method by which we were to be sent into eternity puzzled
us. Not one of the three had a weapon. The surface of the stone was as
bare as it was upon the night that we had investigated it, and we began
to think that death by starvation and thirst would probably be our fate.

But thoughts of such an ending were soon put aside. Two of the savages
slipped from the stone while the other dropped upon his stomach and hid
his face. That something was going to happen we felt certain, but we
could not discover the slightest clue that would guide our puzzled wits
to a solution. We expected death, but we could not guess in what manner
the job was to be performed.

"Looks as if something is coming, Verslun," cried Holman. "I was a fool
to miss him, old man, but I guess--oh, Gee!"

The final exclamation was caused by a happening immediately beside us. A
section of the moss-grown stone, about eight feet long and eighteen
inches in width, started to rise slowly, and when our astonished eyes
fell upon it we knew that we had the solution of the strange appearance
of the figure upon the table on the night we camped in its shadow.
Holman had seen this movable slab rise above the top of the table, but
it had returned to its groove before we had climbed the tree, and it had
fitted so closely into its moss-grown bed that we had been unable to
detect a crevice in the moonlight. We had been on the verge of a
discovery, but as we recalled the incident, lying there helpless, we
were doubtful if it would have saved us from the fate we expected. The
note which Soma had dropped gave full confirmation to all our suspicions
concerning Leith, yet we had been unable to hold our own against him.

One end of the slab remained stationary after it had risen a few inches
from its bed, but the other end, which was nearest us, went up and up,
pushed by some screwjack arrangement that lifted it with slow, jerky
movements till it was nearly upright. The moonlight fell upon the under
surface that was turned toward us, and we understood the manner in which
Leith's friends had arranged for us to make our exit from this world.
The bottom of the stone slab had been carved into a perfect
representation of a centipede, and as the slab remained stationary just
before it reached the perpendicular, I began to dive into my mental
reticule for the scraps of prayers that had been caught and held through
a rather checkered career in places where the efficacy of prayer was
looked upon with a cold eye.

The prostrate savage rose slowly when the movements of the slab had
ceased, and very tenderly he rolled Holman and me over the bed from
which the stone had been lifted. He pushed our bodies against the wooden
post that, fitting into a sliding groove on the body of the stone
centipede, had lifted the thing upright, and to make certain that we
would be in the exact centre of the depression when the stone came back
to its proper resting place, he strapped us carefully to the support
with pieces of ramie fibre, so that we could not move an inch. With
faces turned upward we stared at the carved figure above us, and the
insecure tenure we had upon life at that moment was impressed upon our
minds by the extreme caution which the officiating wizard exercised in
keeping his own body clear of the slab lest his brethren, who were
evidently operating the clumsy mechanism from some place nearby, should
let the stone centipede return to his home without giving him proper
warning.

At last he finished the business to his satisfaction and stepped
backward. My imagination made the thing above me tremble as I looked at
it with eyes of fear. The part of my body that spanned the depression
became numb, and I breathed with difficulty.

Holman broke the silence. "Good-bye, Verslun," he said cheerfully. "It's
mighty tough to go out like this, but it's the fortune of war."

I endeavoured to answer him, but the words, as if afraid of the horror
that loomed above me, refused to come out of my throat. The fiendish
manner in which we were to be killed unmanned me. The slab paralyzed
thought, and it seemed to me that only the inmost kernel of my being, a
very pin-point of the refined essence of life, was throbbing within my
body.

The officiating wizard stepped around us for a final survey. He glanced
keenly at the position of our bodies, and, evidently satisfied that the
centipede had every opportunity to make a good job, he flung himself
down upon his face and started to murmur softly in the strange dialect
which Leith had spoken when addressing the three earlier in the night,
and which the dancer had used in the Cavern of Skulls. I remember that I
tried during those few minutes to catch a word or two of the queer
tongue, and curiously enough, in that moment of extreme peril, I
endeavoured to connect it with some of the dialects I had heard during
my long stay in the islands. The soft muttering seemed to be a thread
connecting us with life itself, and I dreaded the moment it would cease.

I do not know how long the chant continued. It rose and fell, a soft
rhythmic murmur, and I prayed that it would never end. My ears sucked it
in as if it was a life line to which my soul was clinging, and I dimly
understood my eagerness to catch the sounds. My ability to do so seemed
to be wanted as proof to convince my half-paralyzed body that I was
still alive.

The low chant ended with a little throaty cry, and I shut my eyes tight
to save myself the final moment of agony which the falling of the stone
would bring. For an instant there was absolute silence, then some one
gripped me by the legs and pulled madly. The ramie fibre held my body to
the supporting post of the centipede, and I heard Holman give a muttered
order. A knife sawed the cords, a pair of hands gripped my heels and
flung me forward, and as I fell clear of the groove the stone horror
crashed back into its bed with a jolt that shook the huge table! I
opened my eyes to see Kaipi looking at the face of the dancer he had
stabbed in the back as the brute was muttering his prayer!

"Oh hell!" said the Fijian. "Me thought him Soma. Me made mistake! Me
going kill Soma, he kill Toni, Toni all same my brother, work long time
with me at Suva!"

"Hurry up and cut these ropes," cried Holman. "There are two more of
those devils and they'll be back before we get the cramp out of our
muscles."

Kaipi sprang to obey, but when our bonds were cut away, we found that we
could not get to our feet. Legs and arms were completely numbed, and the
many abrasions that we had come by during the towing process to which we
had been subjected made Kaipi's efforts to restore circulation by
rubbing a species of torture that would surely have earned the
commendation of Torquemada if it had been brought under his notice.

"Narrow squeak, Verslun," remarked Holman, as he endeavoured to get to
his knees. "I wonder where those two other devils went to work the
machinery."

"They must be close," I whispered. "Drag us over to the edge, Kaipi.
They'll surely come up to see how the job was done or to see what is
delaying their pal."

Kaipi helped us over to the edge of the table, and while he was doing so
he related briefly how he came to be on hand at the opportune moment.
Our little expedition to the stone table had passed the Fijian soon
after the trinity had taken us in tow, and Kaipi's eyes had mistaken the
biggest of the three natives for Soma. Revenge for Toni's death being
the one motive that inspired him, he had followed the procession,
watched from the bushes till the other two dancers had left Soma's
double with us on the top of the table, and had then climbed quietly up
and knifed the officiating wizard while that person was exhorting the
stone centipede to make a good job of Holman and me. The matter of our
rescue had been an afterthought. Strictly speaking, he deserved no great
amount of praise for dragging us out of danger, as he frankly admitted
that he was waiting for a good chance to attack the person who resembled
Soma, without having any particular worry whether the stone slab would
descend before the opportunity arrived.

"Never mind, Kaipi," said Holman, peering cautiously over the edge of
the table, "I'm satisfied that you were handy at the moment without
considering whether you came to help us or for some other purpose."

"Toni all the same brother to me," muttered the Fijian, dimly
understanding the meaning of the remark; "me kill Soma pretty damn
soon."

"Quite so," murmured Holman. "We'll give our consent to that operation,
but keep quiet for the present till our two friends come back to see how
neatly the old centipede fixed us."

We remained silent, but not inactive. As we waited for the missing pair
we rubbed our limbs carefully, and at the end of ten minutes we began to
feel alive. Our revolvers had been lost from our pockets during the mad
rush through the night--Leith had been too intent on kicking us to order
his guard to search us for arms--and now we had nothing but our bare
hands with which to do combat with a pair of dancers. But we thought we
could do a lot with bare hands when we glanced at the spot where the
stone centipede had crashed back to its bed, A vision of that devilish
carving standing above one in the moonlight was enough to stimulate a
person to herculean tasks when he understood that failure would bring
him again under its ghastly shadow.

For about twenty minutes we waited patiently. Kaipi had asserted that
the two savages had slipped into the jungle growth after they had left
the table, and it was evident that they had gone to some underground
passage that connected with one of the pillars of the altar, through
which the crude mechanism for lifting the stone slab had been operated.
With one eye always to the dramatic, the wizards of the long ago had
built the altar so that the common worshippers surrounding the place on
days when the centipede was called upon to mash some unfortunate victim
could not see how the slab was lifted, and would thus put the uplifting
of the thing down to supernatural agency. It was the tribal Houdin who
laid the foundation of many a strange belief amongst savage races.

"Must be waiting for him to come to them," said Holman. "We'll give them
a few minutes longer."

It was Kaipi's sharp eyes that made the discovery. The pair came
cautiously out of the bushes immediately underneath the tree which
Holman and I had climbed to obtain a view of the surface of the table
two nights before, and they crossed the clearing with hesitating steps.
They evidently expected the officiating wizard to announce in sporting
phraseology that the centipede had won the engagement with one swift
blow to the body, and when no news was forthcoming they were puzzled.

They confabbed in the centre of the clearing, and then hailed the table
in the strange tongue. Receiving no answer, they again debated with
much vigour, and, finally taking their courage in their hands, they came
forward with quickened steps.

We crept close to the edge, careful not to peer over while the pair were
climbing up. As far as I was aware we had no plans made for their
reception. Holman and I had no weapons, neither had the two dancers;
Kaipi had the ugly short-bladed knife with which he had dispatched
Soma's double.

The puffing of the climbing pair came to us. They came near and nearer.
A black arm came up over the edge of the table and clawed at the
moss-grown stone, but while Holman and I reached forward with the
intention of gripping the climber by the throat, Kaipi upset our plans
by driving the blade of the knife into the back of the huge paw that was
endeavouring to get a grip!

A tremendous howl of pain came from the owner of the hand, the pinioned
member was torn from beneath the blade, and as we pushed our heads over
the edge, the top climber fell backward, swept his companion from the
pillar, and the pair struck the coral rock beneath the table with a thud
that was suggestive of broken bones. The native with the skewered hand
picked himself up and dashed toward the trees, but the other remained at
the foot of the pillar, and his position led us to believe that his neck
had been broken by the fall.

"My knife!" cried Kaipi. "He knocked my knife down!"

The Fijian swung himself over the edge, and with monkey-like agility
slipped down the pillar. He shouted up to us that he thought that the
man on the ground was dead, but having found his precious knife, he
proceeded to set all doubts upon the matter at rest.

"Soma better dodge that little fire eater," muttered Holman. "I thought
him a coward last night, but it looks as if he's a fighter when once he
gets started."

As we were unable to slip down the stone pillar in the same manner as
the natives, we found the piece of rope by which the three dancers had
hauled us up to the top, and making it secure upon a stone projection we
lowered ourselves to the ground.

"Now," said Holman, "we must make a new start, and if we get beat in
this round we deserve all that the big fiend who has brought all this
trouble about can do to us. Kaipi, you're a friend of mine for all time.
Shake hands."

The grinning Fijian shook hands with both of us, and we moved toward the
trees, heading in the direction of the spot where Leith had kicked us so
vigorously a few hours before.


[Illustration]


CHAPTER XVIII

BARBARA'S MESSENGER

We had a healthy respect for the deviltry of Leith and his friends as we
turned our backs upon the lonely throne of the centipede, but the cry of
"Father" which Edith Herndon had uttered was still ringing in our ears,
and we were anxious to get within hitting distance of the big,
treacherous ruffian. A mental review of the engagements made us feel
rather light-hearted as we pushed through the tangle. If there were only
six native dancers upon the island at the opening of the conflict in the
Cavern of Skulls, we had reduced that number to one, while the bullet in
Leith's shoulder would depreciate his fighting ability for some time.
Outside the carriers, who, as far as we knew, were neutral in the
matter, we had as opponents, Leith, One Eye, Soma, and the dancer whose
hand had been punctured by Kaipi, and the knowledge that we were more
evenly matched brought us some consolation.

But the fact that Edith and Barbara Herndon were in the power of the
scoundrel brought thoughts that cast a damper upon the little scrap of
joy we derived from reckoning up the casualties of the enemy. The
passion which Leith displayed after receiving Holman's bullet made us
run forward like madmen each time we recalled the diabolical frenzy that
he exhibited. We could not think of a good plan to circumvent the brute.
The jungle hampered and maddened us, and although we knew that we had
gone about our work in a blundering fashion, the circumstances were such
that we could not improve our strategy in the future.

We plunged on till nearly midnight, then Holman called a halt.

"We must sleep," he said. "One can watch while the other two get some
rest."

Kaipi, who declared that he was never less inclined for slumber, agreed
to take first watch, and Holman and I flung ourselves down upon the
grass. We had had no slumber on the previous night, and the incidents in
which we had taken part had left us exhausted.

It was daybreak before Kaipi awakened us, and the face of the Fijian
informed us that something had alarmed him. He was stretched full length
on the ground, listening as only a native can listen, and we waited for
his report. We had much respect for Kaipi's hearing after checking the
signals he made concerning the approaching "tivo" dancer on the previous
afternoon.

"What is it?" asked Holman.

"Some one go by, much hurry," murmured the Fijian.

We crouched in the bushes and listened. It was hardly likely that Leith
had changed his route, and the only person that we knew to be in our
neighbourhood was the dancer.

"If we could get hold of him we might use the third degree on him to
guide us to the spot that Leith is making for," said Holman. "We'll be
outgeneralled completely if he gets into those caverns on the hills. If
he has provisions he can snap his fingers at a regiment."

I agreed with him on that point. The valley inside the basalt cliffs,
and which, as far as we could judge, could only be entered by the
slippery pathway in the Vermilion Pit, was about the finest natural
hiding place in the world. Without taking the caves into consideration,
the luxurious vegetation in the cup between the hills made the finding
of a person a matter of extreme luck. It was a marvellous maze that
Nature seemed to have constructed especially for the diabolical work in
which Leith was engaged.

Kaipi's ear was still to the ground, and the anxious look upon his face
convinced us that some one was close.

"Coming back again," breathed the Islander. "One man, walk slow."

Our own ears acquainted us of the approach at that moment. The sound of
crackling twigs was quite close, and we waited breathlessly, eying the
green curtain through which we expected the unknown to thrust himself.

A black head bobbed through the leaves, and Holman planted a fist
between the newcomer's eyes before the head could be withdrawn. The
morning visitor dropped to the ground, and the three of us promptly fell
upon him, the bloodthirsty Kaipi having to be restrained by main force
from giving another exhibition of neat knifework.

"Who is it?" asked Holman. "Get back, Kaipi, and let me see."

We dragged the panting prisoner into the light, but instead of the
escaped dancer, we found that we had trapped one of the five carriers, a
big Raretongan named Maru, who was possessed of enormous strength.

Holman's punch had been no light one, and it was a few seconds before
the mists had cleared from the Raretongan's brain; then his big brown
eyes lit up with a smile of gladness, and he nodded to Holman.

"Me want you," he said.

"Quite so," muttered Holman, "but I got you first."

Maru smiled the smile of the man who has a card up his sleeve, and he
fumbled in the folds of his sulu till he found what he wanted. With a
dramatic flourish he drew from the cloth a small emerald ring that
belonged to Barbara Herndon, and he smiled childishly as he saw the look
of astonishment upon Holman's face as he snatched the trinket.

"Why--who--how the devil did you get this?" he asked.

"Little missee give me," replied Maru, still convulsed with the humour
which his childish mind found in the situation. "She tell me come alonga
you."

Holman poured out a torrent of questions which the smiling messenger
endeavoured to answer to the best of his ability. In pigeon English he
informed us that he had deserted Leith's camp about midnight; that the
big ruffian had turned abruptly from the direction he was moving in at
the time we caught up with him, and that Holman's bullet had caused him
serious inconvenience. The two girls and the Professor were in charge of
Soma and the one-eyed white man, who, we now learned, was deaf and
dumb. It was while One Eye was on guard that Barbara Herndon had been
able to bribe the Raretongan to throw the strength of his muscles upon
our side of the argument.

Holman, with lover-like longing for anything owned by the lady of his
choice, attempted to put the emerald ring in his pocket, but Maru
objected strongly. The smile fled from his face, and his broken English
nearly strangled him in his efforts to pour out enough of it to acquaint
Holman of the nature of the agreement which he had entered into with
Barbara Herndon.

"Me only show you ring, that's all!" he cried. "You look, know little
missee send me, ring mine all time. You give back."

"You had better give it back to him," I cautioned. "He has got the idea
into his head, and it will take a lot of arguing to convince him that
Miss Barbara didn't give it to him to keep."

"But she didn't!" cried Holman. "Why would she give him a ring? She just
gave him a loan of it to let him see that she had sent him to us."

"My ring all time," protested Maru. "That my pay fight mighty good for
you."

"Give it up to him," I advised. "He's only an overgrown child, and he
has set his mind on it."

"But, Verslun, I know she wouldn't do that!" protested the lover.
"Barbara sent me this as----"

"Oh, I know," I cried, "but we want fighters now, and Maru is a pretty
athletic person."

"Me damn good fighter!" cried the Raretongan. "Me plentee good fighter
if me get ring."

Holman gave up the trinket with a snort of disgust, and a few minutes
afterward, when we were tramping along, I made it my business to drop
back beside Maru and advise him to keep the ring out of the youngster's
sight till we had rescued Miss Barbara. If the native had displayed his
reward it was highly probable that the lovesick Holman, with nerves on
the raw edge from want of sleep and worry, would have pounced upon the
mighty Maru and endeavoured to obtain possession of what he fondly
thought was a token of affection from his beloved.

But the arrival of the messenger was worth more than the emerald ring to
us at that moment. He had more woodcraft than Kaipi, who had spent most
of his time upon the ocean, and his information regarding the direction
in which Leith was now heading saved us many weary hours of marching.

Yams and guavas, with wild passion fruit, made a breakfast and dinner as
we clawed our way in pursuit. At midday we judged that we were hot upon
the trail, unless Leith had changed his course, but the black cliffs
were close to us at that moment, and the recollections of the gloomy
caverns made us silent as we pushed through the matted jungle. We could
see no trace of the path which Leith would be compelled to cut to enable
the two girls to get through, and we heard no sounds. A lone parrakeet
startled us with its harsh cry as it rose from a maupei tree, and the
bird even seemed to recognize that it had committed a breach in sending
its unmusical cry out upon the awful quiet of the place.

Kaipi climbed a tall tree in the vain hope of catching sight of Leith's
party as it crossed the small cleared spaces in the middle of the
impenetrable growth, but nothing except the green plain of bushy tops
and parasitical creepers was visible. As we waited beneath the tree the
"ticking" of a wood bug sounded like hammer blows in the tremendous
quietude, while the bursting of a pod reminded one of the beginning of a
Fourth of July celebration. We had lost all trace of Leith, and now,
immediately in front, rose the cliffs, and we saw a menace on their
dark, forbidding front.

The base of the hills presented the same nearly perpendicular formation
that we had met when endeavouring to reach the long gallery, and we held
a council to decide on what would be the best course to pursue. Maru was
confident that Leith was heading for this particular point at the moment
that Barbara's bribe caused the Raretongan to desert, and it was
reasonable to think that the ruffian had retired to some hiding place to
nurse his wound and decide upon the fate of the Professor and his two
daughters. From the scraps of conversation which we had overheard before
Holman interrupted the argument between Leith and the scientist, we
thought it probable that the old man would visit the centipede upon the
big table if he did not sign the papers that Leith required, while we
shuddered at the probable fate of the two girls unless Providence
directed us as to the manner in which we could effect a rescue.

"We must divide," said Holman. "I'll take Kaipi and go north, you take
Maru and go in the opposite direction. If you find the trail, camp near
it and send Maru on the run back to us. I'll do the same if I strike the
spoor of the big devil."

It was about two o'clock, as nearly as we could judge, when we
separated. We agreed to keep as close as possible to the rocky wall so
that a messenger from one would have less difficulty in locating the
other, and Maru and I found, before we had gone a hundred yards, that
the nearer we could get to the cliff the quicker we could get along. The
lianas found it difficult to get a grip upon the rocks, and we could
worm our way without much trouble.

We had travelled about three quarters of a mile when the native dropped
upon his knees and I immediately followed his example. The ordinary
Polynesian is not to be compared with the Australian black fellow or the
American Indian in his knowledge of the forest, but Maru was an
exception. His sight and hearing were abnormally keen, and he examined
the grass carefully.

"One man go by here pretty short time ago," he whispered.

"Native?" I asked.

"No, him wear shoes."

The Raretongan crawled forward on his knees, his face close to the
grass. The tracks upon the soft grass showed that the person was moving
in the direction we were going, and for about twenty yards we followed
cautiously. Leith, the one-eyed white man, and the Professor were the
only three men on the Isle of Tears, outside Holman and myself, who
would be wearing shoes. It was hard to think that the Professor or Leith
would be alone at that moment, so I concluded, as we crawled along in
the shadow of the cliff, that the tracks were made by One Eye.

Maru suddenly sprang to his feet and stood listening. I listened too.
Into the awful silence came a tremendous rumbling that increased each
second till I pictured it as a cancer of noise growing with appalling
rapidity within the encompassing stillness.

"What is it?" I gasped. "Why it's----"

I understood at that moment, and I sprang toward the jungle, but the
big hand of the Raretongan gripped my shoulder and dragged me close to
the cliff beneath an overhanging ledge.

"Stay here!" he yelled, raising his voice above the tumult that seemed
to be coming out of the heavens. "Keep close much!"

The noise was deafening. The black cliff seemed to rock behind us, and
as Maru pulled me down on my knees five hundred tons of rock shot from
the heights and flattened ten square yards of the packed shrubs
immediately in front of us!

"Now!" screamed Maru, as the dust swept in under the ledge and nearly
choked us; "we get away quick, plenty dust, they can't see!"

The dirt and small rocks had rolled back upon us till we stood ankle
deep, but the native's advice was good. Hugging the wall of the cliff,
we ran back on our tracks till we had passed the area devastated by the
landslide; then we sprang into the bushes and peered up at the cliff.
High above the cloud of dust that was still rising from the ground, and
leaning forward so that he could view the extent of the avalanche, was
the one-eyed white man!

"Maru," I whispered, "go back and get Holman. I'll wait here till you
come."


[Illustration]


CHAPTER XIX

LEITH SCORES

The one-eyed man stood for a long time contemplating his handiwork. From
his point of observation he watched the pile of rocks and the
surrounding bushes, and the absence of movement convinced him that the
job had been well done. He commenced to make facial contortions as an
outlet for the mirth he was generating inside, and at intervals he
managed to produce a peculiar noise that reminded one of the bubbling of
a camel. I began to think that One Eye, besides being deaf and dumb, was
suffering from a shortage of gray matter inside his ugly-shaped head. He
strutted up and down, and narrowly escaped toppling over the ledge
through attempting a cake dance as a grand finale to the insane actions
prompted by the successful manner in which he had engineered the
landslide.

The afternoon had lengthened out before Maru returned with Holman and
Kaipi, and we hurriedly considered the best course to pursue. One Eye
had been with Leith when Maru deserted, so it was obvious that we were
not far from the ruffian's hiding place.

"If we could catch this lunatic on the cliff?" muttered Holman. "Gee! we
could tickle him with Kaipi's old knife blade till he ran us right into
the haunt."

"He's deaf," I said; "there's a good chance of roping him in if we could
scale the cliff."

"Me climb!" said Maru. "Him not hear. Me climb all alonga track, drop
down, breakem him neck."

"No, don't break his neck!" growled Holman. "We want him as a guide. Do
you understand? He knows where Leith is hiding, and if we could get hold
of him it would be clear sailing."

Maru borrowed Kaipi's knife, nodded confidently as we adjured him to use
caution, and then slipped back along the track so that he could climb to
the level of the one-eyed person's perch before attempting to creep upon
him. We sat down to await developments. The witless one was evidently a
lookout, and it was advisable to wait and see the success of Maru's
expedition before we attempted to move.

It was a long wait. Maru didn't intend to take any chances by closing in
hurriedly, and it was nearly two hours after his departure before we saw
his head rise above a boulder high up over the spot where One Eye was
keeping his vigil. It was evidently not the first time that the native
had stalked a human being, and his fine tactics, which should have
called forth praise, severely tried the small amount of patience that we
possessed. Holman cursed softly beneath his breath as Maru sat for ten
minutes at a time studying the route before attempting to move from a
sheltering rock, and my own nails burrowed into the palms of my hands as
I watched. The Raretongan was a genius in his own particular line, and I
think he took more than ordinary precautions so that his success would
prove to Holman that Barbara Herndon had not overpaid him when she
presented him with the emerald ring as a reward for his desertion from
Leith. Maru had no idea of the sentimental view of the matter which the
youngster took; and he thought that Holman's objections against the
bargain were caused by the thought that no services could be rendered
that would be half as valuable as the trinket. The unsentimental savage
could not imagine that the unstrung lover wanted the ring as a keepsake
of the girl who had won his heart on board _The Waif_.

"Caesar's Ghost! Why doesn't he hurry?" cried Holman. "That madman looks
as if he's going to change his camping ground!"

It looked as if the witless one was really going to move, and Maru had
still some fifty yards to cover before he would be directly above the
other's head. Our nerves were in such a state that we felt inclined to
scream out to the patient stalker. If we could grab the scout we could
probably induce him by gentle persuasion to act as guide, but if he
escaped us, we pictured ourselves stumbling over precipices and through
dark caverns with the same lack of results as had marked our trip to the
place of skulls.

Maru was decreasing the distance by inches. Slowly, very slowly, with
all the serpentlike cunning of the savage, he advanced till he was
almost above the spot where the other stood taking a survey of the
jungle. But it was a farewell glance for One Eye. If Leith had placed
him there to keep watch till he had reached a safe position, the watcher
evidently considered that the time was up. He hopped to another ledge
with the agility of a goat, and Holman groaned.

Maru noticed the retreat, and quickened his movements. Dropping
cautiously from ledge to ledge he crept upon the other with the
swiftness of a leopard creeping upon its prey. One Eye's deafness left
him at the mercy of the shadow in his rear. Swiftly taking cover
whenever the white man's head moved to the right or the left, the native
decreased the distance, and we rose to our knees.

Then Maru sprang. His muscular right arm went round the neck of the
white, and we were rushing toward the cliff without waiting to see the
outcome of the struggle. The Raretongan's strength was immense, and we
knew that the other could not break the strangle hold that had been put
upon him. We were more afraid that One Eye would be choked into
insensibility before we reached the post.

The big native was sitting astride his captive when we gained the ledge,
and the prisoner was blinking his one good eye as he stared up at him.
We dropped down beside him and took a look at the sun-tanned face. He
exhibited no fear, and the weak, watery eye showed no glint of
intelligence. It was plain that his brain was slightly deranged.

Holman jerked him into a sitting position, and with signs and gestures
we endeavoured to explain what we wanted him to do. Neither of us
understood the deaf and dumb alphabet, but the alphabet was hardly
necessary. With much pantomimic action we described Leith, the
Professor, and the two girls, and Kaipi enjoyed himself immensely by
waving his knife in front of One Eye's face to signify the fate that
awaited him if he did not immediately guide us to the spot. The Fijian
was so proud of the blade that he could hardly be prevented from burying
an inch of the steel in the prisoner's body.

One Eye, although obviously half-witted, saw that Kaipi was only looking
for an excuse to send him to a more undesirable place than the Isle of
Tears, and he made eager signs that he would act as our guide. Holman
relieved him of the revolver and cartridges he had in his pockets,
strapped his arms behind him, and with Maru's hand clutching the collar
of his coat, we signalled to him to step forward and step lively if he
wished to delay his journey to the other world till his soul was in a
better condition. The sun was close to the high ridges in the west, and
we wished to close with Leith before nightfall.

One Eye taxed our climbing powers in the next ten minutes. With the
agility of a chamois he scurried along the narrow ledges, and several
times Maru was forced to check his speed so that we could keep pace with
him. Holman's face showed the joy he felt at receiving another
opportunity to retrieve the blunders we had made in our two previous
attacks. Now we had reduced the big villain's fighting bodyguard to two
persons, Soma and the dancer, and if he had not impressed the carriers,
we outnumbered him. But Leith was on his own ground, and we had already
discovered that the Isle of Tears made an ideal retreat for an outlaw.
The nearly impassable jungle, surrounded by the cliffs that were
tunnelled with tremendous caverns, made a hiding place in which a few
men could defy an army.

One Eye moved along the side of the cliff for about five hundred yards,
then turned into a small canon hardly thirty feet wide, the bottom of
which was about twenty yards above the valley from which we had climbed.

Our intuition told us that we were near the retreat, and we halted the
hurrying guide, and in the shelter of a boulder explained to him with
more signs and gestures that we wished to proceed with extreme caution.
The end of the gulch that was not more than a stone's throw from the
face of the cliff was already dark with the shadows of the hills, and as
we suspected that the opening to Leith's refuge was close, we wished to
make no unnecessary noise in approaching it. Using the scattered rocks
as covering, we advanced slowly, but before we reached the end the sun
had disappeared, and the absence of twilight, noticeable in that
latitude, compelled us to crawl along in a darkness that made it
impossible to discern any object that was more than three feet distant.
Holman was on one side of One Eye while Maru guarded him on the other
side, and as the bottom of the gorge made it impossible for more than
three to move abreast, Kaipi and I crawled in the rear.

We were at One Eye's mercy at that moment, but the idiot appeared to be
much impressed by the manner in which we had pictured the sure and
sudden fate that would fall upon him if we suspected him of treachery.
The mystery of the place gripped us as we went forward. High above us
the stars looked as if they were floating sequins in a sea of dark blue.

But the stars were blotted out suddenly, and I drew Holman's attention
to the fact. The youngster got to his feet and groped around in the
gloom, while we halted till he made an investigation. It was impossible
to see the face of the half-witted guide to gain any information from
his gestures.

Holman stooped and whispered his finding to us. "We're in a covered
passageway," he murmured. "I can just touch the roof by standing on
tiptoe. As we're in the place we might as well walk instead of crawling;
we'll get to the end quicker."

Maru dragged One Eye to his feet, and we pushed on. The air of the place
was much sweeter than the atmosphere of the Cavern of Skulls. The
floor, instead of being covered with thick dust as we had found it in
the former place, was one of clean, smooth rock, and the walls were
perfectly dry.

I had gripped One Eye's left arm while Holman was making the examination
of the passage, and we had not proceeded more than twenty yards when he
intimated that he wished to turn to the right. We allowed him to do so,
and for fully twenty minutes he followed a zigzag course that left us
completely nonplussed as to the way we had come. We could hardly count
the number of the turnings. First to the right, then to the left, then
back again toward the mouth of the place, he trotted forward with
nothing to guide him, yet when we checked him at certain corners to find
out if there was an angle in the path, we found that he was right in
every instance.

"He's counting the number of paces he takes between the turnings,"
muttered Holman. "No man, unless he had the eyes of a cat, could find
his way along this passage. Keep a grip on him or we'll never see
daylight again."

We guessed that we had walked for over half a mile when the guide
stopped abruptly. In the dark we endeavoured to find out what had pulled
him up short, but we tried in vain. A prick from Kaipi's knife blade
would not make him budge an inch, and we clustered together and racked
our brains to find the solution.

"P'raps we're up against something," whispered Holman, "Feel if there's
anything in front, Verslun."

I walked forward a pace and groped in the blackness. My fingers touched
solid rock. It hemmed us in on all sides. One Eye had walked us to the
end of the passage, and we had come up against a blind wall.

I whispered the news to Holman, and he swore softly. Maru's fingers
tightened on the collar of the prisoner till his breath came in short
gasps. Kaipi moved around to the side of the prisoner, but I pushed him
roughly back. The Fijian's desire to use his knife on all occasions was
somewhat irritating.

"What'll we do?" asked Holman.

"Get back," I answered. "He's either fooled us or he's lost his way."

Holman gripped One Eye by the neck and shook him roughly. The
youngster's temper was up, and it looked as if we had wasted the hours
we had spent in capturing the idiot alive, and the time lost in
following behind him through the canon and the crooked passage. And time
was precious when we thought of the agony which Edith and Barbara
Herndon were suffering.

In his temper Holman forgot that the prisoner was deaf, and he shouted
a question at him. "What the devil is wrong?" he screamed. "Damn you,
will--"

Maru interrupted with a cry of astonishment. The wall at the end of the
passage appeared to slide away, and, standing directly in front of us,
his big frame outlined against a fire of brushwood that blazed behind
him, was Leith!

Holman gave a yell of rage and sprang forward, and Leith turned and sped
into the gloom. In his astonishment at finding himself confronted by the
enemy when the stone door had rolled aside, Holman had forgotten that he
had a revolver in his possession, and Leith had passed the brushwood
fire before I yelled out to the youngster to shoot.

Holman fired immediately, and Leith staggered. For a moment we thought
that he was down, but he picked himself up and ran on. I snatched a
blazing pine limb from the fire as I rushed by, and with the light
flickering upon the walls of the place, we sped madly after the flying
figure that was barely discernible when the blazing branch flung a
splinter of light into the gloom.

Holman emptied the revolver, but the pounding of Leith's feet that came
back to us proved that he was still running. Maru and Kaipi were
hallooing far behind, but Holman and I ran side by side, our minds
unable to think of anything but the capture of the human tiger in front.

We were gaining on him. We could hear his laboured breathing, and I
remembered with a thrill of satisfaction the wound that he had received
the night before. It was only a question of time when we would have our
fingers on his throat. "Keep it up!" gasped Holman. "We've got him,
Verslun! We've got him!"

It looked like it. The red glow from the torch enabled us to catch an
occasional glimpse of shoes moving up and down at such a rate that the
limbs to which they were attached always remained outside the area that
was faintly illuminated. The momentary view of the footgear, together
with the maddening _plop plop_ it made upon the rock, raised an insane
idea within my brain that we were chasing a pair of bewitched shoes that
were enticing us into the very heart of the mountain. The scanty diet
and the happenings of the two preceding days had left me light-headed.
The race was unreal. I had an idea that the shoes would run on forever,
and that every yard they covered took me farther away from Edith
Herndon.

The flame of the pine branch went out, and we were left in utter
darkness. But the sound of the flying feet still came back to us. At
times we were so near that Holman thrust out his hands as he ran, and
cursed softly as the sounds seemed to draw away from him.

"I'll have you yet!" he cried. "I'll choke you, you devil!"

A chuckle came out of the darkness and at that instant I made a
discovery. Leith was not alone. Keeping time with the clatter of the
shoes was a softer tattoo that told me that a barefooted runner was
racing beside the man we were pursuing.

Holman made the discovery at the same moment. "Soma," he breathed, and
he ran faster. From some place that seemed to be leagues in the rear
came the shouts of Maru and Kaipi, but their yells died away, and we
were convinced that they had given up the chase.

The _plop plop_ of the shoes ceased suddenly, and we slackened speed.
Our brains suggested that Leith had stopped abruptly on the chance of
doubling back before we could pull up, and a sweat of terror broke out
upon us. If he doubled successfully he would reach the stone door
through which we had got the first glimpse of him.

"He's turned!" cried Holman. "We'll get him, Verslun! After the--O God!
_Look out_!"

Holman's warning came too late. The rocky floor over which we had been
running, dropped away from us. I pitched forward after the youngster
into a gulf of darkness, landed on my shoulder upon a mass of volcanic
ash, and clutching vainly at the stuff, I rolled at tremendous speed
down into the bowels of the earth. From far above us came the sounds of
uncontrolled merriment--the high-pitched shrieks of a native rising
above the deep bass laughter of Leith.


[Illustration]


CHAPTER XX

THE BLACK KINDERGARTEN

I thought we were a thousand years rolling down that slope of smothering
ash. It was a quicksand that melted beneath us. We drove our arms into
it, but the stuff slipped away like fine wood ash, and we went on and
on. I knew Holman was in front of me. Occasionally a curse directed at
Leith managed to slip out when his mouth was not filled with the
smothering dust. Once I shouted at him, and he answered the cry with a
groan that told me how the happening had affected him. The arch ruffian
had checkmated us for the third time inside three days.

We struck the bottom at last, and, like moles, we clawed our way out of
the pile of soft, feathery stuff that came streaming down upon us like a
river, and for some minutes we were busy wiping the fluffy ash from
mouth and eyes and ears. It clung to us like down, and with each breath
we drew it into our lungs till we coughed and sneezed from the
irritation it produced. Struggling forward, knee-deep in the fine, dry
powder, we reached a spot that was practically clear, and for five
minutes we were busy endeavouring to relieve our tortured lungs.

"How far did we roll?" asked Holman.

"About half a mile," I replied.

"But straight, Verslun! What do you think?"

"Over a hundred yards; I'm certain of that."

"Well, I'm going to climb back."

"You can't do it!" I gasped. "That stuff is like quicksand."

"All the same I'm going to make a try."

We stumbled back to the gigantic ash pile, and shoulder to shoulder we
made a rush at the immense mountain down which we had rolled. We
couldn't see it, but we felt it rise around us like a flood as our legs
sank deeper. It came up to our waists--to our armpits, choking and
smothering us. Coming down we had rolled lightly over its surface, now
our legs bored into it like rods, and we struggled vainly to move. The
pile was like a high snowdrift into which we sank deeper and deeper the
more we struggled, and, worn out with our efforts, we fought our way
clear of the smothering ash and made an attempt to review the situation.

"He's beat us," groaned Holman. "He just trotted ahead of us till he
had us on the verge of the thing, and then he side-stepped. O God! What
asses we have been!"

"We did our best," I said.

"Our best?" repeated Holman. "And the man who tells you that he did his
best as an excuse for failure should be shot, Verslun."

"We couldn't tell that this infernal trench was in front," I grumbled.

"Then we shouldn't have chased him like a brace of madmen. I wonder if
Maru and Kaipi came near it?"

"We might call out, perhaps they'd hear."

Holman yelled the names of the two natives into the gloom above us, but
his yells only started a million echoes rolling through the tremendous
fissure in which we were prisoners.

"They turned back," said Holman. "They had sense enough to stay with One
Eye; we hadn't."

It was no use arguing with the youngster. He denounced our stupidity
till his tongue was too dry to utter the charges his half-crazed brain
made against us.

To divert his thoughts I proposed that we make an attempt to explore the
place, and without making any choice regarding direction we moved into
the inky darkness.

"We'll take it in turns to lead," said Holman gruffly. "Then if one of
us topples over a precipice the other has a chance to save himself. I'll
take first try at it, and if I find that I have pushed my foot into a
hole I'll yell out a warning."

I agreed, and we moved forward slowly. The chances of ever finding our
way out of that place seemed small at that moment. Leith had put us in a
spot where we would not be likely to trouble him for some time, and with
bitterness in our hearts we staggered along in the dark, alternately
damning the treachery of the ruffian and our own stupidity. We had tried
to exercise caution, but when we reviewed our actions, it seemed, as
Holman had remarked, that we had used the judgment of children.

"Why didn't we wait at the door of that place till the brute came out?"
he asked.

I had no answer to give to the question, and after an interval of
silence he fired others at me.

"Why did you let go of One Eye? Why didn't we examine the cavern near
the fire before chasing him? The girls might have been somewhere near
the fire! Do you think they were?"

"I don't think so," I answered, trying to soothe him. "I think Leith was
the only person at the fire. He picked Soma up just before we reached
the gulf."

"But where are they? Where has the devil put them?"

"God alone knows!" I cried. "Here, it's my turn to take the lead."

In silence we went stumbling on into the appalling blackness. We could
not see the dim outlines of each other when we stood only a few inches
apart. The darkness of the Cavern of Skulls had been relieved by the
silver skewers of moonlight, but in the night that rolled around us
there was not a single gleam of light.

We had no matches. Everything that was in our pockets had been jolted
out during the mad jaunt to the stone table, and now the revolver and
cartridges which we had taken from One Eye had been lost by Holman
during the slide down the mountain of volcanic ash that brought us to
the bottom of the underground prison.

We plodded on for about an hour, then stopped simultaneously. At first I
thought that the horror of the situation had affected my brain, but the
fact that Holman had stopped abruptly at the same moment as I did choked
back the cold fear that had rushed upon me. I was not insane! Holman was
listening too! I seemed to feel that the tiny thread of sound which had
set my pulses beating madly had also keyed him up to the highest
tension.

After a minute of intense silence he put a question.

"Did you hear anything?"

"Did you?" I stammered.

"Are we mad, Verslun?" he asked hoarsely. "I thought--" He stopped and
moved close to me. I heard his quick breathing as he groped to find me.

"Verslun, did you hear?" he whispered, gripping my arm. "I heard her
speak."

"I thought I did," I breathed. "Perhaps--perhaps it was an echo."

For a few minutes we stood, our ears searching for the sound that had
disturbed us. We seemed afraid to call out--afraid to quench the little
spark of hope which had suddenly flared up in the despair that filled
our breasts. We knew that our ears had lied, and we tried to lengthen
the thrill by remaining perfectly silent.

The sound came again, and Holman sent a wild cry into the night that
hemmed us in. We were not insane! The spark of hope blazed as we rushed
headlong forward. The silvery voice of Barbara Herndon had come to us
again through the terrible gloom!


[Illustration]


CHAPTER XXI

TOGETHER AGAIN

It is impossible to set down any statement that will enable the reader
to form a mental picture of the meeting which took place in that spot of
eternal night. Hands groped for hands in the darkness, and sobs and
cries and words of comfort went out into the silence. Edith and Barbara
Herndon wept, the Professor shrieked out denunciations of Leith, and
Holman and I were nearly choked by the lumps that rose in our throats.

Explanations came in broken sentences. The Professor's anger prevented
him from giving the story in detail, and the girls were not in a
condition to give a lucid account of their sufferings since the night
we had left them to investigate the light in the hills. We gathered from
the hysterical utterances, however, that Leith had rushed them to the
hills on hearing from the escaped dancer that we had dodged the fate he
intended for us when he had dispatched us to the table of the centipede.
The reduction in his bodyguard caused him to make immediately for the
secret retreat, and as he considered it inadvisable to press his
argument with the Professor and Edith at that moment, he had lowered his
three prisoners into the devil chamber into which we had accidentally
fallen.

"This is the place you mentioned to me the night you left the camp,"
said the Professor.

"We mentioned?" repeated Holman in amazement. "We didn't know the place
existed till we rolled into it!"

"But you read it out of the note that Soma dropped," cried the
scientist. "Don't you remember where he threatened to put the five
babies?"

"The Black Kindergarten!" I stammered.

"The Black Kindergarten," said the old man. "That is what the inhuman
brute called the place when he lowered us into it. We are to stay here
till I sign papers that will give him possession of my property, and
till--till Edith consents to marry him!"

He flung the words out into the stillness, and for a few minutes no one
spoke. The horror of the situation had the same effect upon me as a blow
from a sandbag. Three days before, we were in possession of Leith's
letter to the one-eyed man, in which he had remarked that we would be
occupants of the place of eternal night, and yet we had not been able to
avert the fate which the brute had in store for us in case the Professor
and Edith Herndon refused to consider his villainous proposals. The
Professor's money and the girl's hand! The words made me physically
sick, and I sat down upon the floor of the place till the dizziness had
passed from my brain.

"And food?" Holman put the question, but the words seemed to come to me
from a great distance.

"He told us he would lower it to us once a day till we--till we came to
our senses," said Edith Herndon quietly. "We received our first supply
some hours ago."

She tried to speak bravely, but the little catch in her voice belied the
courageous front which she endeavoured to assume under cover of the
darkness. Barbara was silent, except for an occasional sob which she was
unable to stifle, while the Professor poured forth his story of Leith's
deception when he first met him in Sydney, and where the big scoundrel
had poured into the ears of the laurel-hungry scientist the tales of
skulls and ruins which he would find upon the Isle of Tears. The skulls
and ruins were there, but it looked as if we would add our own skeletons
to the crumbling bones of the long-dead Polynesians, the peculiarities
of whose whitened brain cases were to supply the subject matter of the
learned treatise that was to bring fame to the archaeologist. It was an
indescribably mournful reunion. We could not see each other, and when
silence fell upon us I had a horrible sensation that the choking,
depressing darkness of the place was wafting Edith Herndon away from me.
I longed to find and clasp the hand that had taken mine the night on
board _The Waif_ when I made an offer of my services.

The Professor had explained that the opening through which they had been
lowered was immediately above their heads. They had not moved from the
spot lest they would not be able to find it again to obtain the food
which Leith had promised to send till they saw fit to accede to his
proposals, and when Holman suggested moving forward upon a tour of
investigation the old man combated the idea vigorously.

"We will lose ourselves, and we will never be able to find our way back
here to get the food," he cried.

"But we will never get out by remaining here," said Holman. "If he has
made the acceptance of those proposals the only grounds upon which he
will grant you your liberty, I don't see that it will serve any good to
remain here taking the food he throws down."

"That's true," murmured Edith, and I blessed her mentally for the calm
way in which she had uttered the words. The surrounding darkness had no
terrors for her in comparison to the fate that awaited her above. The
manner in which she spoke of the sallow-faced rogue convinced me that
the proposals that had been made since the time that Leith had shone out
in his true colours had produced a terror which she endeavoured to hide
from her father and sister.

But the dark terrified the Professor. Although he viewed Leith's
proposals with the greatest abhorrence, the hole above his head appeared
to him to be the only path back to the outer world, and he was afraid to
stray.

"There might be another way out of the place," said Holman. "Can Verslun
and I make the attempt and leave you three here?"

"No, no!" cried Barbara. "Please stay here with us!"

"I think it will be better if we remain together," said Edith. "If you
and Mr. Verslun did discover an opening it would be exceedingly
difficult to find your way back here, and if you got out of this place
you might not be able to reach the opening through which we were
lowered. Perhaps the way to it is known only to Leith."

Edith's argument was sound. Our finding them in that black cavern was
purely an accident, and it was hardly probable that Holman and myself
would be able to find our way back to the spot if we went off on a tour
of investigation. Personally I had no desire to leave the girls. Leith's
deviltry had so impressed me that I considered him capable of anything,
and if he thought we were out of the way, I had no doubt that he would
take immediate steps to break down the courage of the Professor and his
daughters by means that were familiar to him. I could well understand
that Edith Herndon's love for her father would compel her to sacrifice
herself if she saw the aged Professor in front of the great stone
centipede, and that might happen at any moment now that Leith considered
that he had disposed of all active opposition.

For hours we debated the matter, and finally the Professor was won over.
He agreed to move forward on an inspection tour of the vast subterranean
place the moment the next supply of food came from above, and we waited
anxiously. During the wait Holman and I made short trips into the
darkness, but we were careful that we did not get out of the hearing of
the two girls, who called at intervals so that we would be able to find
our way back. The place was awe-inspiring. Its size could only be
guessed at. Stones that were flung in a certain direction where the
floor sloped gradually downward could be heard rolling for many minutes
after they left our hands.

We guessed that it was early morning when we heard from Leith. A blazing
torch illuminated a round hole about seventy feet above our heads, and
Holman and I immediately remained quiet so that the big scoundrel would
be in ignorance of the reunion. There was no possibility of the
torchlight making our presence known. It would take a score of torches
to enable him to see us.

Leith thrust his head over the edge of the hole while Soma held the
torch, and, with a coarse laugh, the ruffian inquired if his victims had
changed their minds.

"No, we have not," replied the Professor, his thin, quavering voice
sounding strangely weak after the deep-throated bellow of the bully on
top.

"Well, you'll change it soon," cried Leith. "I'll leave you down there
for another day or two, and then I'll get you up to do some stunts. Mind
you, I mean a proper marriage with Miss Edith, Professor! _The Waif_
will run us up to the German missionary station while you take charge
here for your affectionate son-in-law."

I opened my mouth to fling an answer at the taunting scoundrel, but
Holman surmised my intention and begged me to hold my tongue.

"They'll get no food if you cry out!" he whispered. "Don't speak to him,
man!"

The Professor made no answer to the offensive remark, and after a few
minutes' silence Leith drew back, and Soma started to lower a bundle of
food into the dark prison.

"That rope might prove useful," whispered Holman. "Feel around and see
if you can get hold of it before he pulls it up."

The light of the torch which Leith held only illuminated about six feet
of the rope as the native passed it into the prison, so Holman and I,
standing directly under the opening, felt around in the darkness as the
bundle of food came toward the ground.

"I have it!" murmured Holman. "Wait till he unhooks the bundle."

We let the rope run through our hands till the package of food touched
the rock floor. The line had a small hook upon the end, and the moment
Soma felt that the parcel had reached the bottom of the place, he
dexterously unhooked it with a slight jerk and started to haul in.

"Now!" whispered the youngster. "A big pull! We might bring the nigger
through the hole!"

We went very close to performing the feat. The jolt took the native
unawares; he fell forward on his knees and barely saved himself from
dropping into the opening. The rope came toward us with a run, but as we
pulled furiously it stopped with a sudden jerk, and we knew that the
other end was tied to some projection on the surface.

Leith laughed derisively, and the laugh maddened Holman. He clutched the
rope and started to climb rapidly upward. I couldn't see him, but I felt
his shoes as he wriggled away into the darkness above me, and I held my
breath, I gripped the rope and kept it taut so that Leith and Soma might
not discover the ruse.

But Leith had more cunning than we credited him with. After a futile
pull at the rope he thrust the pine torch through the hole, and as it
dropped into the cavern it illuminated the figure of Holman, who was
then about fifteen feet from the floor. "Cut the rope!" roared the
ruffian. "Quick, Soma! Cut the rope and break the ---- fool's neck!"

Holman, realizing that it was impossible to reach the top, saved himself
a nasty fall by sliding down the rope while the native slashed at it,
but he had not touched the floor when the ninety feet of strong manilla
came whirling down through the darkness. And the rope was not the only
gift we received. Angry at discovering that we had escaped death in our
plunge into the place, Leith poured forth a stream of blasphemy that
outdid the effort he had made when kicking Holman and me on the
afternoon the youngster had wounded him. He cursed us till the shocked
Professor dragged his two daughters away out of hearing, and there we
found the three when we had gathered up the rope and the food.

"We might as well make a try to explore the place," said Holman. "The
scoundrel says that he will not send down any more food till you accept
his proposals."

"Then we'll never get any," said Edith Herndon quietly. "I pray that God
will show us the way out of this place."


[Illustration]


CHAPTER XXII

THE WHITE WATERFALL

We found the rope exceedingly useful now that we had decided to explore
the place in search of a way out. It was reasonable to think that the
floor of the cavern would contain innumerable fissures into which we
might fall, and to guard against this we decided to make a life line out
of the thirty yards of manilla we had luckily obtained. Allowing about
five yards of rope between each two persons, I tied it in turn around
the waist of Holman, Barbara, the Professor, Edith, and myself, and
being thus prepared against a precipice in our path, Holman took the
lead and we followed in single file as the tightening of the rope
informed each one that the immediate leader was a safe distance in
front.

"Is there any choice of direction?" asked Holman, pausing after he had
taken half a dozen steps.

"I don't think so," I said. "Unless some one has an intuition regarding
the path to liberty."

"Please let me pick the route," murmured Edith. "I am stretching out my
arm, Mr. Holman; will you come here to me and feel the direction I am
pointing in?"

We clustered round the girl, each one feeling her outstretched arm and
then turning quickly toward the point indicated. I was glad that no one
could see my own face at that moment. It was pathetic to think of any
one choosing a route in that abyss of horror, and the trouble which the
girl took to make sure that Holman would move off in the direction she
pointed brought tears to my eyes.

"I--I might be silly in thinking it," she stammered, "but I believe--oh,
please, Mr. Holman, try and walk in the direction I pointed in!"

"I certainly will try," said the youngster. "If I go wrong, you put me
right, will you? I believe somehow that we're going to find a way out. I
don't know the right path to it, but I've got a premonition we'll find
it. Now we're off again."

We moved forward with anxious footsteps. Imagination furrowed the floor
of that place with bottomless crevices, and the cold hand of fear
gripped our hearts. It required a mental effort to move one foot past
the other, and whenever one of the girls stumbled, her little cry of
alarm brought untold agony to Holman and myself as we took a grip of
the rope and braced ourselves against the happening which our excited
minds expected any moment. We were walking hand in hand with dread--a
dread that became greater when we thought that a false step of ours
might drag to death the two women that we loved.

On, and on, and on, we bored into the horrible night. With blind
footsteps we walked fearfully through the Stygian waves that rolled
around us. The place seemed to be of enormous size, and in the dead
silence that surrounded us our footsteps woke clattering echoes that
appeared to mock our efforts to escape.

The air in places had a strange odour that reminded us of camphor. This
peculiar smell seemed to be in certain stratas of the atmosphere through
which we passed, and whenever our passage through these scented layers
was unduly prolonged, we experienced a sensation that I can only liken
to the near approach of seasickness. It made the girls sick and faint,
but they walked on without complaining.

We struck the wall of the place after we had been walking for a period
that we judged to be about three hours, and we decided to rest for a
while. We sat close together upon the cold floor and endeavoured to
cheer each other's spirits by constantly asserting that the air of the
place made it reasonable to suppose that there must be some other
entrance besides the hole through which Leith had lowered the three, and
the fissure through which Holman and I had rolled down the gigantic ash
pile. And the assertions seemed logical. The two entrances that we knew
of opened into Leith's retreat, and it was hard to think that the air
supply of the enormous cavern in which we were wandering could come
through those two openings. We combatted our fears with this argument as
we ate a morsel of the food we had received that morning, and feeling
that he who has the biggest stock of hope has the biggest grip upon
life, we endeavoured to make light of our misfortunes as we stumbled on
again after a short rest.

But that impenetrable night produced a depression that we could not
shake off. Imagination sprang ahead of the moment and pictured our final
struggles. We fought with the nightmares that entered our minds, and
conversation languished. We couldn't speak while the mental canvases
were being rapidly coloured with scenes depicting our end in the
darkness and the silence, where a grim fate would even deny one a last
look at a dearly loved face. A silence came upon us that had the same
effect as intense cold. Each in his own frozen husk of despair plodded
forward with the idea that the others were so engrossed in their own
thoughts that they were not inclined to answer when addressed. The
darkness so completely isolated each person that after some hours of
silence it required a tremendous effort to thoroughly convince the mind
that one was walking with living people and not with phantoms.

It was after one of these intervals of silence that Barbara Herndon made
a discovery that chilled our blood. She made some commonplace remark to
her sister and received no reply. She repeated the observation, but it
brought no comment. The happening seemed to drag the rest of us from the
strange torpor, and we stopped. We sensed that Barbara Herndon was
feeling her way toward her sister, and presently the younger girl gave a
shriek of alarm that stirred a million echoes in that place of terror.

"Edith!" she shrieked. "Edith! Edith! Where are you?"

Holman and I clawed fiercely upon the rope, moving toward each other in
an effort to find a quick solution for the mystery. We collided
violently as we reached the spot where the rope had circled Edith
Herndon's waist, and we stood, stunned and speechless, as we fingered
the cord. In some manner, probably severed by a knifelike projection of
rock, the loop which I had knotted around her body had been cut through,
and the rope had fallen unnoticed from the waist of the weary girl!

"Great God!" I cried. "Where did we lose her? What way did we come?"

The questions were ridiculous. The numbing influence of the place had
made us walk for an hour or so in complete silence, and it was
impossible to say when she had lost her position in the line. And now,
as we moved round and round, endeavouring to peer into the blackness, we
lost all sense of direction. Each had a different notion about the way
we had come. While we were moving forward, our combined efforts to walk
straight ahead made it impossible for one to turn and go in an opposite
direction, but in the few moments of our excitement as we turned and
twisted in clawing for the loop where Edith had been tied, we became
bewildered. We didn't know in which direction to turn in searching for
the lost one!

"What'll we do?" cried the Professor. "Do something! Quick! Find her!
Find her!"

I took a great breath and yelled her name into the darkness. The sound
thundered through the place like the noise made by a freight train.
Again and again I screamed it, and the million devils in the place
shrieked the name in mockery. I exhausted myself in my mad efforts to
send my voice to her ears.

Holman gripped my arm when I had worked myself into an insane frenzy,
and he begged me to be quiet.

"Barbara thought she heard an answer," he cried. "Listen! There it is
again!"

It was Edith! Her voice came to us like a thread of silver, and with no
thought of the bottomless crevices that might be in our path, we charged
blindly toward the spot from which her cry had come.

It seemed ages before we met her. The sounds puzzled us, but at last we
gripped her hands, and the Professor and Barbara, hysterical with joy,
sobbed their thanks into the gloom.

"I don't know how the rope became undone," cried Edith. "I didn't find
out that I had become separated from the rest of you till I attempted to
draw your attention to the waterfall."

"To the what?" I questioned.

"To the waterfall," repeated the girl. "Did you pass it? It is a
beautiful little waterfall, and the water flows over a white limestone
rock that makes it sparkle like so many fireflies in the dark."

I cannot explain what happened to me at that moment. Some veil within my
mind was torn away by the few words that the girl had uttered. I was
back upon Levuka wharf, lying under the copra bag where Holman had found
me, and for a moment I could not speak as the subconscious mind flung a
score of half-forgotten incidents into my conscious area.

_"It is the White Waterfall!"_ I yelled. "It is the White Waterfall
that the Maori sang of on the wharf at Levuka! He was warning Toni, and
Toni was killed by Soma because he knew! It is the way out! We're saved!
We're saved! It is on the road to heaven out of Black Fernando's hell!"


[Illustration]


CHAPTER XXIII

THE WIZARDS' SEAT

As we stumbled toward the spot from which came the sounds of running
water, the incidents of the preceding ten days seemed to be dropping
into their places within my brain like the pieces of a picture puzzle
that has suddenly become plain to the eye of the child who is putting it
together. I understood! My brain seemed bursting within my skull. It
appeared to me that God, in his own way, had made me a blind instrument
to do his work. The big Maori on the wharf at Levuka knew of the hell
upon the Isle of Tears. The Maori had warned Toni, the little Fijian,
but fear of what might happen to any one possessing the knowledge had
made Toni deny that he was the companion of the Maori when he was
questioned before and after he had reached _The Waif_. In a burst of
confidence he had confessed the truth to me on the afternoon after I had
saved him from being washed overboard, but the confession had been made
in the presence of Soma, and, as Kaipi asserted, it had cost Toni his
life. Leith, alias Black Fernando, had ordered the big Kanaka to put the
possessor of such important information out of the way.

I repeated over and over again the words which the Maori had addressed
to his woolly headed pupil on that hot day at Levuka. They raced madly
round in my mind, as if exultant because I had found the reason why they
persisted in storing themselves in the cells of my brain. The soul
within me had known that the knowledge would be wanted!

"How many paces?" asked the Professor.

"Sixty!" I roared; and then, seized with temporary insanity, I chanted
the song of the Maori at the top of my voice:

  "Sixty paces to the left,
   Sixty paces to the left,
   That's the way to heaven,
   That's the way to heaven,
   That's the way to heaven out
   Of Black Fernando's hell."

"And here's the waterfall!" cried Holman, "Go easy now! It must be
flowing into some hole, and we don't want to fall into an abyss just as
Verslun has discovered the way out."

We advanced cautiously toward the spot where, as Edith had said, the
water sparkled like fireflies in the darkness. It was an eerie place. We
knew that the water was there by the sound it made flowing over the
rocks, but, except for the tiny sparks of phosphorescent light that
seemed to fly out from it, we could not see it. The spectacle thrilled
us. A million sparks of light seemed to rise from the bed of feldspar
over which the water leaped, and the peculiar quality of the rock gave
to it the weird brilliancy which held us spellbound as we advanced with
extreme caution. It wasn't white by any means, but in those inky depths
it would not require a great effort of the imagination to call it white.
The faint luminous flashes were the only particles of light that we had
seen since Leith had thrown the half-extinguished torch into the hole
that morning, and we could hardly turn our eyes from the novelty.

The water fell into an opening in the rocky floor, and gurgled away into
depths that made us shiver as the distant tinkle came up to us as we
crept forward on hands and knees. We were all thirsty at that moment,
but we wished to put the directions of the Maori to an immediate test,
and we were satisfied to let our longing for a cool drink stay with us
till we could prove whether the strangely luminous waterfall before us
was the one about which the two natives chanted the strange song.

"They said to the left, didn't they?" asked Holman.

"Yes," I answered. I hardly recognized my own voice as I jerked out the
word. I couldn't see the faces of the girls, but I understood what
skyscrapers of hope they had built upon the announcement I had made when
Edith had told of her discovery. Now, as we moved around the hole in the
floor, I understood what a tremendous shock it would be to them if we
discovered that there was no connection between the falling water and
the chant.

"I suppose the left side will be the one upon our left hand when facing
the fall?" said Holman.

"I suppose so," I stammered. "Let us move up close to the side of the
water."

We edged along till we could touch the flashing stream that dropped from
some point high up in the immense roof of the place, and then we started
to step the distance, the Professor chattering along behind us, while
the two girls brought up the rear.

Holman chanted the numbers aloud, and a cold sweat broke out upon me as
he counted. A fear of my own sanity came upon me. I thought that this
connection between the song and the luminous water might have been
suggested by a brain that had suddenly lost its balance under the
torture of the preceding three days.

"Fifty-six! Fifty-seven! Fifty-eight!----"

It was Holman's voice, but to my reeling brain the sound came from the
roof and thundered in my ears like a brazen bell.

"Fifty-nine! _Sixty_!"

We stopped together, and the suppressed sobs of Barbara Herndon were the
only sounds that broke the little stillness that followed. There was no
way out! The darkness, so it seemed to us, was thicker than ever!

"Nothing doing," muttered Holman. "I counted right, didn't I?"

"I think so," I answered huskily.

"Sixty paces exactly, and here's the wall alongside us."

My fingers groped along the moist rock. I felt stunned. Now that the
test had been made it seemed insanity to connect a chant that I heard at
Levuka with a waterfall in a cavern on the Isle of Tears. But why had
Toni been killed? Why had Leith exhibited such curiosity about the song
when he heard me relating the incident to the two sisters on board the
yacht?

My fingers came to a crevice in the wall as the question presented a
bold front to the doubt that had gripped me. The fissure was some four
feet wide, and my exclamation made Holman put a question.

"What is it?" he asked.

"Nothing," I answered. Wrecked hopes had made me cautious. Still I felt
certain that I had remembered those words for some purpose. I recalled
how they had puzzled me on that hot day, and how I had questioned Holman
concerning "Pilgrim's Progress" when he had roused me from my sleep.

"Well, if there's nothing here I'm going back to get a drink," said
Holman.

"Hold on!" I stammered, as I uncoiled the piece of spare rope from my
shoulders; "I want you a minute. There's a split in this rock, and I'm
going to explore it. Take the end of this rope and hang on."

"Hadn't I better go with you?" he asked.

"Not this trip," I answered. "I've just got a feeling that I'd like to
see where it leads to. Hold tight!"

I stepped cautiously into the narrow passage and immediately found that
it narrowed to such an extent that I had to turn sideways to squeeze
through. The floor sloped upward, and as the rock was damp and slippery,
I dropped upon my knees so that I could climb more rapidly. The place
seemed a narrow chute. My knees were skinned from the rough bottom, but
I scratched desperately to obtain a footing. Hope was still alive. The
Maori had said that the road to heaven was sixty paces from the White
Waterfall, and if an all-seeing Providence had guided Edith to the
waterfall, it was surely decreed that we would make our escape from the
clutches of the devil who had us at his mercy.

"We will surely escape," I muttered, as I scratched and clawed in an
effort to drag myself up the slippery path. "We will escape! I know it!
We will escape! I know--"

The muttered words died upon my lips. The crevice turned and then
broadened suddenly, and a blinding flash of light forced me to fling
myself face downward upon the rock. For a moment I lay there, wondering
stupidly whether something had happened to my eyes or whether I had come
suddenly into the light of day. I had seen light--the light of what?

Slowly I lifted my head, and the truth came to me with stunning force.
It was God's own sunlight that I had seen! The chute ended within three
paces of the spot where I lay, and immediately opposite the opening
through which I looked was a patch of vermilion rock that blazed
gloriously as the rays of the afternoon sun struck full upon it. I knew
that rock! It had thrilled me as I looked at it on the afternoon when
Leith had introduced us to the greatest natural wonder of the Pacific. I
was at the end of a passage that opened into the Vermilion Pit!

From where I lay I could not see the top of the crater. When the
passage had suddenly broadened, the roof came down upon it, so that the
opening through which I looked at the opposite side of the great pit was
about ten feet wide but not more than two feet in height. An overhanging
lip of rock prevented me from looking up, but I understood that I was
lower than the slippery Ledge of Death that we had crossed to reach the
Valley of Echoes. It seemed years since we had crossed that path, yet it
was less than a week.

I thought of the others waiting in the darkness, and I turned and slid
down the chute up which I had scrambled. The path to liberty was not yet
plain, but there was fresh air and sunlight at the top of the chute, and
one could see the faces of those they loved. Bumping and bounding over
the jagged rocks I went at a terrific speed to the bottom of the slide,
and, scrambling through the opening, I shouted the news to the four who
waited there.

"It opens into the Vermilion Pit!" I gasped. "I can't see how we can
climb out, but there's hope--there's hope!"

I was foolish in making the last statement, but the sight of the
glorious sunbeams, striking down into the abyss, had made me blind to
the difficulties that were yet to be faced! And the Maori's chant must
surely be true! Now that it had brought us to the light, I could not
but believe that it would bring us to liberty.

The slippery chute brought a suggestion from Holman. He advised that the
two girls and the Professor remain at the bottom while he and I took one
end of the rope to the top so that we could haul them up the wet track
that I had scaled with difficulty.

"We won't be five minutes!" I cried. "Stay where you are till we
signal."

I didn't think, as Holman and I crawled to the top of that place, what
an eventful five minutes that would be. But the big things of life are
crammed into minutes, and Time was bringing the most thrilling one of
our lives toward us as we scrambled up the chute. Our adventures upon
the Isle of Tears were to have a climax that fitted them.

Holman stopped as I had done and thrust his face down upon the rock as
his eyes caught a glimpse of the glittering wall of the crater that came
suddenly into view. The rays of the sun blazing down upon the stained
sides of the mysterious pit made the veins of colour appear like
brilliant snakes. The patch that was framed by the walls of the opening
through which we gazed was a wild riot of scintillating, blinding
colours that dazzled our eyes as we stared at them.

For a minute Holman breathed hungrily of the hot air, then he attempted
to discover our exact position in the crater.

"We must be somewhere near the top," he declared. "Don't you remember
that the colour of the walls darkened rapidly below the Ledge of Death?"

"I remember," I answered. "We must be nearly on a level with the Ledge."

"If we could look out from under this projecting piece of rock,"
muttered the youngster.

"It's risky."

"I'll make a try, Verslun. Hold my legs. I'm going to hang out of this
burrow and take a peep around to get our bearings."

I gripped his legs, and turning upon his back he pushed himself slowly
out over the edge of the passage till he was able to look up in front of
the piece of rock that projected like the peak of a cap above the
opening.

Clinging to this peak with his two hands, the upper part of his body
being out over the abyss, he stared upward, and as I watched his face I
noticed the look of joy and amazement that spread across it.

"What is it, Holman?" I cried. "Are we saved? Tell me!"

He slid hurriedly back to safety and pounded the rock above his head
with his bare fists.

"Do you know what this is?" he yelled. "Do you know?"

I tried to utter the words that came to my tongue, but I could not. I
could see the joy in the youngster's eyes, but I was afraid to speak.

"It is the Ledge of Death!" he shouted. "There is only six inches of
rock above us!"

"Then we're saved!" I cried.

"Sure! If you put the rope around me I can crawl up on it, and once
there I can haul up the others. Do you know what Soma told the Professor
about the bad men falling into this infernal pit?"

I nodded my head. I was unable to speak at that moment.

"Well, the Wizards of the Centipede fixed that! Don't you see? This was
their seat! They leaned out of this place as I leaned out just now, and
they gripped the ankles of any poor devil they had a grouch against. It
was devilish----"

I put my hand across his mouth and he became instantly mute. We held our
breath and listened intently. From above us came the faint sound of
footsteps and a cold perspiration broke out upon us. Some one was
walking slowly along the Ledge of Death!

The sounds ceased when the unknown was immediately above our heads, and
a guilty look came upon Holman's face. The man on the Ledge had
probably heard the youngster's voice, and he was puzzled to know where
the sounds had come from.

We sat without moving a muscle. The silence convinced us that the
unknown was listening. We knew that he hadn't climbed from the Ledge to
the top of the crater. The scratching of his shoes against the rock
would have come to our ears. He was waiting--waiting to discover from
what direction the voice had come that caused him to pause and listen.

The minutes passed like slow-dragging years. The man above wore shoes
and the two men who wore shoes, outside our own party, were Leith and
the one-eyed man. Somehow we felt that Maru and Kaipi had settled with
One Eye, so there was only one person on the Isle of Tears who could
possibly be listening.

Ten minutes passed, then Holman pointed to his own legs. I understood
the sign and gripped his ankles. My head was bursting with the terror
inspired by the thought that our escape might be cut off after the
miraculous manner in which the way out had been shown to us.

Without noise, yet with incredible swiftness, the youngster turned upon
his back and wriggled forward till his head and shoulders were again out
over the pit. His body was tense, every muscle showing as he stiffened
himself. Into my mind flashed a picture of the bloodthirsty Wizards of
the Centipede stretching out in exactly the same manner centuries before
a white man sailed into the Pacific!

The silence seemed to sap my strength. I watched Holman with eyes that
were half-blinded by the perspiration that rolled down my forehead.
There was no movement upon the ledge, and the fingers of the youngster
were reaching slowly--slowly upward.

It was a yell of horror that shattered the awful quiet--a yell that went
up through the hot air like the shriek of a lost soul. It swirled around
and around like a lariat of brass. It was a terrible yell. It wrenched
my inmost being till the very spirit seemed to go out of me for an
instant, and I returned to consciousness to find myself struggling to
hold Holman from being dragged into the depths below.

It was the youngster's voice that seemed to bring me back to a knowledge
of the surroundings. In an instant's pause in the torrent of blasphemy
his words came to me clear and distinct.

"Hold me tight, Verslun!" he cried. "Hold me tight, man! _I have him!_"

[Illustration: "Hold me tight, Verslun!" he cried. "Hold me tight, man!
_I have him!_"]

I shut my eyes to escape the fascination of the depths, and I gripped
Holman's ankles till my nails burrowed into his flesh. I felt his body
heave with a tremendous effort, then another yell, shorter but more
terrifying than the first, told me that the struggle was over.

I dragged Holman back to safety, and, stretched side by side upon the
rock, we listened. Down in the pit--miles, leagues away, something was
falling!

The youngster pulled himself together after the silence had settled upon
the place like a film.

"Let's tie the rope and get the girls up here," he said quietly, "In a
while--in a little while--I can crawl on to the ledge and pull them up
with a rope."


[Illustration]


CHAPTER XXIV

THE WAY TO HEAVEN

With quick-beating pulses we fixed the rope and shouted directions down
the slippery passage to the girls and the Professor, and inside of ten
minutes they were beside us, looking out with frightened eyes at the
coloured wall of the opposite side of the pit. The faces of Edith and
Barbara looked pale and careworn, but they smiled bravely when Holman
assured them that we were within a yard of the path by which we had
crossed to the Valley of Echoes.

"Be brave," he said cheerfully. "You'll be on your way back to the
shore before many hours have passed by. There is no--no danger now."

I do not know if the two girls understood the meaning of his words, but
they asked no questions. Somehow I think that they knew what had
happened. Those two terrible cries must have reached their ears as they
waited at the foot of the chute that led to the wizards' seat, but if
they had any doubts concerning their origin, they refrained from seeking
information. But the Professor knew. A melancholy that had tied his
tongue all through the long day in the Black Kindergarten left him as he
came to the sunlight, and he became light-hearted and merry. He felt
that he had been relieved of his load of nightmares, and the dangers of
the climb to the rocky shelf above our heads did not trouble him in the
least.

It was Holman who performed the heroic work on the late afternoon of
that eventful day. With the rope tied around his waist, he pushed
himself out as he had done twice before during the preceding hour, then,
gripping the edge of the shelf, dragged himself forward. For a moment,
as he swung over the depths, it looked as if he would be unable to drag
himself up, and we clung on to the rope and watched him with frightened
eyes. But youth and courage won the day. Slowly, inch by inch, he lifted
himself, the lips of the two girls moving in dumb prayer; then we lost
sight of him as he drew his legs up on to the ledge, and we knew that we
were safe!

The youngster secured the rope to a projection on the shelf above, and
the Professor, nervous but game, was the next to make the perilous
journey. It was blood-curdling to watch the old man swaying over the
depths while Holman, lying flat upon his stomach, gripped him beneath
the arms and dragged the poor old scientist to safety.

Barbara went next, and when the rope was lowered once more I secured it
around Edith's waist. I held her in my arms as I pushed her body forward
to Holman's strong hands that waited just below the ledge, and for one
brief instant her lips came close to mine, and with a mad, wild love
that had been born in danger, where there was no time for words, I
stooped and kissed her. And even in that moment of extreme peril a faint
smile swept over her face as she looked up into mine, and I knew that
she understood.

It was nearly sunset when we moved away from the top of the Vermilion
Pit, but we had not gone ten paces when we stopped. A yell came out of
the place, then another and another, and Holman and I rushed back to the
edge. Down beneath us, on the slippery Ledge of Death, two natives were
locked in a death grip, and a single glance told us that they were Maru
and Soma. The Raretongan had chased Leith's brown lieutenant on to the
path, and now they were struggling like demons in the mad endeavour to
thrust each other into the depths.

"Quick!" cried Holman. "The rope!"

He slipped the line around his waist as the pair moved to the edge. Maru
was dragging the big savage with a strength that was surprising, but it
was a certainty that if Soma went over the edge the Raretongan would
keep him company.

Holman slipped down upon the Ledge, but before he could reach them a
dusty, bleeding figure stumbled through the entrance to the cavern, a
knife flashed in the sunlight, and Maru was drawn back into safety as
Soma released his grip. The newcomer was Kaipi!

"He kill Toni!" he cried. "Toni all same brother to me. Toni work with
me long time Suva."

Toni, the pupil of the Maori, who had instructed him on Levuka wharf as
to the way out of Black Fernando's hell, had been avenged at last.

It was a happy reunion we held upon the edge of the pit. Edith and
Barbara bound up the wounds of the two faithful natives, and the
muscular Raretongan was so touched with their tender ministrations that
he foraged in his tattered sulu, and with tears of gratitude in his big
brown eyes he handed back to Barbara the emerald ring with which she had
caused him to desert from Leith's service.

"Me want no pay from you!" he cried. "Me work for you all same
nothing!"

We learned that the one-eyed white man and the last of the Wizards of
the Centipede had been dispatched by Maru and Kaipi, and we also
received the news that the four carriers had bolted back to the yacht.
The latter piece of information somewhat dampened our spirits. We felt
that Leith and Newmarch were friends, and we wondered what the silent,
thin-faced captain would do when he heard the story of Black Fernando's
discomfiture.

On account of Kaipi's weak state we camped that evening on the same spot
that we had occupied on the second night upon the Isle of Tears, and at
daybreak next morning we set out for the little bay. We were all happy.
The Professor was as pleased as a boy on his vacation, and he had
returned again to his task of taking notes. The two girls were radiant;
Kaipi was joyful because the murdered Toni had been revenged, and Maru
was in the seventh heaven of delight because Barbara had informed him
that he could go to San Francisco with the party as a reward for his
devotion. As for Holman and myself, we forgot the loneliness of the
place in our joy. The same trees peered at us, the same cablelike vines
gripped our legs, and the same weird rock masses blocked our paths, but
love was in our hearts, and morbid thoughts were chased away.

On the afternoon of the second day from the pit we reached the shore of
the little bay, but _The Waif_ was not there. Newmarch had evidently
discovered that Leith had not been quite successful in the carrying out
of his plans, and fearful of his own share in the business, he had
bolted with the yacht. The South Sea breeds piratical thoughts, and from
our own knowledge of the captain we guessed that in his particular case
those thoughts would be easily generated.

"He thinks he'll save his own skin by clearing out," said Holman, "but
I'm satisfied that Dame Justice is an expert with the lariat. If he's
not in jail before three months are out, my name is not Will Holman."

It was the missionary schooner _Messenger of Light_ that saw our beacon
upon the island on the fourth day after we had reached the spot where we
had landed from _The Waif_. The beautiful white vessel hove to outside
the entrance to the little bay, a boat came ashore, and twenty minutes
after they had first sighted our signal we were on the way to
Wellington, New Zealand.

"And the 'Frisco boats call there," murmured Barbara, "Joy! Joy! Joy!"

The moon was whitening the sleeping Pacific when Edith and I stood
looking over the taffrail as the _Messenger of Light_ swept on her
course. From nearby came the voice of Professor Herndon relating his
experiences to a missionary who was returning from the Marquesas. A soft
island melody was wafted from the fo'c'stle, and the night was alive
with all the witchery of the tropics.

"Edith," I whispered, as I took her hand, "I am a common sailorman, but
if you could love me I--I--"

I stopped in confusion, and as she had done on a former occasion, she
came to the rescue of my stammering tongue.

"You are a big, true man," she murmured. "If you had not come with us we
should not have returned from that awful place. God let you listen to
that song of the White Waterfall so that we might be saved."

Some minutes afterward she released herself from my arms. "Let us find
Will and Barbara," she said softly. "We will share each other's
happiness."

And as I followed her across the poop, a tremendous surge of joy rose up
and filled my heart. The whole world was clean and good, and in my
glorious exultation I whispered a prayer for the soul of John Leith,
alias Black Fernando.

THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's The White Waterfall, by James Francis Dwyer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WHITE WATERFALL ***

***** This file should be named 10862.txt or 10862.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/8/6/10862/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Harold Lawson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


