The Project Gutenberg EBook of Big and Little Sisters, by Theodora R. Jenness

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Big and Little Sisters

Author: Theodora R. Jenness

Release Date: February 1, 2004 [EBook #10902]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIG AND LITTLE SISTERS ***




Produced by Prepared by Al Haines.




BIG AND LITTLE SISTERS

A Story of an Indian Mission School

By THEODORA R. JENNESS


CHAPTER I.

It was a Saturday morning in December at the Indian Mission School.
Two young Sioux girls were going up the stairs--Hannah Straight Tree and
Cordelia Running Bird.  It was their Saturday for cleaning. The two
girls drew a heavy breath in prospect of the difficult task that
confronted them.  The great unplastered mission building was a chilly
place throughout the winter, and the halls and stairway that morning
were drafty from the blustering wind that swept the Dakota plains and
came through the outer doors below, where restless children kept going
to and fro continually.  The young hall-girls shivered on the upper
landing, and stepped back in a sheltered niche in which the brooms were
hanging.  They had thrown their aprons over their heads and shoulders,
and were dreading to begin their work.

"My floor and stairs always look nicer than your floor and stairs," said
Hannah Straight Tree to Cordelia Running Bird.

"Because you have the teachers' side, and that's always nicer, to begin
with, than the girls' side," answered Cordelia Running Bird.  "You know
the teachers never walk whole-feet when you are scrubbing.  If they have
to go by, they walk tiptoe, and their toes are sharp and clean and do
not make big tracks.  But all the children on my side walk whole-feet
over the wet floor when I am scrubbing, and their shoes are big and
muddy.  Ugh! big tracks they make!  But I have learned the motto, every
word, and I can speak that when I feel discouraged with my work."
Cordelia Running Bird gazed at the motto, while the dormitory girls
flocked by, and when the hall was quiet she repeated it in the peculiar
monotonous tone with which an Indian pupil usually recites:

"Those who faithfully perform the task of keeping clean the dark places,
the cold places and the rough places, are they to whom it may indeed be
said, 'Well done.'"

"I shall not try to learn the motto, for it makes my memory tired," said
Hannah Straight Tree.  "I do not like to think hard or work hard.  I am
glad I have the teachers' side."

"If you do not think hard you will have a heart that is a dark place,
like the scrub-pail closet, and it will he hard to keep it clean of
wrong thoughts, like the white mother talked about in Sunday-school.
The motto means inside of us as well as places where we live.  I like to
think hard," said Cordelia Running Bird.  "I heard the teacher tell the
white mother that I had the best memory of any middle-sized girl, and
she said it was as good as many white girls' memories of my age, and
that is 'most fourteen.  So I am to speak the longest middle-sized piece
in the Christmas entertainment."

"Ee!" cried Hannah Straight Tree, "hear her brag because she has a white
memory!  If the teacher praised me, I should be ashamed to tell it!"

"She will not praise you, for you are always very dumb in school.  You
will not try to speak a lesson only with the class in concert," said
Cordelia Running Bird.  "I shall try to finish very fast this morning.
There are only two more Saturdays till Christmas, and to-day I want to
feather-stitch the little new blue dress for Susie.  She will wear it
every day when she is here Christmas.  Many white and Indian visitors
will be here."

"And you will feel so proud because the visitors and the school will
look at Susie, and the middle-sized and little girls will always choose
her in the games.  They would not choose my little sister if she
played," said Hannah Straight Tree, with a sudden downcast look.

"Dolly is so shy I do not know if she would go into the middle of the
ring if they should choose her, and she would not know the way to choose
back," answered Cordelia Running Bird.

"Ee!  She would!  She would!" disputed Hannah Straight Tree.  "Dolly is
as brave and smart as Susie--smarter, too, for she is shorter!  She
could play the games if I would let her!"

"But you will not," replied the other; "you must not scold about my
little sister.  Susie knows the motions in the Jack Frost song so well
the teachers says that she can motion with the children in the Christmas
entertainment."

"She does not motion right," said Hannah Straight Tree.  "She gets
behind, and when they sing:

  "'He nips little children on the nose,
    He pinches little children on the toes,
    He pulls little children by the ears,
    And brings to their eyes the big, round tears,'

she is only nipping her nose when the rest are pulling their ears."

"But she is so little she looks cute, and the visitors and school will
laugh at her and praise her," said Cordelia Running Bird, undismayed.
"She will not wear the blue dress in the Jack Frost song.  She will wear
a red dress from my mission box.  I asked the white mother if I could
not buy the red cloth for an entertainment dress for Susie with the
money that she paid because I tended baby one month till the nurse-girl
came.  And she said if I wished I could put a nickel on the missionary
plate twenty Sundays, which would be one dollar, and so buy the cloth.
She said it would be teaching me to give, as well as to receive.  She
keeps the nickel with the school pennies, and I take one every Sunday."

"And you lift your hand so high and drop the nickel very too loud, so
all the school can hear, when Amy Swimmer passes you the plate!" cried
Hannah Straight Tree.  "Just like it says, 'Ee! I am putting on a
nickel, and the rest can only give one penny!  And _I_ earned my money,
and the pennies are money that their people sent them.'"

"You are very jealous," was the calm reply.  "I shall hire a large girl
to cut it fine and help make the red dress very fast.  The sewing
teacher has not time for such dresses.  Ver-r-y pr-r-etty it will look!"
Cordelia Running Bird smiled prospectively, displaying small white teeth
and two round dimples.  "Christmas evening I shall curl Susie's hair
with a slate pencil, and she will wear fine shoes, and black stockings
with the red dress.  My father brought them with the blue dress, and I
keep them in my cupboard."

"You are much vain because your father is an agency policeman and earns
money, so he buys nice things for Susie," Hannah Straight Tree said,
with growing envy. "Dolly has to wear the issue goods, and she will not
look pretty Christmas time!  Her dress will be a kind that looks black,
and Lucinda only knows a way to make it look like an Indian dress.  She
will wear cowskin shoes so much too large, and very ugly-colored
stockings. If her dress gets torn before she comes, Lucinda will not
mend it nice--only draw it up so puckery.  Very lots of grease spots
will be on it, and her hair will be so snarly I shall have to comb her
very fast."

"My little sister is not torn and dirty any time," said Cordelia Running
Bird, "for my mother came to mission school when she was young and
learned the neat way."

"My big sister only went to camp school just a little while," said
Hannah Straight Tree.  "When my mother died she had to stay at home and
work and keep my little sister.  Now again my father has got married,
and Lucinda wants to come to school and bring my little sister.  Dolly
was five birthdays last Thanksgiving dinner."

"Susie was five birthdays while I was at home vacation. I would be so
glad if she could stay at school next time she comes, but she was
sliding on the ice, and she fell and broke herself right here."
Cordelia touched her collarbone.  "She is mended, but my mother is
afraid to leave her with the children now," she added.  "But next year
she will leave her.  If your big and little sister come to school they
will have nice mission things."

"But they cannot for my father," Hannah Straight Tree said, with
deepening gloom.  "He would let Lucinda, but he says Dolly is too short;
she must be ten birthdays when she comes.  Lucinda loves Dolly, so she
will not leave her, and my stepmother is cross-tempered.  Lucinda will
be twenty-one birthdays--much too old to come to school--when Dolly is
ten birthdays."

"You can tell your father the teachers like the Indian children come to
school when they are very short, so they can grow them more
white-minded," said Cordelia Running Bird.

"I told him, but he says he does not want his children very
white-minded.  He says I came to school so short that they have grown me
too white-minded.  I tell him I am very Indian-minded, but he tells me I
do not know white from Indian.  Lucinda is so sad she will not try. She
looks so horrid--Dolly, too--I am much ashamed of them.  I shall not
speak to them before the white visitors and the teachers--only down at
camp."

"Then you will be very wrong," said Cordelia Running Bird.  "I would not
be ashamed to speak to my own people anywhere."

"Ee!  You talk so good because your father wears a grand policeman's
coat and trousers, and your mother's head is in a hood!" said Hannah
Straight Tree, excitedly. "My father wears a very funny Indian clothes,
and feathers in his hairs, and my big sister's head is in a shawl.  All
the girls will say on Christmas, 'Susie looked just like a fairy in the
Jack Frost song.  We shall give her very lots of candy from our
Christmas bags.'  Dolly knows the Jack Frost motions; I taught her, and
she did them with the children down at camp.  But I shall not tell the
teacher, for Dolly has no pretty things to wear.  That is why I won't
let her play the games.  If my father saw her in the Jack Frost songs
and games, he would be glad she is so smart and just like he would let
her come to school.  But you would be so sorry if my big and little
sister came to school.  You think Susie is a skin-white girl and Dolly
is a very copper-colored Indian."

"You do not speak true," was the denial.  "I should not be sorry, and I
do not think Susie is a skin-white girl. She is very copper-colored,
too."

"But you do not wish Dolly would be in the Jack Frost song and wear a
red dress just like Susie's!" challenged Hannah Straight Tree,
disconcerting her companion with the piercing gaze habitual to her race.

Though not quite innocent of all the charges laid to her, Cordelia
Running Bird was a truthful girl, and she would not disown a failing
plainly set before her by another.  She evaded her companion's gaze in
silence.

"You are thinking hard!  You cannot say it!" was the fierce indictment
from Hannah Straight Tree.

"But--I wish she could be in another motion song--and wear a--green
dress," came the hesitating answer.

"Ee!  You think they would not watch Susie all the time if Dolly
motioned Jack Frost, too, and looked like Susie!  And you do not wish
that Dolly had a blue dress--only ugly green--and looked like Susie in
the games," said Hannah Straight Tree.

"But little white girls do not need to wear alike dresses," was Cordelia
Running Bird's argument. "Because the little white visitor last summer
looked just like a fairy in the pretty pink with white lace, did her
sister have to wish another little white girl looked the very too same?"
she asked.

"There is a difference, but I cannot tell," answered Hannah Straight
Tree, taking down her broom in puzzled moodiness.

The two girls went about their work in a most unfortunate state of mind.
Hannah's discontent at Dolly's lack and Susie's plenty, and the prospect
of Cordelia's triumphs through the petted little sister, grew upon her,
and resulted in unlooked-for trials to Cordelia, who was much
discomfited by the force of her companion's criticisms.

Cordelia Running Bird was a bright, attractive girl, quite conscientious
in discharging her industrial and school duties, and much interested in
the Sunday-school; but in a private talk the very day before, the
teachers had referred to her in some perplexity.

"I wish Cordelia Running Bird were a little different," said the
school-teacher.  "She leads her class, and is a credit to the school in
most respects, but she is rather too ambitious to outdo others.  It
creates jealousy."

"I have observed that she is notional in the making of her dresses,"
said the sewing teacher.  "She is apt to want the skirt a little wider
and the hem a half-inch deeper than the regular uniform.  And she asks
to have more buttonholes, which means more buttons, and an extra ruffle
on the waist.  But she begs me so politely and appears so thankful, if I
grant these trifling favors, that I find myself indulging her too
frequently.  She does the extra work herself, cheerfully and neatly, if
not speedily, but closely watched by others.  She has learned as if by
intuition that variety is the spice of life, but she seems unconscious
of the fact that she makes the other girls discontented.  But she is so
pleasant and obedient, as a rule, that minor faults may be forgiven
her," the white mother charitably concluded.




CHAPTER II.

As something quite unusual at that season in the Dakotas, there had been
a thaw the day before, and a great quantity of mud had been tracked in
on the girls' side by the sewing classes coming from the schoolhouse,
separate from the main mission building, to the upstairs room in which
the sewing work was done.

Hannah Straight Tree quickly swept her portion of the hall, for there
was but little mud on the teachers' side, and was proceeding to her
stairs before Cordelia Running Bird was half way along her floor.

"You have not taken up your dirt!  You have swept it over on my side!"
exclaimed Cordelia Running Bird, who, with all her close attention to
her own work, kept a sharp eye on the other's movements.

"There is little, and it will not be much work to take it up with
yours," was Hannah's reply.  "When we finished yesterday I lent our
dustpan to the middle dormitory girls--they said theirs was too broken
--and they lost it.  Now they say they can borrow the south dormitory
dustpan, and they shall not hunt ours. You can always find things better
than I can, so you must hunt it and take up my dirt," was Hannah
Straight Tree's demand.

"Tokee!  How strange you talk!" exclaimed Cordelia Running Bird, in
amazement.  "The dormitory girls must ask for a new dustpan if they
break theirs.  It is not the rule to lend things, for it makes
confusion; if you lent the dustpan you must find it and take up your
dirt, for I have more to do than you.  It is Number 8, and you can tell
it when you see it."

"You are very cross as well as proud and vain--and you have learned the
motto, every word.  If I had learned the motto I should try to be good,"
said Hannah Straight Tree.

"The motto does not say a girl can tell us we must do a work that is not
ours, and we must mind her.  I shall sweep your dirt back," was the warm
reply.

Cordelia Running Bird gave her broom a sudden push and sent the
sweepings flying backward in a cloud.

"Now look how mean you are! Again I have to sweep my floor!" cried
Hannah Straight Tree, angrily.  "Proud--vain--cross--mean!"  She
counted the four failings on her fingers.

"Not the least bit do I care," replied Cordelia Running Bird, stung
beyond endurance by Hannah's taunts.  "I was not cross at first, but now
I am, because you call me four bad names.  I am now glad your little
sister cannot play the games, or motion in one song, or even have an
ugly green dress.  I am not sorry that your big and little sister cannot
come to school, and very much I wish I had not learned the motto."

Here the young Sioux girl, who was compelled to battle with hereditary
pride and stubbornness in every effort to do right, forgot the white
mother's admonition that the heart might be a dark place and a cold
place needing to be cleansed of evil thoughts.

Hannah Straight Tree did not hunt the dustpan, but with perseverance
worthy of a better cause, she brushed the sweepings from her floor and
stairs upon a ragged palm-leaf fan which she discovered in a corner,
and, dropping them into the scrub-pail, took them out of doors. Cordelia
brought a shoe-box from her cupboard in the playroom and applied it as
an inconvenient dustpan. Meanwhile dustpan Number 8 remained in the
darkest corner of the middle dormitory closet, where it had been pushed
in the rush of clearing up the day before.

Cordelia Running Bird's work of making clean her floor and stairs was
even harder than she had expected. Never had there seemed so many
errands to and fro by those who did the weekly cleaning in the three
dormitories, numbering quite a force.  The thaw had ended in a freezing
snow squall in the night, but a sufficient quantity of mud was clinging
to the broad soles of the government shoes that tramped across
Cordelia's wet floor to insure a startling trail of footprints.

"I cannot keep them up, they come again so fast," she murmured to
herself in grim despair, while wringing out her mop-rag to attack a line
of tracks imprinted by the largest girl in school, in going to and from
the laundry to dispose of laid-off sheets and pillow-cases.  "_Ver-ry
hor-r-i-d_ pictures of the ugly issue shoes.  I will not wear them.  I
am wearing kid store shoes my father buys for every day.  The dormitory
girls are shovel-feeted, and I Wish they could not walk one step--only
lie in bed!"

She was overheard by Hannah Straight Tree, coming up the girls' stairs
at that moment.  Hannah's own work had been done with little difficulty,
and she had obtained permission to help the middle dormitory girls, for
reasons all her own.

The reckless speech was repeated to the dormitory girls by Hannah
Straight Tree, much to their displeasure.

"The dormitory girls are shovel-feeted, and she wishes they could not
walk one step, only lie in bed!" exclaimed the largest girl, sitting
down on a straw-tick to discuss the matter.  "Then we should be
cripples, and, tokee! how many cripples there would be!"

"If they came from both the other dormitories into this to lie down with
the middle dormitory girls, there would be one cripple in each bed, and
in one there would be two cripples," said a broom girl, who was quite
expert at figures, having studied on the problem with the aid of
broom-straws representing cripples.

This portrayal of the startling situation, if Cordelia Running Bird's
wish could be fulfilled, increased the shock of indignation in the
dormitories.

"Ee!" cried one, "we hate the ugly government shoes, of course, and wish
that we could wear the nice shoes from our mission boxes every day.  But
we cannot, only Sundays--and we have to change them after Sunday-school
--and when we wear our best clothes for white visitors.  Cordelia Running
Bird will not wear the government shoes because her father is an agency
policeman, and can buy store shoes for every day."

"I was always much ashamed of my big feet, and now I am more ashamed,"
complained the largest girl.  "If the dormitory girls are shovel-feeted,
every large girl in this school is shovel-feeted."

"Cordelia was very cross about the dustpan, too, but we can pay her
back," said Hannah Straight Tree, adding fresh fuel to the fire.

"Now I shall not show her how to feather-stitch the little blue dress,"
said the largest girl, who was quite famous at embroidery, and had
partly promised to instruct Cordelia Running Bird in her work that day.

"And I shall not help her make the little red dress, as she will be
wanting me next week," resolved a south dormitory bed girl, Emma Two
Bears, who was standing in the doorway.  Emma was the most experienced
dressmaker of the large girls' class and was generous, as a rule, in
helping younger girls. "I am sorry now that I cut and made the little
blue waist, but I did not think she would so soon be wishing me a
cripple."

"And you need not praise the little blue and red dresses if she gets
them done; but I am sure she cannot," gloried Hannah Straight Tree.

"Ee!  We will not.  We will call them ugly issue goods," said one of the
girls.

"Or watch her little sister in the Jack Frost song," said another.

"We will shut our eyes!" exclaimed another.

"And the middle-sized and short girls need not choose Susie in the
games," came from another.

"We will tell them not to.  They will choose Dolly," cried a fifth.

"But Dolly looks so horrid, I am much ashamed of her," was Hannah
Straight Tree's answer.

Cordelia Running Bird heard the fierce discussion through the open door,
near which she knelt at work, and the bitter tears ran down her face.

When at length her work was done as well as she was able, and the last
stair wiped, she went back upstairs on tiptoe to inspect her floor and
see if it was dry.  She was met by Hannah Straight Tree on the upper
landing, carrying a pail of scrub water, mixed with ashes, from the
dormitory. Hannah set it on the top stair, and then glanced wickedly at
Cordelia through half-closed eyes that meant mischief.

"What if I should tip it over?" she said.

"Ee! You must not.  It would freeze, and I should have to scald my hands
with too hot water, thawing it!" exclaiming Cordelia Running Bird,
rushing to prevent her.

In her haste to keep the pail from being overturned Cordelia hit it with
her foot, upsetting it herself.  The stairs were deluged with the
contents, Hannah Straight Tree fell back with a laugh.  "Now see what
you have done yourself!  I did not spill one drop.  You cannot say I
did."

Cordelia Running Bird burst into upbraiding exclamations in Dakota,
which, because they wished them to learn to speak English, was a
forbidden language in the school except on Sundays and on holidays.  By
an odd mishap of memory, Cordelia was apt to break the rule in moments
of excitement, and she knew the penalty too well.

"Now you have talked Dakota, and you must report yourself," Hannah
Straight Tree said triumphantly. "You wished the dormitory girls would
have to lie in bed--now you must lie in bed yourself.  You cannot
feather-stitch or speak to anyone."

The unclean water froze upon the stairs, and Cordelia Running Bird's
work of thawing it with hot water was a long and painful process.  When
it was accomplished, though but poorly, she went upstairs a second time,
passing through the front hall to the white mother's room to report that
she had spoken in Dakota.

"Again, Cordelia?  How can you forget so often?" said the young white
mother in a seriously inquiring tone.

The little Indian girl's excitement had now given place to
discouragement.  She was silent for some time, then she murmured an
original defense.

"The cross thoughts come in Indian, and I speak them out that way.
Che-cha (hateful) means much more in Indian than in English.  Dakota
is my own language, and it tells me how to scold just right."

"No, dear, just wrong," was the reply.  Then looking at the draggled
little figure with head drooped moodily and smarting hands locked
tightly at the sides, the white mother added, "You have had a cold, hard
time this morning in the hall, I know.  Have you been cross about your
work?"  The gentle voice invited confidence, but it did not melt
Cordelia Running Bird.

"Yes, ma'am.  I was very cross at Hannah Straight Tree and the dormitory
girls.  I called the dormitory girls a name, and then a pail of very
dirty water was tipped over on my stairs, so again I had to clean them,
and I screamed at Hannah Straight Tree in Dakota."

"Did Hannah tip it over?"

"No, ma'am, I tipped it over."

With all her sense of injury, Cordelia Running Bird would not tell tales
to divide the blame.

The white mother saw that there was more than she knew of connected with
the trouble in the hall, but seeing that the race mood was upon
Cordelia, she forbore all further questions.

"It has often been explained that if the older pupils spoke Dakota very
much the little ones would speak it, too, and not learn English as they
should," she said. "I'm sorry that the cross thoughts caused you to
forget, Cordelia Running Bird."

"I am very cross now," said Cordelia, fearing her confession might be
misconstrued as a repentance.  "I have enemies that I am hating very
hard.  I shall be thinking Indian thoughts about them while I lie in
bed."

"I hope the cross thoughts will leave you if you lie in bed, where you
can be alone, and try to drive them out. I will send your dinner to the
dormitory," said the white mother.

"I cannot eat one bite for many days.  I wish to starve," Cordelia
Running Bird said, as she turned away.




CHAPTER III.

The girls had finished working in the dormitories and had gone below.
Cordelia Running Bird was relieved that she would not have to meet them
and endure such looks as they might give, though not allowed to speak to
her.

Going to her corner in the south dormitory, she put on her nightgown and
crept into bed.  She hid her head beneath the blankets to shut out the
sounds below, in which she was to have no part for several hours.

But though Cordelia Running Bird was in solitude, her sharp ears caught
the noise of romping children in the playroom, and the frequent dropping
of the sliding-doors upon the narrow individual cupboards, indicating an
excessive rummaging of shelves.  Cordelia knew full well the prying
habits of the Indian children.

"I am glad I have the red dress in my trunk, but they will meddle with
my other things and look at Susie's blue dress, and then roll it up in
such bad wrinkles," she said to herself.  "Just like they will drop a
skein of feather-stitching silk and tramp it with their feet till it is
very dirty.  Then some girl will pick it up to sew her doll clothes, and
there will not be enough for Susie's dress."

Cordelia Running Bird held her breath as these thoughts came to her.

"But I do not know if I can feather-stitch it now, for there is no one
to teach me, that I know of.  Just like Hannah Straight Tree and the
dormitory girls will tell the whole school to hate me, and they will.
If I cannot get a large girl to help make the red dress, and I try to do
it all alone, it will fit so bad, and I cannot get it done in time.
What if I should tell my mother to have Susie stay at camp, and not once
come inside the yard Christmas time?  Then she would not need the
dresses, and they could not call them issue goods, and not choose Susie
in the games, and shut their eyes at her."

Cordelia lay very still, but the thought of Susie's missing the
festivities by staying in the big building in the mission pasture, where
the Indian visitors camped in winter, was put from her in short order.

"Susie shall not stay in camp.  I shall find a way to get the dresses
done, and she shall motion Jack Frost and see the Christmas tree.  I
shall tell them I am tired of playing silly games, and Susie shall not
play, either, so they cannot leave her out.  And I shall tell the school
they must not watch Susie motion, for they are such horrid Indians they
would scare her very bad.  When Hannah Straight Tree's big and little
sister come into the playroom I shall walk close up to them and pull my
dress away, and look at it so sharp, and say, so Hannah hears me, 'Those
wild Indians have so many grease spots I am much afraid of catching
them.'"

While plotting these misdeeds Cordelia Running Bird fell asleep.  A
young girl from the teachers' table brought her dinner on a tray and set
it by the bed without awaking her.  She did not wake up until near the
middle of the afternoon.  She found that the white mother had stolen
into the dormitory with a small book which she had placed upon the
pillow.  There was a narrow white ribbon, frayed and yellow, wound
around the book and tied on one side in a bow.  The rooms below now were
quiet, for the wind had lulled and the entire school was out of doors.

Looking from the window near her bed, Cordelia saw the broad, white
plains illumined with brilliant sunshine and the girls exercising on the
glittering crust of snow occasioned by the thaw.  The little girls were
sliding down hill on boards and broken shovels, cast-off dripping-pans
and ash-pans--everything, indeed, that could be seized on for coasting.
A group of large and middle-sized girls were walking over the mission
pasture, stretching for a mile on every side.  Another band of girls was
packed into a long, wide bob-sled on the point of starting with the
white mother to the little log post office down the river.

"Very lots of fun, and I am being punished here in bed!" Cordelia said
to herself, mournfully.  "Now the bob-sled starts, and very loud the
sleigh-bells ring.  The white mother drives, and she must hold the lines
so tight, for very fast the horses want to go.  We go to the post office
by the al-pha-bet on Saturday, and this day it is the P's and R's--there
are no Q's--so it is my turn.  Very fast I meant to feather-stitch, so I
could spare the time to go. Ee! There is Hannah Straight Tree in my
place.  She made me talk Dakota and get punished.  Now she gets my
sleigh-ride!"  And Cordelia Running Bird threw herself back upon the
pillow, giving vent to wild, resentful tears.

When the tears had spent themselves the Indian girl raised her head and
saw the little book on the other pillow.

"Tokee!  The white mother put it here.  She always keeps it, and it
means that I can look at it now."

Cordelia unwound the ribbon, opening the little book.

"Annie's Bible, and I never thought of her to-day! Just like I am
forgetting her so fast.  Here is Helen's letter.  I shall read that
first."

[Illustration: She read the little note slowly.]

She took a little white note from a dainty envelope and read it slowly,
but with understanding that spoke of previous acquaintance with the
words:

  "_Dear Annie_: Will you let this little Bible be your
  friend and guide, as I have tried to have it for my friend
  and guide since I have been a King's Daughter?  I have
  marked some verses I have learned and have recited in
  the meeting of our circle, and I wish that you might care
  to learn them and recite them in your meeting at the
  school.

  "The King's Daughters in the Far East love to think
  about the Indian girls away out West, who are also
  members of our circle.  Isn't it a sweet thought, Annie,
  that although so widely separated, we are all the children
  of one family in Christ, and are cared for by the same
  heavenly Father?

       "Yours with loving interest,
          "HELEN MERRIAM, Hartford, Conn.
          "Aged 16."

"It came in Annie's mission box, and Helen was her unknown white
friend," said Cordelia Running Bird, as she put the letter back into the
envelope.  "I shall next read Annie's letter."  And she took another
little missive from the Bible, written with a pencil on the tablet paper
of the school, in wavering penmanship that showed the weakness of the
writer's hand.  Cordelia read:

  "_Dear Cordelia_: Annie Running Bird will leave this
  Bible to Cordelia Running Bird, my sister, for I cannot
  carry it to heaven, and in heaven I shall not need to read
  the words that Jesus spoke on earth, for I shall hear him
  speak up there.  But Cordelia will not just yet be bearing
  Jesus speak up there, and she will need to read this Bible
  and must mind just what it tells her.  Dear Cordelia,
  you can have this Bible for your own when you are
  fourteen birthdays, so you will be old enough to take
  good care of it and read it very lots. But if you want
  to borrow it before it is your own, the white mother will
  please lend it to you, so you always give it back, and do
  not lose the letters and the pieces of my hairs that will
  be in it. I did not learn all of Helen's verses for the
  King's Daughters' meeting, for I got too sick to study,
  and my memory feels so queer. I have put a cross behind
  the ones I learned, and, dear Cordelia, wilt you try to
  learn them, too, and all the rest that Helen marked?
  The one I tried to think of most is St. Matthew, chapter 5:44.

  "Good-by, dear sister, for I cannot live much longer,
  I am so pained with the hard coughing all the time. These
  words I write so you will not forget me. I wish to see
  my father and my mother and my little sister very much.
  But if I cannot, you must give my love to them, and all
  my other friends, and tell them they must meet me in
  the better world. And you must, too.

  "So again I say good-by, dear sister,
            "ANNIE RUNNING BIRD,
            "Aged 16."

  "P. S.--Write good-by to Helen and my love."

"She lies at the agency.  She sleeps with those that are happy," mused
Cordelia, looking at the lock of hair with reverent eyes.  "It was very
cold one year ago this winter, when she had the whooping-cough so hard
it made her lungs so sick she could not live.

"My mother had the fever very long and hard at home and could not come
to watch her; my father came, but could not stay long, for my mother was
so sick.  But the teachers took good care of Annie, and the large girls
helped them.  I could only sit by her in daytime, for the teachers said
I was too young to stay up nights.  The dormitory girls were very kind
to Annie, and they used to sit up nights, when they had worked all day
and were so tired, to watch her.

"Emma Two Bears has a sweet song, and one night when she was watching
Annie, and there was a blizzard, and the wind cried very loud, like many
dogs all round the house, Annie was afraid; so she asked would Emma sing
'The Sweet By and By,' and Emma sang it louder than the wind, but very
sweet.  Annie said it made her feel so happy that again she would not be
afraid.

"And once more when Annie could not eat one bite of anything and was so
very faint, Hannah Straight Tree thought that she could drink some
rosebud porridge, so she ran away without permission, and waded through
the deep snow to the rosebushes up the river, to pick off some buds to
make the porridge.  She froze her shortest right side toe, and a wild
steer watched her very fierce, but Hannah Straight Tree did not care,
for she was all the time thinking Annie was so faint.  And Annie drank a
little porridge and told Hannah she was very glad indeed. And they did
not punish Hannah, for the rosebuds were for Annie.

"When the Indian preacher told at Annie's funeral how she was so good
and learned so many Bible verses for the King's Daughters' meetings,
there was much crying in the schoolhouse, for the girls all felt so bad.
And before I got into the wagon with my father, when we carried Annie to
the agency, Hannah Straight Tree whispered that she did not want to
sleep with anyone but me, and if they put another girl in bed with her
she would be sure to turn her back and never say one word to her.

"Now the dormitory girls and Hannah Straight Tree are my enemies.  The
verse that Annie tried to think of most is all about enemies.  I cannot
read it just now. I shall read some other verses first."

Many of the verses her sister had marked were familiar to Cordelia, for,
as Annie had requested, she had been allowed to take the little Bible
when in thoughtful mood, perhaps when kept within doors on a stormy
Sunday afternoon.  She had read them often, asking explanation of the
hard words from the teachers, and had learned a number of the simplest
ones in preparation for her own admission to the King's Daughters
Circle, which would be before long, she had hoped.

"Here is one about the tongue, that has the straight marks Helen made,
and Annie's cross behind it.  This I have not learned to say."

Cordelia Running Bird read aloud slowly: "'_Even so the tongue is a
little member, and boast-eth great things. Behold how great a matter a
little fire kind-leth_.'

"That means to brag with the tongue and make folks very cross.  Hannah
Straight Tree bragged because her floor and stairs are always nicer than
my floor and stairs," Cordelia said.  "But just like I have bragged
some, too," she added.  "My tongue has talked so much because my father
is an agency policeman and my little sister has nice things.  And I
bragged about my white memory and my store shoes.  But I was only
talking to myself about the ugly issue shoes, and Hannah Straight Tree
went and told it."

She turned the leaves and found another text: "'_A soft answer turneth
away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger_.'  I did not speak soft
when I told Hannah Straight Tree she was very dumb in school, and I was
glad Dolly could not motion in a single song, or even have an ugly green
dress, and I was not sorry that her big and little sister could not come
to school.  And Dolly and Lucinda have not said mean things to me, so
why should I be cross at them? But Hannah would not find the dustpan
and take up her dirt, and that was very mean.  Now here is one that I
have learned.  I can say it without looking at the book."

Cordelia Running Bird shut her eyes and carefully re-peated: "'_Pride
goeth before de-struction, and a haught-y spirit before a fall_.'
Haughty means to feel stuck-up. The pail fell downstairs and made me
talk Dakota, so I had to come to bed, because I was stuck-up and made
Hannah Straight Tree cross.  Just like they all would not be hating me
if I had not been haught-y.  But the dormitory girls were very mean to
walk whole-feet on my wet floor. If they had walked heel or tiptoe I
should not have scolded to myself about the ugly issue shoes, and called
them shovel-feeted, and wished they had to lie in bed. But I did not
wish them to be cripples--only have a good long rest till I was through
scrubbing.  But Hannah was mean to go and tell.  I can find no verse
that will excuse her and the dormitory girls."

Here Cordelia Running Bird fell to pitying herself anew.

"I shall now read Annie's best verse, but it will be very hard to mind
those words that Jesus spoke."




Cordelia Running Bird wound the ribbon round the little Bible, tying it
with care, and laid the book close by her on the bed; then she ate her
dinner with a hearty relish. She had hardly finished when the door from
the front hall was opened, and the young white mother, rosy from her
sleigh-ride, looked into the dormitory.  She saw the little Bible lying
near Cordelia, glanced inquiringly at the dark-faced girl, and then
smiled and nodded, to receive a cheerful smile in answer.

"Jump up quickly, dear, and dress," she said.  "Some little girls are
going up the river to the store, and one of the girls is Cordelia
Running Bird."

Cordelia started out of bed in joyful haste.

"Are you ready to give back the Bible?" asked the white mother, coming
to the bed.

"Yes, ma'am," replied Cordelia Running Bird, handing her the little
book.  "Thank you very much.  It made me think of Annie, so I read it,
and it told me I must love my enemies, so just like I shall do it now."

"I am very glad the cross thoughts have left you," was the answer.  "Now
put on your plaid dress and be ready in ten minutes."

Cordelia flew to get the plaid dress from the closet, and was ready and
downstairs in a twinkling.  The little girls selected for the drive were
in the playroom putting on their hoods and coats in great delight.
Cordelia hurriedly put on her own, and, opening her cupboard, she
unlocked a doll trunk, taking out a tiny purse for coins, whose portly
sides bespoke some wealth within.  She looked an instant at the blue
dress and the silk for feather-stitching, finding to her great relief
that they had not been touched.  She locked them in the doll trunk, put
the little key into the purse, and whisked away.

"The store is much nicer than the post office," was her joyous
reflection, as she slipped the purse into her pocket on her way
outdoors.  "Very long have I been saving this last part of all the money
that I earned tending baby; now I have a chance to spend it with my own
eyes."

Down the steep hill went the bob-sled to the great Missouri River, where
it took the straight, smooth road on the snow-laden ice.  The sewing
teacher drove the horses, giving them free rein.  The school-teacher sat
beside her on the seat, and Cordelia and the girls were snuggled down in
hay upon the bottom of the sled, with comforters for lap-robes.

The little log store was but two miles distant, and the party were not
long in reaching it.  It stood upon a steep bluff on the opposite shore.
The white man who kept it dealt to some extent in Indian curiosities, of
which the two teachers were in quest to send as Christmas gifts to
Eastern friends.

"We wish to look especially at moccasins and Indian dolls," said the
school-teacher to the trader when they had made known their errand.

[Illustration: "We wish to look especially at moccasins and Indian
dolls," said the teacher.]

"I've got some first-class moccasins, both porcupined and beaded, but no
Indian dolls," replied the trader. "Indian dolls are growing mighty
scarce, now the young squaws get so much put into their minds to do.
Only the old-timers understand the trick of making dolls."

"I am disappointed that you have none, for I wished to send one to my
little niece.  But I must wait and try to get one elsewhere."

While the two teachers were examining the moccasins, Cordelia Running
Bird and the children were absorbed in looking at the china dolls and
other articles displayed upon the shelves and hanging from a wire
stretched above the counter.

"I was telling Hannah Straight Tree I should buy a big doll for Susie,
and a red silk handkerchief for my father, and a blue silk handkerchief
for my mother, and should hang them on the Christmas tree," said
Cordelia, partly to herself and partly to the little girls.

"Kee!  I would not hang them," said a prudent little maid of ten years.
"Hannah Straight Tree told the other girls, and they are very yelous--
that is not the word, but I forget it--for they say they cannot hang
their people anything.  They say you think the name 'Running Bird' is
very stylish, and you wish to hear it called so often at the Christmas
tree."

"Of course I shall not hang them," said Cordelia, firmly.  "And I shall
not buy a doll for Susie, for my father always buys her one.  I was
going to brag about her having two," she added candidly.  "And I shall
not buy the silk handkerchiefs.  They have the issue cotton ones and
some other ones that my father bought;" and she withdrew her eyes from
the display of cheap and gaudy handkerchiefs of so-called silk material
suspended from the wire.  "I shall buy a cake pan with a steeple for my
mother, and a hairbrush for my father, for his hairs stick up so
straight and stiff.  And I shall give the presents very still at camp,
so the school will not be jealous."

Having thus subdued her vanity, Cordelia Running Bird shyly bought the
articles she had selected from the trader's boy, who helped his father
in the store.  She also bought four hair ribbons and a little bag of
candy, having left two silver quarters.  She was considering how to
spend them when her eyes alighted on some little brown shoes and a pair
of stockings matching them, beneath a small glass show-case.

"Ver-r-y st-y-lish little shoes and stockings!" she exclaimed,
forgetting in her rapture to be shy before the trader's boy.

The small girls crowded upon tiptoe at the show-case, peering through
the glass sides to inspect the little wonders.

"Just the color of an Indian," observed a little maid of seven, holding
up her slim hand to compare it with the red-brown shoes and stockings.
"But they made them for a little white girl.  They are like the ones the
little white visitor with the pink dress wore last summer."

"They are just as pretty for a little Indian girl," replied Cordelia.
"They would be just right for Susie," with a longing eye.

"But Susie does not need them," said the prudent little girl.  "She has
a black shoes and stockings in your cupboard that are very nice."

"But she could have two pairs.  These would be so pretty with the red
dress in the Jack Frost song.  She could wear the black ones with the
blue dress," said Cordelia, seized anew with her besetting sin and
growing helpless in its grasp.

She asked the number of the shoes, finding it the same that Susie wore.
Then she asked the price.  She could buy the shoes and stockings for a
dollar and a half.

"One dollar more than I have got," she said in feverish regret.  She was
intently silent for a little, then she turned, and, running quickly to
the school-teacher, drew her to one side, where they could talk unheard.

"The Indian doll my grandmother made for me is very nice and new, for I
have kept it in my trunk so much. I will give it to you if you please to
give me one dollar--that is what they gave my grandmother for her dolls
when she would sell them at the agency," Cordelia said, in eager
undertone.

"Why, child, you surely cannot wish to sell your Indian doll that has a
beaded buckskin dress just like the one your grandmother wore when she
was your age?" said the school-teacher in surprise.  "No, thank you,
dear. You wish to give me pleasure, but I cannot accept it, for I know
you love the little Indian grandmother better than you could the
prettiest white doll in the Christmas box," she added, gratefully.

"It is very Indian-minded, and I do not now care for it," replied the
girl, with a clouded face.  "I wish to buy the little brown shoes and
stockings in the glass box," pointing to the show-case.  "I have only
fifty cents."

"Why, of course, Cordelia, if you really wish to sell it," was the
response.  "The shoes and stockings are for Susie, I suppose, but are
not the black ones nice enough?"

Cordelia had displayed the little black shoes and stockings to the
teachers with a deal of pride.

"But the brown ones are much prettier for the Jack Frost song," she
argued, pressingly.

"Very well," replied the teacher, opening her purse and handing her the
dollar, with a sorry look.  "Perhaps, however, we would better see the
little things before you buy them."

The brown shoes and stockings were examined by the teachers and were
thought quite satisfactory for the price. Cordelia bought them
breathlessly and hid them in her coat pocket to insure their safety.

But the home-going in the early moonlight evening was less joyous than
had been the journey to the store. To the young Sioux girl the
sleigh-bells seemed to jingle harshly, and the gumbo hills, whose tops
were bare of snow, seemed frowning blackly from across the river.

Cordelia Running Bird passed some peppermints to the children, which
awoke a burst of gratitude.

"We little girls shall always choose Susie in the games," said one.

"Yes," exclaimed another, "Hannah Straight Tree and the dormitory girls
have told us not to, but we shall."

"Ee! Talk lower so the teacher will not hear you,"  said Cordelia, with
a sudden flutter of the breath.  "You must choose Dolly half the time--
if Susie plays."

"She is too bad-looking," said a third.  "Susie has two pairs of pretty
shoes, and two nice dresses, and we like her better."

"But you must not talk that way before the larger girls," Cordelia
cautioned in an undertone.  "Doily has a new hair ribbon like the red
one I have bought for Susie--both are in my lap.  And I have bought a
pink one for Lucinda.  I wish to do them good--Hannah Straight Tree,
too.  You must tell the larger girls you like Dolly just as well as
Susie.  If they wear alike ribbons on their braids it will be nice."

"A new ribbon cannot dress Dolly up," remarked the prudent little girl.
"The points of her hairs will look like Susie's points, and that is
all."




CHAPTER V.

Sunday morning there was wonder in the school to see Cordelia Running
Bird in the heavy government shoes that had been lying in her cupboard
since the distribution of the clothing early in the fall.  And when it
was observed that she had dressed for Sunday-school and had not changed
the shoes the wonder grew to pure amazement.

"Ee!  What ails the vainest girl in South Dakota? She will now be
wearing issue shoes to Sunday-school!" exclaimed a dormitory girl, among
a group of large and middle-sized pupils gathered in the music room,
adjoining the playroom, in Sunday-school attire.

Cordelia sat in a corner with her eyes upon her Sunday-school lesson.
Her feet were planted side by side as if with studied care.

"Just like she is very scared because the large and middle-sized girls
do not speak to her since yesterday. She is not sorry, only scared,"
said Hannah Straight Tree.  "See, she sticks her feet out very far, so
we will see the shoes and think she is not vain; but we will not believe
her.  She has found the dustpan, too, because she is so scared of me.
She bragged so much she made me cross, so I told her she must find it
and take up my dirt, yesterday.  She minded me this morning."

"She will be more scared before we speak to her," remarked the bread
girl.  "Ver-r-y ugly issue shoes! She ought to wear a dragging dress to
hide them."

There was a burst of laughter, while the keen, black eyes of the entire
group were fixed upon Cordelia Running Bird's feet.  She did not draw
them back nor lift her eyes, but suddenly her dusky face grew scarlet,
and there was a nervous trembling of her lips that moved persistently in
an attempted study of the lesson.  She had heard the words, as the girls
intended she should. They were speaking in Dakota without fear of being
understood by the white mother, who was in the playroom passing pennies
for the missionary plate.

The white mother heard the laugh and stepped into the space between the
sliding doors, which were ajar. She saw the girls' resentment at a
glance, and that it was directed at Cordelia Running Bird.  She was
troubled, but could not combat the feeling that had spread throughout
the school, to mar the peace and quiet of the Sabbath, which these
Indian girls were wont to keep in reverent spirit.

"She has bought another pair of shoes for Susie--stockings, too--not
black ones, like the little schoolgirls have to wear for best, but very
stylish brown ones," Hannah Straight Tree said.  "She put them in her
trunk last night.  I crept upstairs and watched her, for the children
said she had them in her pocket.  The large and middle-sized girls must
not see them till the entertainment, but the little girls keep saying
they are like the ones the little white visitor that wore the dress that
was pink dim-i-ty, had on.  Ver-ry white-minded shoes!  She wants to
hire me to like her, if she does not wish to have Dolly in the Jack
Frost song with Susie, so she bought new hair ribbons at the store for
Dolly and Lucinda.  She told the little girls because she knew they
would tell me. But Dolly and Lucinda shall not wear them.  Very cotton
silk, of course."

The ringing of the bell for Sunday-school relieved Cordelia Running Bird
of the torment she was undergoing. Conversation was suspended, and the
girls put on their hoods and marched in a procession to the
school-house, guided by the teachers.

Cordelia had a trying hour in Sunday-school.  The middle-sized girls,
her companions in the white mother's class, indulged in frequent
whispering at her expense and kept deep silence when she tried to lead
the class, as she was wont, in reading reference verses and in concert
recitation of the memory verses and the Golden Text. Thus it happened
that she read a reference verse alone, in faltering accents, with the
eyes of all the class upon her:

"'_Remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed
to give than to receive_.'"

"She gives a nickel every Sunday, so she minds the verse and gets the
red dress very cheap," Hannah Straight Tree whispered from the seat
behind.

The white mother heard the whisper, but the words were in Dakota, so she
failed to understand.  She saw Cordelia Running Bird shrink and color
and her face grow very grave.  Seeing this the class ceased whispering,
but the white mother's faithful teachings went unheeded, and she saw the
lesson was a failure.  In fact, the whole room was in sad disorder from
the opening to the close of Sunday-school, and all three teachers were
perplexed and disappointed by the strange behavior of their usually
attentive pupils.

"How unfortunate that the race mood has attacked the school when
Christmas is approaching, and we wish the girls to do their best and be
their happiest," said the white mother, lingering; for a minute in the
schoolroom after the dismissal.  "Cordelia seems about the only one,
except the little girls, who isn't out of sorts to-day, yet she is the
one they are all against.  The older girls all seem displeased at her."

"The large girls worried me with loud and constant whispering and
inattention to the lesson," was the school-teacher's sorrowful report.
"There were so many, with the superintendent's class combined with mine,
I found it quite impossible to keep good order, as you probably
observed."

The superintendent was not present.  He had started for the distant
railroad station two days previously to get the Christmas boxes.

"I have never had the slightest trouble with both classes, heretofore,
but to-day they seemed to throw off all restraint, and I was simply in
despair," added the young teacher with a strained expression in her
voice. "They whispered in Dakota, and their meaning was a mystery, but I
heard Cordelia Running Bird's name and Hannah Straight Tree's very
often, also Susie, Dolly and Lucinda."

"There was some trouble in the hall yesterday, which made Cordelia
Running Bird moody for a time, but she recovered her good-nature in the
afternoon and seems to be behaving nicely now, although much hurt by the
treatment which she is receiving from the girls," the white mother said.

"The children were excited also," said the teacher, who had taught the
infant class.  "They whispered much in English, and I gathered from
their talk that the unusual wardrobe which Cordelia is preparing for her
little sister to appear in during her Christmas visit, has to do with
the disturbance.  I was forced to hear about the red dress and the brown
shoes and stockings, and the blue dress and the black shoes and
stockings, till I knew not what to do.  It seems that Hannah is vexed
about the little things, and the other girls are sympathizing with her,
and they seem to have some grievance of their own, besides."

"That explains it," said the white mother.  "Perhaps it was unwise to
let Cordelia have the red cashmere for the little dress, but she is
paying for it by contributing a portion of her hard-earned money to the
missionary fund. Her patience with the baby, who was very fretful, was
quite wonderful.  She cheerfully devoted all her playtime for a month to
baby, while I gave attention to the little children, and I thought it
but a just reward to let her have the little dress, especially as it was
in her mission box.  Her father had not brought the blue dress then, But
dear me! She has added brown shoes and stockings, which I didn't in the
least expect."

The children in their bedtime talk had told the white mother of Cordelia
Running Bird's purchase at the store, and later in the evening the
second teacher had informed her of the barter of the Indian doll.

"The brown shoes and stockings must be laid to my account.  Whatever can
be done?" exclaimed the school-teacher, in dismay.

"Nothing," said the white mother, firmly.  "I wish Cordelia was less
extravagant, and we will be careful to restrain her after this.  But
Indian girls must learn as well as white girls to respect the right of
property.  The girls have been allowed much freedom in the spending of
what money they could call their own, but it has mostly gone for hair
ribbons and candy, and there has been no trouble before.  I hope the
feeling will subside, however, in a day or two.  So many Christmas
pleasures are in prospect that the girls will surely have no room for
strife and envy in their hearts."

Here the teachers hastened to the mission building to discharge the
duties that devolved upon them after Sunday-school.

Just before sun\et Monday afternoon a flock of girls were gathered at
the stile in front, watching with intensity a solitary little figure
moving slowly on a far side of the pasture, near the barbed wire fence.

"Again there walks Cordelia Running Bird very far away," said Hannah
Straight Tree.  "She has walked alone two afternoons.  She must be
thinking very hard."

"She is going on the mourner's walk," observed the girl who kept the
playroom.  "When an Indian walks alone, so far and very slow, that means
they are too sad. She cannot be happy, for the large girls--only me--and
the middle-sized girls do not talk to her.  Then, too, of course, she
thinks of Annie.  It was just one year ago this Monday that they took
her to the agency.  The large girls did not wash, because there was a
funeral."

"And Cordelia Running Bird was so proud because the girls all cried,"
said Hannah.  "Now I wish we had not cried."

"Kee!  You must not be so mean as that," exclaimed the largest girl, in
shocked surprise.  "Of course we cried for Annie.  She was very kind to
everyone--not cross like us."

"She was a very little cross, sometimes, because she was an Indian.  She
tried much harder than Cordelia Running Bird."

"I am glad I sang 'The Sweet By and By' when she was so afraid," said
Emma Two Bears.

The girls were silent for a little, stirred by memories of the
schoolmate who had passed into the life beyond.

Meantime the solitary girl in the snowy pasture continued her walk.

"I can wish I had not told Cordelia Running Bird that I would not sleep
with anyone but her," said Hannah. "I am glad she is not in the middle
dormitory now."

"They put her in our dormitory so that she can go and tell the teachers
if a little girl is sick, or cries," remarked the prudent little girl,
who had arrived upon the scene with several other children.  "The
teachers say she wakes up easy, and is braver in the dark than any other
girl."

"Ee!  Cordelia Running Bird is a dress pattern for the other girls--I
mean a pattern!" Hannah cried.  "Cordelia is the bravest, and she has a
white memory, so she has the longest piece.  Cordelia is polite.  She
keeps her clothes so clean and does not tear them, so the missionary
ladies send her prettier things, for the teachers write she is so nice.
The visitors always talk about Cordelia Running Bird very lots.  They do
not think the girls are listening, but they are."

"They should not listen.  That is stealing talk, the white mother says,"
replied the prudent little girl.  "We like Cordelia Running Bird, for
she does not scold us little girls and tell us we are in the way, as you
do," was the bold defense.  "We shall choose Susie in the games."

"If the little girls choose Susie, the large and middle-sized girls can
pull their hairs when they are combing them," was the appalling threat
from Hannah Straight Tree.  "If they tell the teachers we can say their
hairs were snarly and we could not help it."

"Ee!  We shall not pull the little girls' hairs and tell a lie," said
Emma Two Bears, rallying her honest principles.  "We can treat Cordelia
Running Bird cross because she called us shovel-feeted, and is very
vain, so we should punish her, but we will not be wicked."

"I did not say we shall--I said we can," retracted Hannah, in confusion.

"The girls were very mean to walk whole-feet where she was scrubbing,"
said the playroom girl, who knew from sad experience what Cordelia's
trials must have been.  "It makes me very cross because the little girls
will not stay out or, sit still on the benches when I scrub the
playroom, and they do not make big tracks, if they do walk whole-feet."

"You can speak to her, because she could not call you shovel-feeted, for
the white mother lets you always wear the mission shoes," said Hannah
Straight Tree, growing bold again.

"Because I have an onion--no, a bunion--on my foot. The issue shoes
would make it worse.  Just like there is no girl in school that does not
hate to have the horrid whole-feet tracks on her wet floor."

"I hate them--some," confessed a middle dormitory girl.

"I, too," admitted a south dormitory girl.  "I threw a few drops of
scrub water on a girl that walked whole-feet."

"I told a girl her tracks were so big, just like she had on snowshoes,"
said a north dormitory girl, relentingly.

"Of course, I made the very biggest kind of tracks on Cordelia Running
Bird's wet floor," said the largest girl; "but if we walk tiptoe all the
other girls will laugh and say, 'See how she nips along.  She tries to
walk so nice, just like the teachers.'  And if we are walking on our
heels they say, 'Very awkward; hear her tramp just like a steer.'  But
it is not kind to walk whole-feet."

The race mood was upon the wane, and Hannah Straight Tree was fast
losing influence.

"I would not have cared so much about the blue dress and the black shoes
and stockings, but she bought the red dress and the brown shoes and
stockings, when her little sister does not need them," Hannah argued in
an injured tone.

"She did not buy them with your money," said the playroom girl.  "You
would not have taken care of a cross baby four weeks, and missed a plum
picnic, and not played a leap, to earn pretty things for Dolly.  You are
much too lazy."

"Now I shall not stay another minute!" springing from the stile in deep
chagrin.  "You all can like Cordelia Running Bird if you want to, but I
shall not like her."

Hannah Straight Tree ran into the house, and those remaining turned
again to watch Cordelia.  She had reached a sloping bluff, down which
the fence extended to the flats beside the river.  She stood a moment on
the edge, then wrapped her clothes about her and sat down on the crust.
Presently she disappeared.

"She has slid down hill," observed the playroom girl. "She must be going
to the river."

"She should not.  It will soon be dark, and she is all alone," said Emma
Two Bears, in a tone betraying some anxiety.




CHAPTER VI.

Cordelia Running Bid held her clothes about her with one hand, steering
with her feet, and reached the flats in safety.  She arose and stood
still and looked toward the river to a space of open water on the near
side of a sandbar, half way over.

She took a few steps forward rather slowly, then her pace quickened more
and more, till she was running breathlessly, as if in fear of losing her
resolve to carry out some plan she was intent upon.

In rushing through a hollow lined with willow trees she slipped and
almost lost her footing, and in struggling to regain it she released her
hold upon a well-filled gingham bag which she had hid beneath her coat
and dropped it on the ground.  She picked it up and hung it by the
draw-string on her arm, but with this interruption of her headlong
course there came a corresponding halt of purpose. So she turned aside
and walked a few yards down the hollow, where she found a log on which
to seat herself.

Presently she murmured in the passive monotone of a despairing Indian
girl: "Just like I have to stop and think before I do it.  If I drown
the blue dress and the black shoes and stockings and the red dress and
the brown shoes and stockings, I can write to Hannah Straight Tree, for
she will not let me speak to her: 'Now you see I truly am not vain, for
I have put the Christmas clothes for Susie in my workbag, and a stone,
so it would sink, and I have drowned them in the airhole in the middle
of the river.'

"But again that would be bragging," was her puzzled afterthought.  "Just
like Jesus is not helping me one bit, for very fast I went and bought
the brown shoes and stockings after I had prayed to stop being vain.
And the teachers looked so sorry, and I was ashamed to tell the white
mother.  Everything I say and do is vain and bragging, and I cannot
think hard enough to help it.  My tongue bragged about Dolly and
Lucinda's hair ribbons to the little girls, and my feet bragged about
the issue shoes, I stuck them out so far.  And when the girls made fun
of me I did not pull the shoes back, for I wanted them to think I was
not scared, but sorry.  I was truly trying to try hard, but I was trying
the wrong way. Now my pencil will be bragging if it tells Hannah
Straight Tree I have drowned the things."

Cordelia sat in troubled thought while the pink and golden colors of the
sunset faded from the sky above the bluffs and the wind sighed through
the hollow.

"The white mother says it is not right to even waste a pin, and many
nice things that have cost much money would be wasted if I drowned them.
I shall look at them and think again what I can do."

She drew the contents from the bag and spread them on her lap.  First
she gave attention to the little blue dress she had helped to make at
the expense of many play hours.

[Illustration:  She drew the contents from her bag and spread them on
her lap.]

"Emma Two Bears made the waist so nice and said she would not take one
thing for pay, but I made her take a shell necklace that was very
pretty; but I did not care for it myself, it was so Indian-minded.  Emma
is so generous.  I wish I could be generous.  If I should give the blue
dress to Dolly, and the black shoes and stockings, just like I should be
some generous.  What if I should truly do it?" with a sudden interest in
her tone.  "She would look as pretty as the little schoolgirls then, and
she could motion Jack Frost, and Hannah and the others could not say
Susie did not need the red dress and the brown shoes and stockings.  I
am 'most sure Jessie Turning Heart will help me make the red dress, if I
bring the playroom wood for her, till we change work next month.  She
hates to bring wood, for her foot gets cold, and then the sore bunch
pinches her much worse.  She is very fast and stylish making dresses,
and she feather-stitches; and she says she is not cross at me.  She said
one time she liked to sew so much, just like she would be getting up and
sewing in her sleep.  So I shall ask her to trade work.

"But Hannah Straight Tree says she hates light blue, for it makes a
copper-colored Indian look much blacker; and she hates one tuck, and
there would have to be one, for the blue dress is too long for Dolly.
And it smuts some, too, and is not soft and fine.  Hannah would not want
it.  She would say Susie looked much nicer in the red dress, and Dolly
should not motion Jack Frost in the blue one."

Cordelia put the blue dress and the black shoes and stockings back into
the bag, and spread the red cashmere across her lap and smoothed it
lovingly.

"It feels so soft I like to rub it.  Just the color of the one rose on
the white mother's window bush." She held it up, luxuriating in its warm
red glow.  "Ver-ry sw-e-et and pretty--and the brown shoes and
stockings, too. I shall put them on the clean snow and look at them."

She spread the things on the hard white crust and viewed them with
increasing admiration.  Suddenly she caught them up and hid them in her
apron, for the sight of them was far too tempting; then she locked her
hands together in her lap and sat so still a wood-mouse dared to leave
his hole beneath the log and frisk about her feet.

"The baby was so cross I could not play one bit the whole four weeks,"
she said at length, in supplicating tones.  "Just like I earned the
dress so hard.  I thought I did not care much for the Indian doll, but
my grandmother cannot make another, for she now has par-a-lay-sis in her
hands--the doctor says it is.  And I sold the Indian doll to get the
brown shoes and stockings.  Dolly has a round face, and her eyes are
pretty.  Susie has a thin face, and she is a very little cross-eyed, so
she needs a prettier dress to look as nice as Dolly.

"But Lucinda cannot come to school if Dolly cannot, and she feels so
sad.  If Dolly's father saw her looking very pretty in a red dress and a
brown shoes and stockings, just like he would feel so happier he would
let her come to school.  Then Lucinda would be glad, and she would learn
the neat way, and they would grow Dolly more white-minded.  The verse I
read yesterday was a King's Daughters' verse.  Helen marked it--Annie,
too.

"What if Annie should be looking down from up there,"--pointing to a
newly glimmering star--"and speaking just like this: 'Dear Cordelia,
these words I tell you--" It is more blessed to give than to receive."
I would give the red dress and the brown shoes and stockings to the
little girl named Dolly Straight Tree.'"

Cordelia looked another minute at the star.

"Of course Annie cannot speak those words up there, but she would like
to have me do it, and my father and my mother would not care, for I
should tell them just like Annie thought I ought to; and they always let
me do a thing I want to, anyhow.

"If an Indian likes another Indian very much he will give him a big
present.  My father told an Indian man one time, 'I am your friend, so I
shall give you a pony.' And he did.  And the Indian man told my father,
'I am your friend, so I shall give you a steer.'  And a white man
laughed and said it was a good trade.  But the Indians did not laugh.
They said my father and the other Indian were very generous.

"Now I have found the right way, and it makes me very happier, and I
shall not change my thoughts." in firm relief.  "I shall do this kind:
Till Dolly and Lucinda come I shall not say one word to any girl, or
even tell the white mother.  Then Susie's best things I shall give to
Hannah Straight Tree in a way that will surprise her. Tokee! there rings
the half-hour bell till supper, and I am down here, and it is
moonlight."

Cordelia hastily replaced the best things in the bag and scampered home.




CHAPTER VII.

Cordelia Running Bird carried out her plan of asking Jessie Turning
Heart, the playroom girl, to help her make the red dress, and the latter
willingly agreed to "trade work," and escape bringing in the wood to the
torture of her lame foot.

Cordelia found that she had undertaken no light task, for there were
violent snowstorms in the next two weeks, and an enormous quantity of
wood was swallowed by the great stove in the playroom, which must needs
be kept red-hot from long before dawn until bedtime, to dispel the
freezing atmosphere within.

Owing to the influence of the playroom girl, the large and middle-sized
girls in general ceased to be intensely hostile to Cordelia, but they
did not break the seal of silence, so she could not ask help from among
them. The small girls showed their friendship for Cordelia now and then
by marching in a line behind her from the wood-yard laden with what fuel
they could bring, or even going down the path the older girls had broken
to the flats for willow fagots, which they tied upon their backs and
brought to her for kindling.

Hannah Straight Tree tried Cordelia's resolution to do good to her by
stealthy persecutions that escaped the notice of the teachers, who
remarked to one another in relief that Hannah and the other girls
appeared in better humor toward Cordelia, and the fatter had regained
her cheerful spirits.

Hannah took her station in the little outside hall one blustering
afternoon, watching through the side window till Cordelia climbed the
porch steps loaded to her chin with wood; then Hannah braced her back
against the outside door.  Cordelia spared one hand with difficulty,
tugging at the door with wind-tossed garments, all in vain.  She dropped
her wood to use both hands.  The door would sometimes stick when lightly
closed, and thinking this to be the case, she threw her weight against
it in a forcible attempt to burst it open.  Hannah jumped away and
darted through the inside door in silent glee.

Cordelia fell full length into the hall and struck her head against the
inner threshold. She lay in a dazed condition for a little, then aroused
herself, to catch a glimpse of Hannah peering through the window of the
inside door. She vanished instantly, but the expression of her face had
told Cordelia where the mischief lay.

"She will not let me like her," thought Cordelia, struggling to her feet
with aching head, and blinking back the tears. "Just like I shall have
to hate her just a little while I do her good."

She turned, and saw to her surprise that Emma Two Bears, who had come
behind her to the porch, was gathering up her wood. Emma often helped to
fill the wood-box in the music room, as an especial friend of hers
attended to that work, and Cordelia feared her wood was being boldly
captured for that purpose.  She was about to cry out sharply, but
restrained herself and fell back silently, while Emma passed into the
house.  Cordelia followed her, and saw with sinking heart that Emma took
a straight track through the playroom for the music room; but on the
threshold of the room she whirled about, and, walking to the playroom
wood-box, dropped the wood in.

"Thank you very much!" exclaimed Cordelia, in sign language on her
fingers.  Etiquette forbade her to employ her tongue in the expression
of her gratitude, seeing that the girls had placed a ban on it.  A
curious contortion of the deaf-and-dumb alphabet was used among the
Indian girls when pride forbade the use of speech.

"You need not thank me.  I am only punishing Hannah Straight Tree," Emma
answered, likewise with her fingers.

This exchange of compliments was read without scruple by the many pairs
of eyes, including Hannah's, that were watching the affair.

"Emma Two Bears talks deaf-and-dumb to her.  Now we can plan
crack-the-whip with her, for that is not a speaking game," observed a
middle-sized girl, who had been a comrade of Cordelia's heretofore.

"She will not have time to crack the whip," said Hannah.  "She is going
to the south dormitory, where she sits her whole playtime helping sew
the red dress for Susie, so she can look nicer than the other little
home sisters and the little schoolgirls."

"You are very jealous-minded, and you try hard to spite Cordelia Running
Bird," said the recent comrade.

"You can talk that way because you have no little sister," grumbled
Hannah.

Cordelia passed upstairs with quick steps.

"Just like the large and middle-sized girls--only Hannah Straight Tree--
will again be speaking to me pretty soon," she said to Jessie Turning
Heart, who sat beside a sunny window in the south dormitory sewing
briskly on the little red waist.

"They cannot speak to you till Christmas day, because they all said they
would not," Jessie answered.  "Then if you ap-ol-ogize and say you do
not wish them to be cripples any more, and that you will stop talking
vain, they will again speak to you, and they will walk heel or tiptoe on
your floor."

"I shall write an ap-ol-ogy in Dakota on three papers Christmas morning,
and pin them on a side of the three dormitories, but you must not tell,
because I do not wish to brag what I shall do," Cordelia said, in
strictest confidence.

"I think it would be better if you had but one shoes and stockings and
best dress for Susie.  But you cannot help it now," the playroom girl
replied.  "Two best dresses and two shoes and stockings look too many,
when the other little home sisters have not one best thing."

Cordelia Running Bird was quite strongly tempted to confide still
further in the friendly playroom girl, who had sustained her through the
trying tempest of events, but she resisted and began to hem the little
skirt in silence.

"Ee! how short you have it!" Jessie noticed suddenly. "You must think
Susie is to grow the other way before she wears it."

Cordelia's only answer was a noncommittal smile which Jessie failed to
understand.  This thought, however, suddenly impressed Cordelia:

"Now it is too short for Susie, and the hem is not one bit too wide, so
I could not let it down.  What if Hannah Straight Tree is so cross she
will not let Dolly wear it? And there is no other little home sister
just the size of Dolly that could wear it, and is coming Christmas. Just
like Hannah will not take it and will keep on hating me forever and
ever, so I cannot do her good."

Whether this foreboding was fulfilled, or otherwise, will be explained
in Hannah's letter to the King's Daughter in the Far East, who had sent
the little Bible and the loving message to the King's Daughter in the
Far West:

  "_Dear Helen Merriam_: Now I shall write you a letter,
    for Cordelia Running Bird cannot, for she says it,
  would be bragging.  It is all about Christmas, and our
  big and little sisters.  Cordelia's big sister is now in
  heaven, and Cordelia wrote good-by to you from Annie.
  My big sister is now in the First Reader, but she cannot
  help it, for my mother died, and so Lucinda had to stay
  at home and keep Dolly, and that is my little sister.

  "And it was about Susie--that is Cordelia's little sister--
  that I got so mean and jealous, for she had a nice
  Christmas things--two kinds--and Dolly would not have
  one kind, and she would look so horrid.  So I called
  Cordelia Running Bird proud, vain, cross, mean.  And
  I talked about her so the girls got cross at her.  And
  I made her push a pail of scrub water downstairs, so she
  talked Dakota and had to lie in bed and could not
  feather-stitch the blue dress, for it smutted so the silk
  would be too dirty.  But she feather-stitched the red dress,
  and she sold her Indian doll, and it was her grandmother's
  when she was Cordelia's age, so she bought the brown shoes
  and stockings.

  "And Cordelia read the King's Daughters' verses,
  'Love your enemies,' and 'It is more blessed to give than
  to receive,' so she put the red dress and the brown shoes
  and stockings and two hair ribbons in a box, and Jessie
  Turning Heart tied a blue scarf round my eyes so tight
  I could not see, and led me to the chicken house.  And
  I put my hand on the box, and Jessie pulled off the scarf,
  and I uncovered the box and found the things.  And
  Cordelia Running Bird had pinned a piece of paper on the
  red dress, and these words were written on it: 'Dear
  Hannah Straight Tree, I am your friend, so I shall give
  you these best Christmas things for Dolly.  And will
  you please take the hair ribbons, for they are not very
  cotton silk?'

  "And I was very 'shamed, and said I would not take
  them, I had been so mean.  But Cordelia Running Bird
  said I must, for she had made the red dress too short for
  Susie, so if I did not it would be wasted. So I told her
  I would take it if she would excuse my meanness, but I
  should not take the brown shoes and stockings--only just
  the black ones.  But she begged so hard just like I had to.
  And Cordelia and I scrubbed Dolly very hard in a tub,
  for Lucinda has not learned the neat way, and she did
  not cry, only laughed.  And the white mother found some
  very little underclothes for her, and we curled her hair
  with a slate pencil, and she wore the best things and
  looked so pretty.  And the brown shoes were a little bit
  too large, but they did not show.

  "And Dolly motioned Jack Frost very cunning, and
  they looked at Dolly more than Susie, but Cordelia
  Running Bird did not care.  And my father was so happier
  he laughed and laughed when Dolly nipped her nose and
  pinched her toes just right, and when the song stopped he
  slapped his knees and cried very loud, he was so glad
  about Dolly.

  "And after the Christmas tree my father told the
  teachers (and Emma Two Bears was interpreter): 'Your
  school is a good place, for it makes the Indian children
  very smart, and you treat the Indian visitors very kind,
  so I shall let Dolly stay, and then Lucinda will stay, too.'
  Very fast Lucinda stopped being sad, for she thought
  before my father would not let Dolly stay till she was ten
  birthdays, and Lucinda loves her so she would not stay
  without her.

  "And the doll they hung me on the Christmas tree was
  bigger than Cordelia Running Bird's, and its hairs and
  clothes were prettier, so I told Cordelia, 'I am your
  friend, and I shall give you my doll.'  And she did not
  want to take it, but I made her.  So she said, 'I am your
  friend, and I shall give you my doll, but it is not so nice
  as yours.'

  "And Cordelia Running Bird and I now walk together
  all the time, and again I shall never be mean to her.  And
  they did not choose Susie quite so much as Dolly in the
    games, but Cordelia says that makes her glad. And it
  was because she read the King's Daughters' verses.

  "Now I shall put an end to this too long letter. Many
  days have I been writing it, and the girls, said just like
  I was writing a book. And Cordelia sends her love.

     "From your unknown American Indian friend,
          "HANNAH STRAIGHT THEE."

  "P. S.--Cordelia Running Bird nearly drowned both
  kinds of Christmas clothes, and then she thought to give
  the best kind to Dolly.  And Susie did not care because
  she had to wear the blue dress, and it smutted so her
  hands and face got dirty, and the black shoes and stockings.
  She was just as happier.  And the teacher saved Cordelia's
  Indian doll and gave it back to her, because she knew
  she loved it very hard.  And Cordelia was so glad
  she hugged it very tight.

  "Again P. S.--Cordelia wrote, 'Peace on earth, good-will
  toward men.  I do not wish the dormitory girls were
  cripples, and I will stop talking vain and will always
  wear the issue shoes every day.  And will they please
  excuse me?'  And they did.  And now they walk heel or
  tiptoe on Cordelia's wet floor.  Lucinda will now learn
  the neat way, and they will grow Dolly more white-minded,
  for she came to school so short.  And again I say it was
  the King's Daughters' verses.  And I do not like to think
  hard, but I shall try to learn them, too.  And we did
  not shut our eyes at Susie when she motioned Jack Frost,
  as we meant to just for spite.  And the girls all said
  Cordelia was so generous, she said she nearly got vain
  again.  So I shall stop this time."

[Illustration:  Helen read the letter to her King's Daughters circle.]

Helen read the letter to her King's Daughters Circle, and a young
member, thinking of the little Sioux maiden at the far Northwestern
Mission who had tried to overcome her faults and love her enemies,
repeated softly:

  "'For thou hast a little strength, and thou hast kept
  my word and hast not denied my name.'"





End of Project Gutenberg's Big and Little Sisters, by Theodora R. Jenness

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIG AND LITTLE SISTERS ***

***** This file should be named 10902.txt or 10902.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/9/0/10902/

Produced by Prepared by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


