The Project Gutenberg EBook of Bayard: The Good Knight Without Fear And
Without Reproach, by Christopher Hare

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Bayard: The Good Knight Without Fear And Without Reproach

Author: Christopher Hare

Release Date: February 28, 2004 [EBook #11363]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BAYARD: THE GOOD KNIGHT ***




Produced by Ted Garvin, Andrea Ball, Thomas Ruley and the Online




[Illustration: BAYARD.]



BAYARD

THE GOOD KNIGHT WITHOUT
FEAR AND WITHOUT REPROACH


BY CHRISTOPHER HARE

WITH COLOURED ILLUSTRATIONS
BY HERBERT COLE



INTRODUCTION


That courtesy title which flies to the mind whenever the name Bayard is
mentioned--"The Good Knight without Fear and without Reproach"--is no fancy
name bestowed by modern admirers, but was elicited by the hero's merits in
his own day and from his own people.

The most valuable chronicle of the Good Knight's life and deeds was written
with charming simplicity by a faithful follower, who, in single-hearted
devotion to his beloved master's fame, took no thought for himself, but
blotted out his own identity, content to remain for all time a nameless
shadow--merely the LOYAL SERVITOR. It is from his record that the incidents
in the following pages are retold.

The "Loyal Servitor" is now believed from recent research to have been
Jacques de Mailles, his intimate friend and companion-at-arms, probably his
secretary. He certainly learnt from Bayard himself the story of his early
years, which he tells so delightfully, and he writes with the most minute
detail about the later events which happened in his presence, and the
warlike encounters in which he himself took part; and a most vivid and
interesting account he makes of it. In an ancient catalogue of the Mazarine
Library, his book is first set down as the _Histoire du Chevalier Bayard,
par_ Jacques de Mailles, Paris, in 4to, 1514 (probably a mistake for 1524).
The better-known edition, with only the name of the "Loyal Servitor," was
published in 1527, under the title of

THE VERY JOYFUL AND VERY DELIGHTFUL
HISTORY
OF THE LIFE, THE HEROIC DEEDS, THE TRIUMPHS
AND THE VALOUR OF THE GOOD KNIGHT
WITHOUT FEAR AND WITHOUT REPROACH

BAYARD.




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


BAYARD

A FINE EXHIBITION OF HORSEMANSHIP

BATTLE OF FORNOVO

BAYARD DEFENDS THE BRIDGE

THE PAGE PRESENTS HIS PRISONER

SEIZURE OF THE SPY

BAYARD PRESENTED TO HENRY VIII

THE DEATH OF BAYARD




[Illustration: LE CHEVALIER BAYARD _Sans peur et sans reproche_.]

THE STORY OF BAYARD

CHAPTER I


Pierre Terrail, the renowned Bayard of history, was born at the Castle of
Bayard, in Dauphine, about the year 1474, when Louis XI. was King of
France. He came of an ancient and heroic race, whose chief privilege had
been to shed their blood for France throughout the Middle Ages.

The lord of Bayard had married Helene Alleman, a good and pious lady of a
noble family, whose brother Laurent was the Bishop of Grenoble. Pierre
Bayard, the hero of this story, was the second son of a large family; he
had three brothers and four sisters. His eldest brother, Georges, was five
or six years older than himself, then came his sisters, Catherine, Jeanne,
and Marie, while younger than himself were Claudie, and two brothers,
Jacques and Philippe.

Like so many other mediaeval strongholds, the Castle of Bayard was built
upon a rocky hill, which always gave an advantage in case of attack. It had
been erected by the great-grandfather and namesake of our Pierre Bayard,
probably on the site of an earlier stronghold, in the year 1404. No better
position could have been chosen, for it commanded a deep valley on two
sides, in a wild and mountainous district of Dauphine, near the village of
Pontcharra in the Graisivaudan. Even now we can still see from its ruins
what a powerful fortress it was in its time, with massive towers three
stories high, standing out well in front of the castle wall, and defended
by a strong drawbridge. Well fortified, it could have stood a siege before
the days of artillery.

But towards the end of the fifteenth century, when Bayard's childhood was
spent here, such castles as these were not looked upon as mainly places of
defence and refuge, they were gradually becoming more like the later
manor-houses--family homes, with comfortable chambers and halls, where once
there had chiefly been the rude dwelling of a garrison used for defence and
stored with missiles and arms.

Each story of the castle, as well as the towers, would contain various
chambers, well lighted with windows pierced in the thick stone walls. On
the first floor, approached by a broad flight of steps from the court, we
find the oratory--scarcely large enough to be dignified by the name of
chapel--the dining-hall, and the private chamber of the lord of the castle.
On the floor above this the lady of Bayard had her own apartment, the
"garde-robe" or closet where her dresses were kept, and the place where her
daughters as they grew up, and any maidens who were brought up under her
care, sat at their needlework, and where they slept at night. On the upper
story were the rooms for the young children with their maids, and the
various guest-chambers.

The ground floor below the dining-halls was a dark place given up to
store-rooms and the servants' quarters, and below this again were cellars
and grim dungeons, which could only be reached by trap-doors. The kitchen,
usually a round building, stood in an outer court, and here great wood
fires could be used for the needful hospitality of a country house. The
stables and the rough quarters for the serving-men were beyond.

The dining-hall was used as a court of justice when the lord of the castle
had to settle any difficulties, to receive his dues, or reprimand and
punish any refractory vassal. At one end of this hall was a great hearth,
where most substantial logs of wood could be laid across the fire-dogs, and
burn with a cheerful blaze to light and warm the company in the long, cold
winter evenings. At meal-times trestle tables were brought in, and on these
the food was served, the long benches being placed on each side of them. On
the special occasions of important visits or unusual festivities, a high
table was set out at the upper end. The floor was covered with fresh
rushes, skins of wolf or bear being laid before the fire, and the walls
were stencilled in white and yellow on the higher part, and hung with serge
or frieze below. Only in the lady's chamber do we find carpets and hangings
of tapestry or embroidery, part of her wedding dowry or the work of her
maidens. Here, too, were a few soft cushions on the floor to sit upon, some
carved chairs, tables, and coffers. The master of the house always had his
great arm-chair with a head, and curtains to keep off the draughts, which
were many and bitterly cold in winter-time.

The chronicler of Bayard, known as the "Loyal Servitor," begins his story
on a spring day of the year 1487.

Aymon Terrail, lord of Bayard, sat by the fireside in his own chamber, the
walls of which were hung with old arms and trophies of the chase. He felt
ill and out of spirits. He was growing old--he had not long to live: so he
assured his good wife.

What was to become of his sons when he was gone? A sudden thought occurred
to him. "I will send for them at once, and we will give them a voice in the
matter."

To this the lady of Bayard agreed, for she never crossed her lord's will,
and at least it would distract his gloomy thoughts. It chanced that all the
four lads were at home, and ready to obey their father's command. As they
entered the room and came forward, one by one, in front of the great chair
by the hearth, somewhat awed by this hasty summons, they were encouraged by
a smile from their mother, who sat quietly in the background with her
embroidery.

The assembled group made a striking picture. The grand old man, a massive
figure seated in his canopied arm-chair, with white hair and flowing beard
and piercing black eyes, was closely wrapped in a long dark robe lined with
fur, and wore a velvet cap which came down over his shaggy brows. Before
him stood his four well-grown, sturdy, ruddy-faced boys, awaiting his
pleasure with seemly reverence, for none of them would have dared to be
seated unbidden in the presence of their father. Aymon de Bayard turned to
his eldest son, a big, strongly-built youth of eighteen, and asked him what
career in life he would like to follow. Georges, who knew that he was heir
to the domain and that he would probably not have long to wait for his
succession, made answer respectfully that he never wished to leave his
home, and that he would serve his father faithfully to the end of his days.
Possibly this was what the lord of Bayard expected, for he showed no
surprise, but simply replied, "Very well, Georges, as you love your home
you shall stay here and go a-hunting to fight the bears."

Next in order came Pierre, the "Good Knight" of history, who was then
thirteen years of age, as lively as a cricket, and who replied with a
smiling face, "My lord and father, although my love for you would keep me
in your service, yet you have so rooted in my heart the story of noble men
of the past, especially of our house, that if it please you, I will follow
the profession of arms like you and your ancestors. It is that which I
desire more than anything else in the world, and I trust that by the help
of God's grace I may not dishonour you."

The third son, Jacques, said that he wished to follow in the steps of his
uncle, Monseigneur d'Ainay, the prior of a rich abbey near Lyons. The
youngest boy, Philippe, made the same choice, and said that he would wish
to be like his uncle, the Bishop of Grenoble.

After this conversation with his four sons the lord of Bayard, not being
able to ride forth himself, sent one of his servants on the morrow to
Grenoble, about eighteen miles distant, with a letter to his brother-in-law
the Bishop, begging him to come to his Castle of Bayard as he had important
things to say to him. The good Bishop, who was always delighted to give
pleasure to any one, readily agreed. He set off as soon as he had received
the letter, and arrived in due time at the castle, where he found Aymon de
Bayard seated in his great chair by the fire. They greeted each other
warmly and spent a very pleasant evening together with several other
gentlemen of Dauphine, guests of the house.

At the end of dinner, the venerable lord of Bayard thus addressed the
company: "My lord Bishop, and you, my lords, it is time to tell you the
reason for which I have called you together. You see that I am so oppressed
with age that it is hardly possible I can live two years. God has given me
four sons, each of whom has told me what he would like to do. My son Pierre
told me that he would follow the calling of arms, and thus gave me singular
pleasure. He greatly resembles my late father, and if he is like him in his
deeds he cannot fail to be a great and noble knight. It is needful for his
training that I should place him in the household of some prince or lord
where he may learn aright his profession. I pray you that you will each
tell me what great House you advise."

Then said one of the ancient knights: "He must be sent to the King of
France." Another suggested that he would do very well with the Duke of
Bourbon; and thus one after another gave his advice. At last the Bishop of
Grenoble spoke: "My brother, you know that we are in great friendship with
the Duke Charles of Savoy, and that he holds us in the number of his
faithful vassals. I think that he would willingly take the boy as one of
his pages. He is at Chambery, which is near here; and if it seems good to
you, and to the company, I will take him there to-morrow morning."

This proposal of the Bishop of Grenoble seemed excellent to all present,
and Pierre Bayard was formally presented to him by his father, who said:
"Take him, my lord, and may God grant that he prove a worthy gift and do
you honour by his life." The Bishop at once sent in haste to Grenoble with
orders to his own tailor to bring velvet, satin, and all things needful to
make a noble page presentable. It was a night to be long remembered in the
castle, for cunning hands were pressed into the service under the eyes of
the master tailor, who stitched away through the long hours in such style
that next morning all was ready. A proud and happy boy was Bayard the next
morning when, after breakfast, clad in his fine new clothes, he rode the
chestnut horse into the courtyard before the admiring gaze, of all the
company assembled to look upon him.

[Illustration: A fine exhibition of horsemanship.]

When the spirited animal felt that he had such a light weight upon his
back, while at the same time he was urged on with spurs, he began to prance
about in the most lively fashion, and everybody expected to see the boy
thrown off. But Bayard kept his seat like a man of thirty, spurred on his
horse, and galloped round and round the court, as brave as a lion, his eyes
sparkling with delight. An old soldier like his father thoroughly
appreciated the lad's nerve and spirit, and could scarcely help betraying
the pride he felt in him. But the wise Bishop probably thought that the lad
had received quite as much notice as was good for him, and announced that
he was ready to start, adding to his nephew: "Now, my friend, you had
better not dismount, but take leave of all the company."

Bayard first turned to his father with a beaming countenance. "My lord and
father, I pray God that He may give you a good and long life, and trust
that before you are taken from this world you may have good news of me."
"My son, such is my prayer," was the old man's reply as he gave the boy his
blessing. Bayard then took leave of all the gentlemen present, one after
the other. Meantime the poor lady his mother was in her tower chamber,
where she was busy to the last moment packing a little chest with such
things as she knew her boy would need in his new life. Although she was
glad of the fair prospect before him, and very proud of her son, yet she
could not restrain her tears at the thought of parting from him; for such
is the way of mothers.

Yet when they came and told her, "Madame, if you would like to see your son
he is on horseback all ready to start," the good lady went bravely down to
the little postern door behind the tower and sent for Pierre to come to
her. As the boy rode up proudly at her summons and bending low in his
saddle took off his plumed cap in smiling salutation, he was a gallant
sight for loving eyes to rest upon. Bayard never forgot his mother's
parting words. "Pierre, my boy, you are going into the service of a noble
prince. In so far as a mother can rule her child, I command you three
things, and if you do them, be assured that you will live triumphantly in
this world. The first is that above all things you should ever fear and
serve God; seek His help night and morning and He will help you. The second
is that you should be gentle and courteous to all men, being yourself free
from all pride. Be ever humble and helpful, avoiding envy, flattery, and
tale-bearing. Be loyal, my son, in word and deed, that all men may have
perfect trust in you. Thirdly, with the goods that God may give you, be
ever full of charity to the poor, and freely generous to all men. And may
God give us grace that while we live we may always hear you well spoken
of."

In a few simple words the boy promised to remember, and took a loving
farewell of her. Then his lady mother drew from her sleeve a little purse,
in which were her private savings: six gold crowns and one in small
change,[1] and this she gave to her son. Also, calling one of the
attendants of the Bishop, she entrusted him with the little trunk
containing linen and other necessaries for Bayard, begging him to give it
in the care of the equerry who would have charge of the boy at the Duke of
Savoy's Court, and she gave him two crowns. There was no time for more, as
the Bishop of Grenoble was now calling his nephew. As he set forth on that
Saturday morning, riding his spirited chestnut towards Chambery, with the
sun shining and the birds singing, and all his future like a fair vision
before him, young Bayard thought that he was in paradise.

[Footnote 1: The gold crown was then worth 1 livre 15 sous. Multiplying
this by 31, in order to find its present value, we learn that the sum which
Bayard received from his mother would to-day be worth 266 francs, or about
10 guineas.]

Pierre Bayard had set forth from his home in the early morning, soon after
breakfast, and he rode all day by the side of his uncle until, in the
evening, they reached the town of Chambery, where all the clergy came out
to meet the Bishop of Grenoble, for this was part of his diocese, where he
had his official dwelling. That night he remained at his lodging without
showing himself at Court, although the Duke was soon informed of his
arrival, at which he was very pleased. The next morning, which was Sunday,
the Bishop rose very early and went to pay his respects to the Duke of
Savoy, who received him with the greatest favour, and had a long talk with
him all the way from the castle to the church, where the Bishop of Grenoble
said Mass with great ceremony. When this was over, the Duke led him by the
hand to dine with him, and at this meal young Bayard waited upon his uncle
and poured out his wine with much skill and care. The Duke noticed this
youthful cup-bearer and asked the Bishop, "My lord of Grenoble, who is this
young boy who is serving you?"

"My lord," was the reply, "this is a man-at-arms whom I have come to
present to you for your service if you will be pleased to accept him. But
he is not now in the condition in which I desire to give him to you; after
dinner, if it is your pleasure, you will see him."

"It would be very strange if I refused such a present," said the Duke, who
had already taken a fancy to the boy.

Now young Bayard, who had already received instructions from his uncle,
wasted no time over his own dinner, but hurried back to get his horse
saddled and in good order, then he rode quietly into the courtyard of the
castle. The Duke of Savoy was, as usual, resting after dinner in the long
gallery, or _perron_, built the whole length of the keep, on a level with
the first floor, and overlooking the great courtyard below. It was like a
cloister, with great arched windows, and served for a general meeting-place
or lounge in cold or wet weather. From thence he could see the boy going
through all his pretty feats of horsemanship as if he had been a man of
thirty who had been trained to war all his life. He was greatly pleased,
and turning to the Bishop of Grenoble he said to him, "My lord, I believe
that is your little favourite who is riding so well?"

"You are quite right, my lord Duke," was the answer. "He is my nephew, and
comes of a race where there have been many gallant knights. His father, who
from the wounds he has received in battle, and from advancing age, is
unable to come himself to your Court, recommends himself very humbly to
your good grace, and makes you a present of the boy."

"By my faith!" exclaimed the Duke, "I accept him most willingly; it is a
very fine and handsome present. May God make him a great man!"

He then sent for the most trusty equerry of his stables and gave into his
charge young Bayard, with the assurance that one day he would do him great
credit. The Bishop of Grenoble, having accomplished his business, did not
tarry long after this, but having humbly thanked the Duke of Savoy, took
leave of him and of his nephew, and returned to his own home.

Those spring and summer months spent at the Court of Savoy remained a happy
memory to Bayard all his life. On feast-days and holidays the whole company
would go out into the woods or the meadows, the Duchess Blanche with her
young maidens and attendant ladies, while the knights and squires and pages
waited upon them as they dined under the trees, and afterwards played games
and made the air ring with their merry songs. Or there were hunting and
hawking parties which lasted for more than one day, or river excursions
down as far as the Lake of Bourget, where the Duke had a summer palace. It
must have been on occasions such as these when the gallant young Bayard met
with the maiden who caught his boyish fancy, and to whom he remained
faithful at heart until the end of his days. Yet this pretty old-world
story of boy-and-girl affection made no farther progress, and when the
knight and lady met in the years to come, once more under the hospitable
care of the good Duchess Blanche, they met as congenial friends only. The
fair maiden of Chambery is known to history solely by her later married
name of Madame de Frussasco (or Fluxas), and in the records of chivalry
only by the tournament in which the "Good Knight without Fear and without
Reproach" wore her colours and won the prize in her name.




[Illustration: CHARLES VIII KING OF FRANCE _from a medallion_.]

CHAPTER II


The King heard that the Duke of Savoy was coming to his Court, and he sent
the Comte de Ligny to conduct the Duke on his way, and to receive him with
due honour. They met him about six miles from Lyons, and gave him a warm
welcome, after which the two princes rode side by side, and had much talk
together, for they were cousins and had not met for a long time. Now this
Monseigneur de Ligny was a great general, and with his quick, observant eye
he soon took notice of young Bayard, who was in the place of honour close
to his lord, and he inquired: "Who is that gallant little lad riding his
horse so well that it is quite a pleasure to see him?"

"Upon my word," replied the Duke, "I never had such a delightful page
before. He is a nephew of the Bishop of Grenoble, who made me a present of
him only six months ago. He was but just out of the riding-school, but I
never saw a boy of his age distinguish himself so much either on foot or on
horseback. And I may tell you, my lord and cousin, that he comes of a grand
old race of brave and noble knights; I believe he will follow in their
steps." Then he cried out to Bayard: "Use your spurs, my lad, give your
horse a free course and show what you can do."

The lad did not want telling twice, and he gave such a fine exhibition of
horsemanship that he delighted all the company. "On my honour, my lord,
here is a young gentleman who has the making of a gallant knight,"
exclaimed de Ligny; "and in my opinion you had better make a present of
both page and horse to the King, who will be very glad of them, for if the
horse is good and handsome, to my mind the page is still better."

"Since this is your advice," replied Charles of Savoy, "I will certainly
follow it. In order to succeed, the boy cannot learn in a better school
than the Royal House of France, where honour may be gained better than
elsewhere."

With such pleasant talk they rode on together into the city of Lyons, where
the streets were full of people, and many ladies were looking out of the
windows to see the coming of this noble prince and his gay company. That
night the Duke gave a banquet in his own lodging, where the King's
minstrels and singers entertained the guests, then there were games and
pastimes, ending with the usual wine and spices being handed round, and at
last each one retired to his own chamber until the dawn of day.

The next morning the Duke rose early and set forth to seek the King, whom
he found on the point of going to Mass. The King greeted him at once most
warmly and embraced him, saying, "My cousin, my good friend, you are indeed
welcome, and if you had not come to me I should have had to visit you in
your own country...." Then, after more polite talk, they rode together on
their mules to the convent, and devoutly heard Mass, after which the King
entertained the Duke of Savoy, Monsieur de Ligny, and other nobles to
dinner with him, and they had much merry talk about dogs and falcons, arms
and love-affairs. Presently de Ligny said to the King: "Sire, I give you my
word that my lord of Savoy wishes to give you a page who rides his chestnut
better than any boy I ever saw, and he cannot be more than fourteen,
although his horsemanship is as good as that of a man of thirty. If it
pleases you to go and hear vespers at Ainay you will have your pastime in
the fields there afterwards." "By my faith," cried the King, "I do wish
it!" and he heard the whole story of this wonderful boy from the Duke of
Savoy.

When young Bayard heard that the King was to see him he was as much
delighted as if he had won the city of Lyons; and he went in haste to the
head groom of the Duke of Savoy and prayed him to get his horse ready for
him, offering his short dagger as a present. But this the man refused and
made reply: "Go and comb and clean yourself, my friend, and put on your
best clothes, and if, by God's help, the King of France takes you in
favour, you may some day become a great lord and be able to serve me."
"Upon my faith! You may trust me never to forget all the kindness you have
shown me," replied the boy; "and if God ever gives me good fortune you
shall share it." It seemed a long time to his impatience before the hour
arrived when he rode his horse, attended by his equerry, to the meadow
where he was to await the King and his company, who arrived by boat on the
Saone. As soon as Charles VIII. had landed he cried: "Page, my friend,
touch up your horse with your spurs!" which the lad did at once, and to see
him you would have thought that he had been doing it all his life. At the
end of his race Bayard made his clever horse take a few jumps, and then he
rode straight towards the King and gracefully drew up before him with a low
bow. All the company was delighted with the performance, and the King bade
him do it again. "Picquez! Picquez!" (Prick up your horse!), he cried, and
all the pages shouted: "Picquez! Picquez!" with enthusiasm, so that for
some time the name stuck to him.

Then Charles turned to the Duke of Savoy and said: "I see that my cousin of
Ligny told me the truth at dinner, and now I will not wait for you to give
me this page and his horse, but I demand it of you as a favour."

"Most willingly, my lord," answered the Duke, "and may God give him grace
to do you true service." After this young Bayard was given into the special
charge of the lord of Ligny, who was greatly pleased and felt sure that he
would make of him a noble knight.

Meantime, the Duke of Savoy remained for awhile at the Court of Charles
VIII., with whom he was in great favour, and they were like brothers
together. This young King was one of the best of princes, courteous,
generous, and beloved of all men. At length the day of departure came, and
the good Duke went back to his own country, laden with beautiful and
honourable presents.

During three years young Bayard remained as a page in the service of the
Seigneur de Ligny, being trained with the utmost care in all that would be
needful to him in his profession of arms.

He won so much favour from his lord that at the early age of seventeen he
was raised from his position as a page to that of a squire, and appointed
man-at-arms in the General's company, being retained at the same time as
one of the gentlemen of the household, with a salary of 300 livres. As a
man-at-arms Bayard would have under him a page or varlet, three archers,
and a soldier armed with a knife (called a "coutillier"). Thus, when we
find a company of men-at-arms spoken of, it means for each "lance garnie,"
or man-at-arms, really six fighting men on horseback.

When King Charles VIII. found himself once more in his loyal city of Lyons,
it chanced that a certain Burgundian lord, Messire Claude de Vauldray, a
most famous man-at-arms, came to the King and proposed that he should hold
a kind of tournament, called a "Pas d'Armes," to keep the young gentlemen
of the Court from idleness. He meant by this a mimic attack and defence of
a military position, supposed to be a "pas" or difficult and narrow pass in
the mountains. It was a very popular test of chivalry, as the defender hung
up his escutcheons on trees or posts put up for the purpose, and whoever
wished to force this "pas" had to touch one of the escutcheons with his
sword, and have his name inscribed by the King-at-arms in charge of them.

There was nothing that King Charles VIII. loved better than these
chivalrous tournaments, and he gladly gave his consent. Messire Claude de
Vauldray at once set about his preparations, and hung up his escutcheons
within the lists which had been arranged for the coming tournament.

Young Bayard, whom every one called Picquet, passed before the shields and
sighed with longing to accept the challenge and so improve himself in the
noble science of arms. As he stood there silent and thoughtful, his
companion, called Bellabre, of the household of the Sire de Ligny, asked
him what he was thinking of. He replied: "I will tell you, my friend. It
has pleased my lord to raise me from the condition of page into that of a
squire, and I long to touch that shield, but I have no means of obtaining
suitable armour and horses." Then Bellabre, a brave young fellow some years
older than himself, exclaimed: "Why do you trouble about that, my
companion? Have you not your uncle, that fat Abbe of Ainay? I vow that we
must go to him, and if he will not give you money we must take his cross
and mitre! But I believe that when he sees your courage he will willingly
help you."

Bayard at once went and touched the shield, whereupon Mountjoy, King-at-arms,
who was there to write down the names, began to reason with him. "How is
this, Picquet, my friend; you will not be growing your beard for the next
three years, and yet you think of fighting against Messire Claude, who is
one of the most valiant knights of all France?" But the youth replied
modestly: "Mountjoy, my friend, what I am doing is not from pride or
conceit, but my only desire is to learn how to fight from those who can
teach me. And if God pleases He will grant that I may do something to
please the ladies." Whereupon Mountjoy broke out into a hearty laugh,
which showed how much he enjoyed it.

The news soon spread through Lyons that Picquet had touched the shield of
Messire Claude, and it came to the ears of the Sire de Ligny, who would not
have missed it for ten thousand crowns. He went at once to tell the King,
who was greatly delighted and said: "Upon my faith! Cousin de Ligny, your
training will do you honour again, if my heart tells me true." "We shall
see how it will turn out," was the grave reply; "for the lad is still very
young to stand the attack of a man like Messire Claude."

But that was not what troubled young Bayard; it was the question how to
find money for suitable horses and accoutrements. So he went to his
companion, Bellabre, and asked for his help. "My friend, I beg of you to
come with me to persuade my uncle, the Abbe of Ainay, to give me money. I
know that my uncle, the Bishop of Grenoble, would let me want for nothing
if he were here, but he is away at his Abbey of St. Sernin at Toulouse,
which is so far off that there would be no time for a man to go there and
back." "Do not trouble," said his friend, "you and I will go to Ainay, and
I trust we shall manage it." This was some comfort, but the young warrior
had no sleep that night. He and Bellabre, who shared the same bed, rose
very early and took one of the little boats from Lyons to Ainay. On their
arrival, the first person they met in the meadow was the Abbe himself,
reading his prayers with one of his monks. The two young men advanced to
salute him, but he had already heard of his nephew's exploit, and received
him very roughly. "Who made you bold enough to touch the shield of Messire
Claude?" he asked angrily. "Why, you have only been a page for three years,
and you can't be more than seventeen or eighteen. You deserve to be flogged
for showing such great pride." To which his nephew replied: "Monseigneur, I
assure you that pride has nothing to do with it, but the desire and will to
follow in the steps of your brave ancestors and mine. I entreat you, sir,
that, seeing I have no other friends or kindred near, you will help me with
a little money to obtain what is needful."

"Upon my word!" exclaimed the Abbe, "go and seek help elsewhere; the funds
of my abbey are meant to serve God and not to be spent in jousts and
tournaments." Bellabre now put in his word and remonstrated.

"Monseigneur, if it had not been for the virtue and the valour of your
ancestors you would never have been Abbe of Ainay, for by their merits and
not yours it was gained. Your nephew is of the same noble race, and
well-beloved of the King; it is absolutely necessary that you should help
him...." After more talk of this kind the Abbe at last consented, and took
the two squires into his own room, where he opened a little cupboard, and
from a purse which was inside he took out a hundred crowns and gave them to
Bellabre, saying: "I give you this to buy two horses for this brave
man-at-arms, for he has not enough beard to handle money himself. I will
also write a line to Laurencin,[1] my tailor, to supply him with needful
accoutrements." "You have done well, my lord," said Bellabre, "and I assure
you that every one will honour you for this." When the young gentlemen had
their letter they took leave with many humble thanks, and returned at once
to Lyons in their little boat, highly pleased with their success.

[Footnote 1: The most important and wealthy merchant of Lyons.]

"We are in good luck," said Bellabre, "and we must make the most of it. Let
us go at once to the merchant before your good uncle changes his mind, for
he will soon remember that he has put no limit to your expenses, and he can
have no idea what a proper outfit will cost. You may be sure that you will
never see any more of his money." So they took their boat on to the
market-place, found the merchant at home, lost no time in telling of the
good Abbe's generosity, and encouraged Laurencin to exert himself to the
utmost in the way of splendid suits of clothing and armour, to do honour to
his patron's gallant nephew, for there seemed to be no question of economy.
Bayard was measured and fitted with cloth of silver, velvet, and satin,
and then went gaily home with his friend, both of them thinking it an
excellent jest.

When the Abbe of Ainay bethought himself later of what he had done, and
sent a messenger in haste to the tailor, he found that it was too late and
that his bill would come to hundreds of crowns. He was furious, and vowed
that his nephew should never have another penny from him; but that did not
mend matters, for the story got about, to the intense amusement of the King
and his Court, and the rich old miser met with no sympathy.

The young men were fortunate enough to buy two excellent horses for much
less than their value from a brave knight who had broken his leg, and not
being able to figure in the contests himself, was willing to help so
gallant a youth.

The time was drawing near for the great tournament, which would be a high
festival for the town and was looked forward to with much eagerness and
excitement. The course on which the knights were to fight was surrounded
and duly laid out with richly-painted posts. At one side of this enclosed
field, stands were put up and made very bright and gay with coloured
hangings, carpets, embroidered banners, and escutcheons. It was here that
the royal and noble company would sit and watch the proceedings.

Meantime, by permission of the King, Messire Claude de Vauldray had caused
it to be published and declared throughout the city that he would hold the
"pas" against all comers, both on foot and on horseback, on the approaching
Monday.

A tournament was always a gorgeous and brilliant spectacle, but on this
occasion, being held by the King's desire and graced by his presence, it
was more splendid than usual. In our day, when it is the custom of men to
avoid all show and colour in their dress, we can scarcely picture to
ourselves the magnificence of those knights of the Renaissance. When the
gallant gentleman actually entered the lists for fighting, he wore his suit
of polished armour, often inlaid with gold or silver, a coloured silken
scarf across his shoulders richly embroidered with his device, and on his
head a shining helmet with a great tuft of flowing plumes. But in the
endless stately ceremonies which followed or preceded the tournament, the
knight wore his doublet of fine cloth, overlaid with his coat-of-arms
embroidered in silk or gold thread, and an outer surcoat of velvet, often
crimson slashed with white or violet satin, made without sleeves if worn
over the cuirass and finished with a short fluted skirt of velvet. Over
this a short cloak of velvet or satin, even sometimes of cloth of gold, was
worn lightly over one shoulder.

If this was the usual style of costume, which had also to be varied on
different festivals, we can easily understand how impossible it was for
young Bayard to procure such costly luxuries on his small means, and we can
almost forgive him for the audacious trick he played on his rich relation
the Abbe of Ainay. Not only was the knight himself richly clad, but we are
told that to appear in a grand tournament even the horse had to have
sumptuous trappings of velvet or satin made by the tailor. We have not
mentioned the suit of armour, which was the most expensive item of all;
being made at this period lighter and more elaborate, with its flexible
over-lying plates of thin, tempered steel, it was far more costly than it
had ever been before. The bravest knights at the Court were proud to try
their fortune against Messire Claude. It was the rule that after the
contest each champion was to ride the whole length of the lists, with his
visor raised and his face uncovered, that it might be known who had done
well or ill. Bayard, who was scarcely eighteen and had not done growing,
was by nature somewhat thin and pale, and had by no means reached his full
strength. But with splendid courage and gallant spirit, he went in for his
first ordeal against one of the finest warriors in the world. The old
chronicler cannot tell how it happened, whether by the special grace of God
or whether Messire Claude took delight in the brave boy, but it so fell out
that no man did better in the lists, either on foot or on horseback, than
young Bayard, and when it came to his turn to ride down with his face
uncovered, the ladies of Lyons openly praised him as the finest champion of
all. He also won golden opinions of all the rest of the company, and King
Charles exclaimed at supper:

"By my faith! Picquet has made a beginning which in my opinion promises a
good end." Then, turning to the Sire de Ligny, he added: "My cousin, I
never in my life made you so good a present as when I gave him to you."
"Sire," was the reply, "if he proves himself a worthy knight it will be
more to your honour than mine, for it is your kind praise which has
encouraged him to undertake such a feat of arms as this. May God give him
grace to continue as he has begun." Then the General added, turning round
with a smile to the assembled company:

"But we all know that his uncle, the Abbe of Ainay, does not take great
pleasure in the youth's exploits, for it was at the old gentleman's expense
that he procured his accoutrements." This remark was received with a roar
of laughter, in which the King himself joined, for he had already heard the
story and was very much amused at it. Soon after the tournament the Sire
de Ligny sent for young Bayard one morning and said to him: "Picquet, my
friend, you have begun with rare good fortune; you must carry on the
pursuit of arms, and I retain you in my service with three hundred francs a
year and three war-horses, for I have placed you in my company. Now I wish
you to go to the garrison and meet your companions, assuring you that you
will find as gallant men-at-arms there as any in Christendom; they often
have jousts and tournaments to keep in practice of arms and acquire honour.
It seems to me that while awaiting any rumour of war you cannot do better
than stay there."

Bayard, who desired nothing more, replied: "My lord, for all the goods
and honours which you have bestowed upon me I can only at this present
time return you thanks.... My greatest desire is to go and join the
company which you speak of, and if it is your good pleasure I will start
to-morrow." "I am quite willing," said the Sire de Ligny; "but you must
first take leave of the King, and I will bring you to him after dinner."
Which was done, and the youth was thus presented: "Sire, here is your
Picquet, who is going to see his companions in Picardy, and he is come to
say good-bye to you." Young Bayard knelt before the King, who said to him
with a smile: "Picquet, my friend, may God continue in you that which I
have seen begun, and you will be a gallant knight; you are going into a
country where there are fair ladies, be courteous and chivalrous to them,
and farewell, my friend." After this, all the princes and lords crowded
round to take leave of the young soldier, with much affection and regret at
losing him. When he reached his lodging, he found that the King had sent
him a purse of three hundred crowns, and also one of the finest war-horses
in the royal stable. With his usual impulsive generosity Bayard gave
handsome presents to the messengers, and then went to spend the evening
with the Sire de Ligny, who treated him as though he were his own son,
giving him wise advice for his future life, and above all bidding him keep
honour always before his eyes. This command did he keep in very truth until
his death. At last, when it grew late, de Ligny said to him: "Picquet, my
friend, I think you will be starting to-morrow morning before I have risen,
may God bless you!" and embraced him with tears, while Bayard on his knees
said good-bye to his kind master.

More presents awaited him, for that night there arrived two complete and
costly suits from the Sire de Ligny, who also sent his own favourite
chestnut horse, so that when the young squire set forth at daybreak he was
splendidly equipped in every way with horses, servants, armour, and clothes
suitable to his position. As we have seen, dress was a very expensive thing
in those days, when gentlemen of rank wore velvet, brocade, and satin, both
for evening and riding costume as a matter of course.

It was a slow journey into Picardy, for Bayard wished his horses to arrive
in good condition, and only travelled a moderate distance every day. When
he arrived at the little town of Aire, his destination, all the young
officers of the garrison came out to meet him, for the fame of his jousting
with Messire Claude de Vauldray had already reached them. They would not
listen to his modest disclaimers, but feasted and made much of their new
comrade. One lively young noble of the company, probably quite deceived by
the fine show that Bayard made with all his handsome parting gifts, and
taking him for a man of wealth, said to him: "My good companion, you must
make people talk about you, and endeavour to acquire the good favour of
all the fair ladies of this country, and you cannot do better than give us
a tournament, for it is a long time since we have had one in this town."
The poor boy must have been somewhat taken aback by this suggestion, but he
was far too plucky to show it, so he replied with ready goodwill, "On my
faith, Monsieur de Tardieu, is that all? You may be sure that this will
please me even more than yourself. If you will have the goodness to send me
the trumpeter to-morrow morning, and if we have leave of our captain, I
will take care that you shall be satisfied."

All that night Bayard was too excited to sleep, and when Tardieu came
to his lodging in the morning with the trumpeter of the company, he
had already settled exactly what he would do and had written out his
announcement, which ran thus: "Pierre de Bayard, young gentleman and
apprentice of arms, native of Dauphine, of the army of the King of France,
under the high and puissant lord the Sire de Ligny--causeth to be
proclaimed and published a tournament to be held outside the town of Aire,
close to the walls, for all comers, on the 20th day of July. They are to
fight with three charges of the lance without 'lice'" (meaning in this
instance a barrier), "with sharpened point, armed at all points; afterwards
twelve charges with the sword, all on horseback. And to him who does best
will be given a bracelet enamelled with his arms, of the weight of thirty
crowns. The next day there shall be fought on foot a charge with the lance,
at a barrier waist-high, and after the lance is broken, with blows of the
axe, until it is ended at the discretion of the judges and those who keep
the camp. And to him who does best shall be given a diamond of the value of
forty crowns."

This sounds more like real war than courtly pastime, and we see how
terribly in earnest this young soldier was. The allusion to "those who keep
the camp" is to the marshals of the tournament and the heralds-at-arms who
kept a very close watch on the combatants. They also maintained on this
miniature battlefield the laws of chivalry and courtesy, giving help to
those who needed it.

When a young squire first entered the lists he was warned by the cry:
"Remember of what race you come and do nothing contrary to your honour."
There were many strict rules to be observed; for instance, it was forbidden
to strike your adversary with the point, although it was usually blunted
(but not in this tournament of Bayard's). It was forbidden to attack the
horse of your opponent, and this we can quite understand, for in those
days, when a knight wore complete and heavy armour, if his horse were
killed he was absolutely at the mercy of his enemy. It was always made a
ground of complaint against the Spaniards that they attacked the horses of
the foe. In a tournament it was the rule only to strike at the face or the
chest, both well protected by the visor and the breastplate, and to cease
at once if the adversary raised the visor of his helmet. Also no knight was
to fight out of his rank when making a rush together. This was very
important when the champions were divided into two companies under the
order of two chiefs, and were placed exactly opposite each other, at the
two ends of the arena. On a signal made by the marshals of the tournament,
they charged impetuously upon each other, with their horses at full gallop.
They held the lances straight out until the signal came, then lowering the
lances, they rushed forward amid a cloud of dust with loud war-cries and
the fight became a furious scuffle. The knights who had stood the first
shock without being unhorsed or wounded, pressed forward and fought with
the sword, until one of the marshals threw his wand of office into the
arena to show that the contest was over.

In these tournaments the horses were frequently armed as well as their
riders, and they were often gaily caparisoned with emblazoned housings,
sometimes of very costly material, such as satin embroidered with gold or
silver.

At the time when young Bayard joined his company at Aire, there were
stationed in Picardy at no great distance about seven or eight hundred
men-at-arms in these regulation companies (compagnies d'ordonnance) as they
were called. When they were not actually employed on duty, they were very
glad to take their pleasure in all sorts of warlike games. As we may
suppose, they were delighted to take part in the proposed tournament.
Amongst these companies there were some of the famous Scotch Guards, who
had first been taken into the service of France by Charles VII.

The time fixed was only eight days off, but all the same about forty or
fifty men-at-arms gave in their names. Fortunately, before the expected
day, that gentle knight, the Captain Louis d'Ars, arrived, and he was much
delighted to have come in time for this entertainment. When Bayard heard of
his captain's arrival he went to pay his respects to him at once, and was
most warmly welcomed, for the boy's fame had gone before him. To make the
festival more complete, his friend Bellabre also appeared, having been
delayed by waiting for two splendid horses which he expected from Spain. At
length the eventful day arrived, and the gentlemen who wished to take part
in the tournament were divided into two equal ranks, there being
twenty-three on one side and twenty-three on the other. The judges chosen
were the Captain Louis d'Ars and the lord of St. Quentin, captain of the
Scotch company.

At this point it will be interesting to give a full account of the details
needful for a tournament of this period, the close of the fifteenth
century. These tournaments were first started as training-schools for the
practice of arms, and were later tempered by the rules of chivalry. Jousts
were single combats, often a succession of them, for a prize or trial of
skill, while the tourney was troop against troop. These warlike games were
very popular in France especially, but very strict rules had to be made to
prevent the "joust of peace" becoming the deadly "joust a l'outrance" (to
the death).

The "lists," or tournament grounds, were in Bayard's time usually of a
square shape rather longer than broad, and were surrounded by palisades,
often adorned with tapestry and heraldic devices. The marshals of the lists
took note of all that happened and enforced the rules of chivalry. Varlets
were in attendance to help the esquires in looking after their masters, and
helping them up, with their heavy armour, if unhorsed.

It was common to hold a "passage of arms" for three days: two for the
contest on horseback, first with lances, second with swords and maces;
while on the third day, on foot, pole-axes were used. A specially heavy
kind of armour was worn, sometimes nearly 200 lbs. in weight, so that a
knight once unhorsed lay on the ground absolutely helpless, and could not
rise without help. This armour was made still stronger by "reinforcing
armour"--pieces screwed on over the left side, chiefly, which received most
blows--making a double defence for the head, chest, and left shoulder.
"Pauldrons" or shoulder-guards buckled on, that on the right arm being
smaller to leave freedom for using the lance. Then we have brassards or
arm-guards; the rere-brace for the upper arm, the vam-brace for the lower,
and the elbow-piece called a "coudiere."

When all was ready on the appointed day for the tournament at Aire, the
trumpet sounded, and then the order of the Tourney was declared aloud.
Bayard had to appear first in the lists, and against him rode forth a
neighbour of his in Dauphine, by name Tartarin, a powerful man-at-arms.
They rushed at each other so vehemently that Tartarin broke his lance half
a foot from the iron, and Bayard struck him above the arm-piece of his
armour and broke his lance into five or six pieces, upon which the trumpets
sounded forth triumphantly, for the joust was wonderfully good. After
having finished their first attack they returned to face each other for the
second. Such was the fortune of Tartarin that with his lance he forced in
Bayard's arm-piece, and every one thought that he had his arm pierced. But
he was not hurt, and succeeded in returning the attack by a stroke above
the visor, which carried off the bunch of plumes from his adversary's
helmet. The third bout with the lance was as good or even better than the
others, for the lance was more completely shivered into fragments.

When these two knights had finished, next came the lord of Bellabre, and
against him a Scotch man-at-arms, named the Captain David of Fougas, and
these likewise did with their three jousts of the lance all that it was
possible for gentlemen to do. Thus, two by two, all the company went
through the same contest.

This jousting with the lance was one of the most popular exercises for
knights of that day, and the proper use of this weapon was one of the most
important accomplishments for a warrior. We shall often notice, in the
accounts of Bayard's adventures on the field of battle, how extremely
expert he was with his lance. The supreme triumph with this weapon was to
use such skill and force as to break the lance shaft--made of ash or
sycamore--into as many pieces as possible; in fact, to "shiver" it
completely, and thus break as many lances as possible. The tilting lance
was often made hollow, and was from 12 to 15 feet long; but the lance used
with the object of unhorsing instead of splintering was much stronger,
heavier, and thicker in the stem, and instead of a pointed head had a
"coronal," which was blunt.

The first part of the tournament having come to an end, then followed the
battle of the swords. According to the rules, this began with Bayard, who,
on the third stroke he gave, broke his sword into two pieces, but he made
such good use of the stump that he went through the number of strokes
commanded, and did his duty so well that no man could have done better.
After this came the others according to their order, and for the rest of
that day there was such a succession of vigorous fighting that the two
judges declared "never had there been finer lance work or contests with the
sword." When the evening came they retired to young Bayard's lodging, where
a great supper was prepared, to which came many ladies, for within ten
miles round all those of Picardy, or the greater number, had come to see
this fine tournament. After the supper there were dances and other
entertainments, and the company was so well amused that it struck one hour
after midnight before they broke up. It was late next morning before they
woke up, and you may believe that they were never weary of praising Messire
de Bayard, as much for his skill at arms as for his good hospitality.

The next morning, in order to complete that which had begun so well, all
the soldiers assembled at the dwelling of their Captain Louis d'Ars, where
Bayard had already arrived, having come to invite him to dinner at his
lodging, in company with the ladies of the previous evening. First they all
went to hear Mass, and when that was over, "you should have seen the young
gentlemen taking the ladies' arms, and with much pleasant talk leading them
to Bayard's lodging, where if they had supped well the night before, at
dinner they did still better." There was no lingering after this meal, and
towards two o'clock all those who were to take part in the second day's
tournament retired to arm themselves and make ready to fight. The
combatants all approached on horseback, and gravely went round to salute
the company before the contest began.

It was Bayard's place to begin, and against him came a gentleman from
Hainault, Hannotin de Sucker, of great repute. They fought with their
lances, one on each side of the barrier, and gave such tremendous strokes
that the lances were soon broken to pieces; after this they took their
battle-axes, which each of them had hanging by their sides, and dealt each
other great and terrible blows. This appears to us an extremely rough form
of entertainment, but we must remember that these knights were clad in
armour, and so thoroughly covered up from head to foot that there was not
supposed to be a place where a pin could pierce between the joints of the
armour. Under the helmet a smaller close-fitting steel cap was often worn.
This fierce contest went on until Bayard gave his opponent a blow near the
ear, which caused him to waver, and worse still, to fall on his knees,
when, pursuing his success, the victor charged again over the barrier, and
caused Hannotin to kiss the ground.

When the judges saw this they cried, "Hola! Hola! that is enough; now you
may retire." After these two came Bellabre and Arnaulton of Pierre Forade,
a gentleman of Gascony, who did wonders with their lances until they were
both broken; and then they came to the battle-axes, but Bellabre broke his,
after which the judges parted them. After these two came Tardieu and David
the Scotchman, and they did their duty very well. So did others in turn, so
that it was seven o'clock before it was all finished and, for a small
tournament, the lookers-on never saw better jousting in their lives.

When all was over, each man went to his lodging to disarm and change; then
they all came to Bayard's lodging, where the banquet was ready, and there
were also the two judges, the lords of Ars and of St. Quentin, and all the
ladies. After supper it had to be decided and declared by the judges who
should have the prizes. Some of the gentlemen most experienced in arms were
asked to give their opinion "on their faith," and afterwards the ladies on
their conscience, without favouring one more than another. At last it was
agreed that, although each one had done his duty well, yet in their
judgment during the two days Messire de Bayard had done best of all;
wherefore they left it to him, as the knight who had gained the prizes, to
give his presents where it seemed good to him. There was a discussion
between the judges as to who should pronounce sentence, but the Captain
Louis d'Ars persuaded the lord of St. Quentin to do so.

The trumpet was sounded to command silence, and St. Quentin said: "My lords
who are here assembled, and especially those who have been in the Tourney
of which Messire Pierre Bayard has given the prizes for two days ... we
would have you know that after due inquiry of the virtuous and brave
gentlemen who were present and saw the contests, and of the noble ladies
here present ... we have found that although each one has very well and
honestly done his duty, yet the common voice is that the lord of Bayard has
done best in these two days; wherefore the lords and ladies leave to him
the honour of giving the prizes where it seems good to him." Then he added:
"My lord of Bayard, decide where you will give them." The young knight
blushed modestly and was quite troubled. Then he said:

"My lord, I do not know why this honour should come to me, for I think that
others have deserved it more than I. But as it pleases the lords and ladies
that I should be judge, I hope that the gentlemen, my companions, will not
be displeased if I give the prize for the first day to my lord of Bellabre,
and for the second day to the Captain David of Scotland." He therefore gave
the gold bracelet to his friend Bellabre, and the diamond to the Scotch
Captain David, and his decision was greatly applauded. There was again
feasting and dancing afterwards, and the ladies could not say enough in
praise of their gallant young host. We may imagine the penniless condition
in which all this extravagant generosity left him, but his extreme
liberality appears to have been one great feature of his character which
made him beloved through life by all who had to do with him.

He never could see one of his companions thrown without giving him another
horse; if he had a crown left, every one shared it. He never refused the
request of any man if he could possibly grant it, and in his gifts was
always gentle and courteous. His chronicler makes a special point of his
piety from early youth; the first thing when he rose in the morning was
always a prayer to God, as he had promised his mother.




[Illustration: LOUIS XII KING of FRANCE _from a medallion_.]

CHAPTER III


During two years Bayard remained with the garrison at Aire, and made great
progress in all warlike training. At the end of this time, in the year
1494, Charles VIII. undertook his first expedition to Italy, and as the
company of the Count de Ligny was commanded to join him, young Bayard
looked forward with great delight to his first taste of real warfare.

The young King of France, in his eager desire for military glory, forsook
the wise policy of his father, Louis XI., and resolved to claim the kingdom
of Naples, in assertion of the rights bequeathed to him by Rene of Anjou.
In order to prevent any opposition from Spain he yielded to King Ferdinand
the provinces of Roussillon and Cerdagne, and on the same principle gave up
to the Emperor Maximilian, Artois and Franche-Comte. Having made these real
sacrifices as the price of a doubtful neutrality, he set forth on his wild
dreams of conquest at a distance, which could be of no permanent advantage
to him.

Charles VIII. had soon collected a magnificent army and crossed the Alps
in August 1494; it was composed of lances, archers, cross-bow men, Swiss
mercenaries, and arquebusiers. These last used a kind of hand-gun which had
only been in common use for about twenty years, since the battle of Morat.
The arquebus had a contrivance, suggested by the trigger of the cross-bow,
to convey at once the burning match to the trigger. Before that the match
had been held in the hand in using the hand-gun as well as the hand-cannon.
Many of these arquebusiers were on horseback. Besides a number of small
pieces of artillery, the French army had 140 big cannons. The use of these
fire-arms in war had been gradually increasing since the days when Louis
XI. made such use of his "bombards" in the wars in Flanders.

When we read of the wonderful success which at first attended the French
army, we must remember how greatly superior it was to the troops which
opposed it in Italy, which were mostly bands of adventurers collected by
mercenary leaders, named Condottieri, who fought for gain rather than for
glory, and had no special zeal or loyalty for the prince who employed them.
The soldiers in their pay were, for the time being, their own personal
property, and their great desire was to save them "to fight another day,"
while it was not to their interest to kill the men of another band (who
might be on the same side next time), and they only sought to make
prisoners for the sake of their ransom. The impetuosity and real warlike
spirit of the French was a new and alarming thing in Italy, which had been
so long accustomed to the mere show of war.

Charles passed as a conqueror through Pisa and Florence to Rome, then
victorious at Capua, he entered Naples in triumph. During the spring months
of 1495, spoilt by his easy victory, he gave himself up to pleasure in
that fair southern land, idly dreaming of distant conquest. His success
awakened the jealous alarm of Europe, and a formidable league was formed
against him by all the Italian States, the Emperor Maximilian, and the
Kings of Spain and England. Suddenly roused to a sense of his danger,
Charles VIII. left his new kingdom in the charge of his cousin, Gilbert de
Montpensier, with a few thousand men, and hastily set forth on his homeward
way. He left garrisons in various conquered cities, and his army consisted
of barely 10,000 men. They crossed the Apennines with great labour and
difficulty, to find their passage barred by the confederates on the Emilian
plain near the village of Fornovo.

[Illustration: Battle of Forvono.]

Never was battle more fiercely contested than on that Monday, 6th July,
when the French succeeded in breaking through the host of their enemies.
The actual fighting lasted little more than an hour, amid a scene of the
wildest confusion, which was increased by a storm of thunder and lightning,
with rain falling in torrents. We are told that Bayard, the Good Knight,
who had accompanied the King through the whole campaign, distinguished
himself in the first charge at the head of de Ligny's company, and had two
horses killed under him, then continued fighting on foot, and in the thick
of the battle he took the standard of the horsemen opposing him, and
covered himself with glory. The King, hearing afterwards of his gallant
deed, sent him a present of five hundred crowns. Charles could appreciate a
kindred spirit as he too fought with splendid courage on that eventful day.
The French camp, with all its rich treasures of armour, gorgeous clothing,
rare tapestries and plate, was looted; but Charles VIII. and the greater
part of his army, with all the artillery, made good their passage through
an overwhelming host of foes and raised the siege of Novara, where Lodovico
Sforza was besieging the Duke of Orleans.

The French King was soon to receive news of the defeat and destruction of
the small army he had left to hold Naples, and the death of the gallant
Viceroy, Gilbert de Montpensier. Such was the sad ending of the first of
those glorious and fatal expeditions to Italy, in which four kings wasted
in vain so much treasure and so many precious lives. Charles VIII. did not
long survive this bitter disappointment. He died at Amboise on 7th April
1498, at the age of twenty-eight. As he left no children he was succeeded
by his cousin, the Duke of Orleans, under the name of Louis XII. Louis XII.
was crowned on the 1st of July 1498.

If there was one trait of character which, more than any other,
distinguished Bayard the Good Knight, it was his absolute loyalty towards
the lord he served, and his undying gratitude for any kindness which he had
received. He never forgot those six happy months he had spent at the Court
of Savoy when he first went there to take up the profession of arms as a
young lad of thirteen. It was not by his own choice that he left the
service of his earliest master, who in a fit of generosity had presented
his favourite page to the King, in the hope that by so doing he would best
further the career of Bayard.

But Charles I., Duke of Savoy, did not live to see this, for he had died in
1490, and the Duchess, his widow, had left Chambery and retired to her
dower house in the pleasant town of Carignano, in Piedmont, about seventeen
miles to the south of Turin. This lady, Blanche Paleologus, had been a most
kind friend to young Bayard, and when she heard that he was stationed in
the neighbourhood, she invited him to visit her, and received him with the
utmost courtesy, treating him as if he were a member of her family. She was
greatly beloved and honoured in Carignano, where she was lady suzerain, and
where there may still be seen, in the church of Santa Maria delle Grazie, a
splendid monument to her memory.

We may imagine the satisfaction with which the good Duchess found that her
page of bygone days had blossomed out into a valiant and famous knight, and
they must both have had much to hear and tell of all that had happened
since they parted. Here Bayard also met with another friend, the young lady
who had been one of the maids-of-honour of the Duchess at Chambery and who
had won the boyish affection of the Good Knight. If the young folks had
been able to follow their inclinations it is probable that in time to come,
when they were of suitable age, marriage would have followed, so the "Loyal
Servitor" tells us in his chronicle. But circumstances parted them, as
Bayard went to the King's Court, and the fair maiden was married later to a
very good and honourable gentleman, the Seigneur de Frussasco (or Fluxas),
who was governor of the household to the Duchess of Savoy, a man of wealth
and high position.

We have a simple, touching story of the delight with which the lady of
Frussasco welcomed her dear friend, the Good Knight, of their eager talk
about old times, and their high ideal of honour and duty. She told him how
she had followed the story of his achievements, from his first joust with
Messire Claude de Vauldray, his tournament at Aire in Picardy, and the
honour which he received on the day of Fornovo, which had spread his fame
throughout France and Italy, and she gave him so much praise and honour
that the poor gentleman blushed for very shame.

Then the lady said to him: "Monseigneur de Bayard, my friend, this is the
great house in which you were first brought up; would it not be well for
you to distinguish yourself here as you have done so nobly elsewhere?"

The Good Knight made answer: "Madame, you know how from my youth I have
always loved and honoured you, and I hold you to be so wise and so kind
that you would only advise me for my good. Tell me, therefore, if you
please, what you would have me do to give pleasure to my good mistress, the
Duchess Blanche, to you above all, and to the rest of the noble company
here at this time?"

Then the lady of Frussasco said: "It seems to me, my lord of Bayard, that
you would do well to arrange some tournament in this town for the honour of
Madame of Savoy, who will be very grateful to you. You have here in the
neighbourhood many French gentlemen, your companions, and there are other
gentlemen of this country who I am assured would all most willingly join
you."

"If it is your wish," replied the Good Knight, "it shall be done. You
are the one lady in this world who has first conquered my heart by your
grace and kindness.... I pray of you that you will give me one of the
under-sleeves from your dress, as I have need of it."[1] The lady gave it
him, and he put it into the sleeve of his doublet without a word.

[Footnote 1: This was fastened with a little lacing under the hanging
sleeve, and was the usual favour asked for and worn by the knight on his
helmet.]

The Duchess Blanche was never weary of talking with the Good Knight, who
had always been so great a favourite of hers. But Bayard could not sleep
all that night, for his mind was full of plans for carrying out the request
of his lady. When the morning came he sent a trumpeter round to all the
towns of the neighbourhood where there were garrisons, to make known to
the gentlemen that if they would make their way within four days, on the
next Sunday, to the town of Carignano, in the costume of men-at-arms, he
would give a prize, which was the cuff of his lady, from whence hung a ruby
of the value of a hundred ducats, to him who should be victorious in three
encounters with the lance, without a barrier, and twelve turns with the
sword.

On the appointed day, about an hour after noon, the Good Knight was at his
place in the ranks, armed at all points, with three or four of his
companions, but only those were with him who were prepared to take part in
the coming contest. Bayard began first, and against him came the lord of
Rovastre, a gallant gentleman who bore the ensign of the Duke Philibert of
Savoy. He was a very hardy and skilful knight, who gave a fine thrust with
his lance to begin with, but the Good Knight gave him such a blow on the
broad band, which protected his right arm, that he disarmed him, and caused
his lance to fly in five or six pieces. The lord of Rovastre regained his
band and tilted with the second lance, with which he did his duty
thoroughly ... but the Good Knight struck him on the visor, and carried off
his plume of feathers (panache) and made him tremble, although he kept his
seat on horseback. At the third lance the lord of Rovastre missed his aim,
and Bayard broke his lance, which went to pieces.

After them came Mondragon and the lord of Chevron, who did their tilting so
well that everybody applauded. Then came two others, and so on until all
the company were satisfied.

The lances being broken it was now time for the contest with swords; but
the Good Knight had only struck two blows when he broke his own, and sent
that of his opponent flying out of his hand. The gracious Duchess
requested the lord of Frussasco to invite all the gentlemen who had taken
part in the tournament to supper. After supper the hautboys sounded, and
the minstrels began to tune up in the gallery, but before the dancing
began, it was decided to award the prize to him who had gained it. The
lords of Grammont and Frussasco were the judges, and they asked all the
company--gentlemen, ladies, and the combatants themselves--and they were
all of opinion that the Good Knight himself, by right of arms, had gained
the prize. But when they presented it to him he said that he did not
deserve it, but that if he had done anything well, Madame de Frussasco was
the cause, as she had lent him her sleeve, and that it was her place to
give the prize as she chose.

The lady, who was well versed in the laws of honour and chivalry, humbly
thanked the Good Knight for the honour which he had done her, and said: "As
M. de Bayard has shown me this courtesy I will keep the sleeve all my life
for love of him, while as for the ruby, I advise that it should be given to
M. de Mondragon, for he is considered to have done the next best."

This was accomplished as she wished, to the content of all, and the Duchess
Blanche rejoiced greatly in the success of the Good Knight, who had begun
his career in her household. The Good Knight took leave of his noble
mistress, the lady of Savoy, telling her that he owed her service and
obedience next to the King, his sovereign lord. Then he said farewell to
the lady who had been his first love, and they parted with much regret, but
their warm friendship lasted till death. We do not hear that they ever met
again, but not a year passed without presents being sent from one to the
other.




[Illustration: LUDOVICO SFORZA DUKE of MILAN _from a medallion_.]

CHAPTER IV


While the French army felt such absolute security of their dominion in
Italy as to suffer the young captains to join in amusements, the fugitive
Duke Lodovico Sforza of Milan, who had lost his duchy by treachery, was
watching events and preparing to return.

When Lodovico arrived he was received with acclamation, and entered Milan
in triumph.

If this sudden revolution took all Italy by surprise, we can understand the
dismay of Louis XII., who found that he had all his work to do over again.
For not only had Milan rebelled, but all the other towns which he had
conquered.

King Louis sent the Sire de Ligny as his chief general, and as a matter of
course the Good Knight went with him. I must tell you the story of an
adventure he had. He was in a garrison about twenty miles from Milan with
other young men-at-arms, and they were constantly making small expeditions.
One day Bayard heard that in the little town of Binasco, near the Certosa
di Pavia, there were about three hundred good horses, which he thought
might be easily taken, and therefore he begged his companions to join him
in this adventure. He was so much beloved that forty or fifty gentlemen
gladly accompanied him. But the castellan of the fortress at Binasco had
news of this through his spies, and laid a trap for the Frenchmen; he had a
strong troop placed in ambuscade on the road, and made sure of success.
But, though taken by surprise, the Good Knight fought like a lion, and with
cries of "France! France!" led his little company again and again to the
attack, for, as he told them, if news of this reached Milan not one would
escape. In fact, so fierce was their charge that they drove back the
defenders mile after mile to the very gates of Milan. Then one of the older
soldiers, who saw the enemy's plan, shouted, "Turn, men-at-arms, turn!" and
the others heard in time, but the Good Knight, thinking only of pursuing
his foes, entered pell-mell with them into the city, and followed them to
the very palace of the lord Lodovico. As he was wearing the white cross of
France, he was soon surrounded on all sides and taken prisoner. Lodovico
had heard the cries, and sent for this brave foe, who was disarmed before
being taken to the palace.

The Duke of Milan was surprised to see such a young warrior, and asked him
what brought him into the city. The Good Knight, who was never put out by
anything, replied, "By my faith, my lord, I did not think I was coming in
alone, but believed my companions were following me. They understood war
better than I did, otherwise they would have been prisoners as I am...."
Then Lovodico asked him how big was the French army, and he made answer,
"As far as I know, my lord, there must be fourteen or fifteen hundred
men-at-arms and sixteen or eighteen thousand men on foot; but they are all
picked men, quite determined to win back the State of Milan for the King,
our master. And it seems to me, my lord, that you would be much safer in
Germany than you are here, for your men are not fit to fight us."

He spoke with so much confidence that Lodovico was much amused, and
remarked that he should like to see the two armies face to face. "And so
indeed should I, my lord, if I were not a prisoner." "Really, if that is
all," replied the Duke, "I will at once set you free, and make it up to the
captain who took you prisoner. But tell me, if you desire anything else I
will give it to you."

The Good Knight bent his knee in thanks for this generous offer, and
replied: "My lord, I ask nothing else save that of your courtesy you will
be good enough to return to me my horse and my arms which I brought into
this town; and if you will send me to my garrison, which is twenty miles
from here, you will thus render me a great service, for which I shall be
grateful all my life; and saving my honour and the service of my King, I
would do anything you command in return."

"On my faith!" exclaimed the lord Lodovico, "you shall have what you ask
for at once." Then he turned to the Seigneur Jean Bernardin who had taken
him prisoner. "Do you hear, captain, he is to have his horse, his arms, and
all his accoutrements at once"

"My lord," was the reply, "that is a very easy matter for all is at my
lodging." So he sent two or three servants, who brought the horse, and the
armour, which the Duke caused to be put on before him. This arming took
place in the great courtyard, at least as far as the gallant prisoner was
disarmed, and when Bayard was fully accoutred he sprang on his horse
without touching the stirrup, and asked for his lance, which was given
him--a steel-headed weapon about fourteen feet long, the shaft being of
ash or sycamore with a little flag (pennoncelle) waving at the top. Then,
raising his visor, he said to the Duke: "My lord, I thank you for the great
courtesy you have shown me. May God repay you!"

The Good Knight spurred his horse, who pranced about in the most wonderful
way, and then Bayard gave a small exhibition of his skill with the lance
which amazed the bystanders and did not please the lord Lodovico overmuch,
for he remarked: "If all the French men-at-arms were like this one I should
have a poor chance." However, he took gracious leave of the Good Knight,
and sent him forth with a trumpeter in attendance to conduct him back to
his garrison.

They had not gone very far, only about twelve miles from Milan, when they
met the main body of the French army. Every one was greatly surprised to
see Bayard, for there had been great sorrow at the rumour that the gallant
knight had been too rash and had been taken prisoner through his youthful
boldness and rashness. When he reached the camp he found that the news of
his exploit had preceded him, for the Sire de Ligny, his good leader, came
forward to meet him with a smile, saying: "Hallo! Picquet, who has got you
out of prison? Have you paid your ransoms' I was on the point of sending
one of my trumpeters to pay it and fetch you back."

"My lord," replied the Good Knight, "I thank you humbly for your good will;
but the lord Lodovico set me free by his great courtesy."

It was at Novara that Lodovico Sforza met the army of France. The Duke's
forces were composed of different races--German "landsknechte," Burgundians
who were commanded by the same Claude de Vauldray who had fought with the
Good Knight in his first tournament, and Swiss mercenaries. There were
bands of Swiss fighting on the side of the French, and those within the
city declared that they would not fight against their fellow-countrymenn in
the other camp. They laid down their arms, and neither threat nor promise
availed. Soon it was discovered that one of the gates of Novara had been
opened by treachery, and that the French were entering the city. Then, as a
last hope, Lodovico and his companions put on the dress of common soldiers
and mixed with them in the ranks. But the unfortunate Duke was betrayed by
one of the Swiss captains, who was put to death later by his own countrymen
as a traitor.

On the occasion of Louis' former conquest of this land he had given several
important towns and estates to his general, the Sire de Ligny. These had
revolted with the rest of the duchy, to the great annoyance of de Ligny,
and a report reached the citizens of Tortona and Voghera that their homes
were to be sacked and pillaged. This was of course in those days the usual
penalty of rebellion, but the French general was a generous and merciful
man who had no such cruel intentions. However, the inhabitants of Voghera
took counsel together, and twenty of the chief merchants went forth to meet
their lord and humbly pray for mercy, two miles outside the city gates. But
de Ligny took no notice of them and rode on in silence with his men-at-arms
to his lodging within the city. One of his captains, to whom they appealed,
Louis d'Ars, promised to do his best for them, and advised that they should
plead again on the morrow. This time about fifty of the chief men came to
him as suppliants, bare-headed, and fell on their knees before the General.
They made a long and lamentable petition, ending with the offer of the
richest silver plate, cups, goblets, bowls, and precious vessels to the
value of more than three hundred marks.

Without deigning to look at the presents they had brought, their offended
lord turned upon them, reproached them bitterly for their treachery in
rebelling against him before the usurper, Lodovico, had even approached
their walls. What fate was too terrible for such cowards and traitors? The
kneeling citizens trembled and thought their last hour had come, when the
captain, Louis d'Ars, pleaded for mercy as a special favour to himself,
promising that henceforth they would prove themselves faithful and loyal
subjects. Then at length de Ligny suffered his anger to cool down, and
yielded to the wish of his good captain by granting a pardon. "But as for
your present, I do not deign to accept it for you are not worthy," he
exclaimed. Then, looking round the hall, his eyes fell upon the Good
Knight, to whom he said: "Picquet, take all this plate, I give it you for
your kitchen." To which he made instant reply: "My lord, I thank you humbly
for your kindness, but with God's help the goods of such evil-doers shall
never enter my house for they would bring me misfortune."

Thereupon the Good Knight took one piece of silver after another from the
table and made a present of it to each one of the assembled company, not
keeping a single thing for himself, to the amazement of every one. When he
had given away everything, he quietly left the chamber, as did many of the
others. The Sire de Ligny turned to those who remained and asked: "What do
you think of this, gentlemen? Did you ever see such a generous soul as my
Picquet? God should have made him king over some great realm. Believe me
that he will some day be one of the most perfect knights in the world."
All the company agreed, and could not praise young Bayard enough. And when
the Sire de Ligny had thought over the matter, he sent him next morning a
beautiful costume of crimson velvet lined with satin brocade, a most
excellent war-horse, and a purse with three hundred crowns--which did not
last him long, for he shared it all with his companions.

Louis XII. had been so much engaged with his conquest of Milan that for a
time he had not done much towards recovering the kingdom of Naples. This
had been lost after the retreat of Charles VIII., who died before he had
been able to make another fight for it, after the disastrous fate of his
viceroy, Gilbert de Montpensier, and his brave little army. At this time
Frederick of Aragon was King of Naples, having succeeded his nephew,
Ferdinand II., in 1496.

The king gave the command of his great army to the lord of Aubigny, who had
brought back the broken ranks of the first expedition to Naples. The
company of de Ligny, under his lieutenant, Captain Louis d'Ars, was ordered
to form part of it. Bayard, the Good Knight, who could not bear to be left
behind when fighting was going on, asked the permission of his dear master
to accompany the lieutenant's men.

On this important occasion Louis XII., doubtful of his own strength, made
the great mistake of forming an alliance with Ferdinand, King of Spain.

King Frederick of Naples knew nothing of the secret compact between France
and Spain, and he expected Gongalvo de Cordova, known as the Great Captain,
to come to his help with the troops of Spain.

As the alliance between France and Spain was founded on treachery, we
cannot be surprised that they soon fell out over the division of their
spoils. King Ferdinand of Aragon was never bound by any contract which did
not profit him, and by his orders the Great Captain, Gonzalvo de Cordova,
invaded the province of Naples itself. The lord of Aubigny had placed his
various companies as garrisons in different towns, and those which belonged
to the Count de Ligny were in the hands of his company, amongst whom, as we
know, was Bayard, the Good Knight. We shall now understand how it was that
he found himself at war with the Spaniards, who had been at first the
allies of France.

Pierre de Bayard, the Good Knight, had been placed in command of a garrison
at a place called Monervine, by his captain, Louis d'Ars. There had been no
fighting in his neighbourhood for some little time, and he began to get
rather weary. So he said one evening to his companions: "Gentlemen, it
seems to me that we have been too long in one place without seeing our
foes. We shall grow weak for want of using our arms, and our enemies will
grow bolder than ever, thinking that we dare not go out of our fort. So I
propose that to-morrow we ride out towards the nearest Spanish garrisons,
Andria or Barletta, and have a little fighting if possible." The others
readily agreed, and about thirty of them arranged to start early the next
morning. It was a merry party of young gentlemen who galloped over the
country at daybreak, and it so chanced that the same idea had occurred
to a Spanish knight of Andria, Don Alonzo of Soto-Mayor, who wished to
exercise his company of men-at-arms. Such was the fortune of the two
captains, that as they turned a corner by some rising ground they suddenly
came within arrow-shot of each other, and joyful indeed they were to have
such a chance. When the Good Knight saw the red crosses he turned to his
followers and cried: "My friends, here is our chance to win honour ...
we will not wait for them to attack!"

With a shout of delight they all lowered their visors, and crying,
"_France, France_!" they galloped forward and charged their foes,
who came proudly on to meet them with the cry of "_Spain! St. Iago_!"
gaily receiving them on the point of their lances. In the shock of this
first meeting many on both sides were borne to earth. The combat lasted a
good half-hour before either side seemed to have the best of it, for they
were well matched in numbers and strength. But in the end one side must
win, and it chanced that the courage and skill of the Good Knight, and the
enthusiasm with which he inspired his men, at last succeeded in breaking
the ranks of the Spaniards, of whom about seven were killed and the same
number taken prisoner, while the rest took to flight, and amongst them
their captain, Don Alonzo. The Good Knight pursued, crying out to him:
"Turn, man-at-arms, it would be a shame to die while running away."
Presently Alonzo, like a fierce lion, turned against his pursuer with
terrible force; and they fought desperately with sword-thrusts.

At length the horse of Don Alonzo backed and refused to advance any more,
when the Good Knight, seeing that all the other Spaniards were gone,
leaving their captain alone, said, "Surrender, man-at-arms, or you are
dead." "To whom must I surrender?" he asked. "To the Captain Bayard," was
the reply. Then Don Alonzo, who had already heard of that famous name, and
knew that he had no chance of escape, gave up his sword and was taken with
the other prisoners to the garrison, where with his usual chivalrous
courtesy, the Good Knight gave Don Alonzo one of the best rooms of the
castle, and supplied him with all that he needed, on receiving his parole
that he would make no attempt to escape.

The Spanish captain was treated with the greatest kindness, being suffered
to join in all the doings of the other gentlemen, and his ransom was fixed
at 1000 crowns. But after a fortnight or more he grew tired of this life
and persuaded an Albanian in the garrison to procure him a horse and help
him to gain his freedom, for it was only fifteen or twenty miles to his own
quarters. The man agreed, tempted by a high bribe, and Don Alonzo, who was
allowed to come and go as he pleased, had no difficulty in passing out
through the gateway in the early morning, when he and his companion put
spurs to their horses and felt assured of success. But if the Good Knight
was courteous he was not careless, and when he paid his usual morning call
on his prisoner he was nowhere to be found. The watch was sounded, and the
absence of the Albanian was also discovered, whereupon Bayard sent off in
instant pursuit and Don Alonzo was overtaken within two miles of Andria,
where he had dismounted to fasten the girth of his saddle which was broken.
The Albanian managed to reach the Spanish quarter, for he knew that the
penalty of his treachery would be hanging, and the Spanish knight was
brought back to Monervine.

When Bayard met him he said: "How is it that you have broken your faith, my
lord Don Alonzo? I will trust you no more, for it is not a knightly deed to
escape from a place when you are on parole." The prisoner tried to excuse
himself by vowing that he only went to fetch his ransom as he was troubled
by receiving no news of his own people. But this did not avail him much,
for he was kept in close confinement in a tower, but otherwise very well
treated in the way of food and drink. After about another fortnight a
trumpeter arrived to announce that the ransom was coming, and when this was
duly paid, Don Alonzo took a friendly leave of his captors, having had time
to notice that the Good Knight kept not a penny of the money for himself,
but divided it all amongst his soldiers.

But the story does not end here, for this recreant knight was ungrateful
enough to complain to his friends in the most outrageous manner of the
treatment which he had received during his captivity. When this came to the
knowledge of the Good Knight he was justly indignant, as were all his
companions, and he at once wrote a letter to Don Alonzo, calling upon him
to withdraw these untrue words, or to accept a challenge to mortal combat.
This he sent by a trumpeter, and also offered his foe the choice of
weapons, and whether the contest should be on foot or on horseback.

The Spanish captain sent back an insolent answer, saying that he would not
withdraw anything he had said, and that he would prove his words in mortal
combat within twelve days, two miles from the walls of Andria. In fixing
this date he knew that Bayard was ill at the time with a quartan fever. But
the Good Knight would not let such a small matter interfere with his
knightly honours, and when the day arrived he rode to the spot appointed,
with the Sire de la Palisse and his friend Bellabre as his seconds, and
about two hundred men-at-arms as a guard of honour.

Bayard was clothed in white as a mark of humility and rode a splendid
horse, but as Don Alonzo had not appeared, a trumpeter was sent to hasten
his coming. When he was told that the Good Knight was on horseback with
the usual armour, he exclaimed: "How is this? I was to choose the arms.
Trumpeter, go and tell him that I will fight on foot." He said this,
thinking that the illness of Bayard would make it quite impossible for him;
and the trumpeter was greatly surprised, as all had been arranged for a
duel on horseback, and this looked like a way of retreat for the Spaniard.
Ill as he was Bayard showed no hesitation, and with the courage of a lion
declared that he was willing to avenge his honour in any guise. The arms
chosen were a sharp-pointed sword or rapier and a poignard, while the
armour used included a throat-piece (gorgerin) and a secrete.[1]

[Footnote 1: Secrete, a kind of steel skull-cap, often worn under the
helmet.]

When the camp was duly prepared and the champions in face of each other,
Bayard knelt down and made his prayer to God, then he bent to kiss the
earth, and rising, made the sign of the cross before he advanced to meet
his enemy. Don Alonzo addressed him in these words: "Lord of Bayard, what
do you seek from me?" And he replied: "I wish to defend my honour." Then
began the mortal combat between these two valiant men-at-arms, and never
was seen more splendid skill and courage. The rapier of the Good Knight
slightly wounded the face of Don Alonzo, who carefully guarded this most
vulnerable part, but his foe waited until he raised his arm for the next
attack, and then aimed at his neck, and notwithstanding the tempered steel
of his armour, Bayard's onslaught was so tremendous that the throat-piece
(gorgerin) was pierced and the rapier, having no sharp edges (it was only
used for thrusting) was driven in so far that it could not be withdrawn.
Don Alonzo, feeling himself wounded unto death, dropped his sword and
seized the Good Knight in his arms, the two wrestling fiercely until they
both fell on the ground.

The terrible struggle lasted for some time, until Bayard struck his foe on
the visor with his poignard and cried: "Don Alonzo, recognise your fault
and cry for mercy to God...." But the Spanish knight made no reply, for he
was already dead.

Then his second, Don Diego, said: "Seigneur Bayard, he is dead, you have
conquered;" which was proved, for they took off his visor and he breathed
no more. This was a sad trouble to the victor, for he would have given all
he had in the world to have vanquished him alive. Then the Good Knight
knelt down and thanked God humbly for his success. Afterwards he turned to
the dead knight's second and asked: "My lord Don Diego, have I done
enough?"

"Too much, indeed, my lord Bayard, for the honour of Spain," was the
pitiful reply. Then the Good Knight gave leave that honourable burial
should be accorded to Don Alonzo, and his friends bore away the body of
their champion with sad lamentation. But we may imagine the joy and triumph
with which the noble company present and the French men-at-arms accompanied
their hero back to the castle of Monervine.

This duel and the passages-of-arms before with Don Alonzo spread the fame
of Bayard throughout all Europe; indeed, his wonderful renown as the flower
of all chivalry really dates from this time. You may imagine how bitter the
Spaniards were and how they sought for revenge.

After the battle of Cerignola, fought on April 28, 1503, Gonzalvo, the
Great Captain, entered Naples in triumph. When this disastrous news reached
France, Louis XII. hastened to send a fresh army, commanded by la
Tremouille, to reinforce the troops already in Apulia and Calabria. The
French general fell ill, and his authority passed into the hands of the
Marquis of Mantua, who found himself opposed and beaten back at every point
by the genius of Gonzalvo.

At length the two armies came to a stand on either side of the River
Garigliano, one of the broadest rivers of Southern Italy, falling into the
Gulf of Gaeta. The French had possession of the right bank of the river,
close to the rising ground, and had therefore a more favourable position
than the marshy swamp on the lower side, in which the Spanish forces
remained encamped for fifty days. It was a fearful time, in the dead of
winter, with excessive rains, and the soldiers in both camps were driven to
the last verge of endurance, while numbers sickened and died. Under these
depressing circumstances the bright, cheerful spirit of Bayard, the Good
Knight, was invaluable, and his mere presence kept his company in hope and
courage. He never missed an opportunity of engaging in any feat of arms,
and his famous defence of the bridge is perhaps the best known of all his
exploits.

There was a bridge across the Garigliano which was in the hands of the
French, and one day a certain Don Pedro de Pas, a Spanish captain, small
and dwarfish in body but great in soul, conceived a plan for obtaining
possession of it. With about a hundred horsemen he set off to cross the
river by a ford which he knew of, and behind each horseman he had placed a
foot-soldier, armed with an "arquebuse." Don Pedro did this in order to
raise an alarm in the French camp, so that the whole army might rush to
defend it, and leave unprotected the bridge, which would then be seized by
the Spaniards. Bayard, who always chose the post of danger, was encamped
close to the bridge, and with him was a brave gentleman, named le Basco.
When they heard the noise they armed themselves at once, and mounted their
horses in haste to rush to the fray. But as the Good Knight happened to
look across the river he caught sight of about two hundred Spanish horsemen
riding straight towards the bridge, which they would certainly have taken
without much resistance, and this would have meant the total destruction of
the French army.

[Illustration: Bayard defends the Bridge.]

Then the Good Knight cried to his companion, "My lord the Equerry, my
friend, go instantly and fetch our men to guard this bridge, or we are all
lost; meantime I will do my best to amuse them until you come, but make all
haste." This he did, and the Good Knight, lance in rest, galloped across
the bridge to the other end, where the Spaniards were on the point of
passing. But, like a lion in his rage, Bayard rushed at them with so
furious an onset that two or three of the foremost men were driven back and
hurled into the water, from whence they rose no more, for the river was
wide and deep. For a moment they were driven back, but seeing there was
only one knight they attacked him so furiously that it was a marvel he
could resist them. But he came to a stand against the barrier of the bridge
that they might not get behind him, and made so desperate a fight with his
sword, raining blows on all who came near, that he seemed to the Spaniards
more a demon than a man.

In vain they cast pikes, lances, and other arms against him; the Good
Knight seemed to bear a charmed life. In fact, so well and so long did he
defend himself that his foes began to feel a superstitious dread of this
invincible champion when, after the space of full half an hour, his friend,
le Basco, arrived with a hundred men-at-arms.

The historian Champier adds that when Bayard saw help approaching he
cried, with a loud voice, "Haste ye, noble Frenchmen, and come to my help."
Not satisfied with driving back the Spaniards from the bridge, the gallant
little company pursued them for a good mile, and would have done more but
they saw in the distance a great company of seven or eight hundred Spanish
horsemen.

With all his dauntless courage, Bayard had the instinct of a good general,
and he said to his companions: "Gentlemen, we have done enough to-day in
saving the bridge; let us now retire in as close order as possible." His
advice was taken, and they began to retreat at a good pace, the Good Knight
always remaining the last and bearing all the brunt of the rear attack.
This became more difficult every minute, as his horse, on which he had
fought all that day, was so worn out that it could scarcely stand.

All of a sudden there was a great rush of the enemy, sweeping like a
flood over the French men-at-arms, so that many were thrown to the ground.
The horse of the Good Knight was driven back against a ditch, where he
was surrounded by twenty or thirty horsemen, who cried: "Surrender,
surrender, my lord!" Still fighting to the last, he could only make answer:
"Gentlemen, I must indeed yield to you, for, being alone, I can no longer
fight against your might."

If all the accounts of contemporary historians did not agree on the subject
we could hardly believe that one hero could keep back two hundred men at
the narrow entrance of the bridge for close upon half an hour. That after
so tremendous a fight Bayard could pursue the enemy, and defend the rear of
his retiring companions, is indeed a marvellous achievement. The wonder is
not that he was taken prisoner at last, but that he should have held out so
long.

Meantime all his companions had ridden straight to their bridge, believing
that the Good Knight was amongst them, but of a sudden a certain gentleman
from Dauphine exclaimed: "We have lost all, my friends! The Captain Bayard
is dead or taken, for he is not in our company. I vow to God that if I am
to go alone I will return and seek him...." On hearing this the whole troop
turned their horses and set off at full gallop after the Spaniards, who
were bearing away with them the flower of all chivalry. But they did not
know it, for Bayard was aware that if they heard his name he should never
escape alive, and to all their inquiries he only made answer that he was a
gentleman. They had not even taken the trouble to disarm him.

Of a sudden he heard his companions arrive in pursuit, shouting: "France!
France! Turn, turn, ye Spaniards; not thus shall you carry away the flower
of chivalry." Taken by surprise, the enemy received the French charge with
some disorder, and as men and horses gave way, the Good Knight saw his
opportunity, and without putting his foot in the stirrup, sprang upon a
fine horse whose rider was thrown, and as soon as he was mounted, cried:
"France! France! Bayard! Bayard! whom you have let go!" When the Spaniards
heard the name and saw what a mistake they had made to leave him his
arms (without requiring his parole, which he would certainly have kept),
they lost heart and turned back towards their camp, while the French,
overjoyed at having recovered their "Good Knight without Fear and without
Reproach"--their one ideal of chivalry and honour--galloped home over the
famous bridge. We do not wonder that for many days after they could talk of
nothing but this thrilling adventure and the gallant exploits of Bayard.

[Illustration: The Page presents his Prisoner.]




[Illustration: THE EMPEROR MAXIMILIAN
_from the portrait by Albert Durer_.]

CHAPTER V


The wars of Italy had a wonderful fascination for Louis XII., and he
eagerly united with the Emperor, the King of Spain, and the Pope in the
League of Cambray against Venice, hated for her great wealth and success.

In the spring of 1509 the King collected another army, in which he made a
great point of the foot-soldiers, whose importance he fully appreciated,
and for the first time he chose captains of high renown to command them. He
sent for Bayard and said to him: "You know that I am crossing the mountains
to fight the Venetians, who have taken Cremona from me, and other places. I
am giving you the command of a company of men-at-arms ... but that can be
led by your lieutenant, Captain Pierre du Pont, while I wish you to take
charge of a number of foot-soldiers."

"Sire," replied the Good Knight, "I will do what you wish; but how many
foot-soldiers do you propose to give me?"

"One thousand," said the King; "no man has more."

But Bayard suggested that five hundred of these soldiers, carefully
chosen, would be quite enough for one man to command if he did his duty
thoroughly, and to this the King agreed, bidding the Good Knight bring them
to join his army in the duchy of Milan.

The important city of Padua, which had been restored to the Emperor
Maximilian, was left through his carelessness with a small garrison of only
800 "landsknechte" (German foot-soldiers). Two Venetian captains contrived
an ingenious stratagem for recovering the city. It was the month of July by
this time, and immense waggons of hay, from the second mowing, were
entering Padua every day. A number of Venetians made an ambush under some
thick trees about a bow-shot from the walls, then they hid behind the
hay-waggons and crept in through the gates, which at a given signal they
opened to their comrades. The German soldiers, taken by surprise, were put
to death, and the command was given to the brave General Pitigliano, who
repaired and strengthened the fortifications, knowing of what immense
importance this city was to his Republic.

Maximilian was extremely annoyed by the loss of Padua, and collected a
great army, composed of men from all the allies, to besiege it. He also
brought to bear against it the strongest artillery ever used--one hundred
and six pieces of cannon and six immense mortars, "so heavy that they could
not be raised on gun-carriages, they could only be loaded with stones, and
were fired off not more than four times a day." The city was strongly
fortified and defended, and it was decided to attack the most important
gate which led to Vicenza. This being a most perilous enterprise, the
command was given to Bayard of the attacking party. The gate was approached
by a long, straight road between deep ditches, and there were four great
barriers at two hundred steps from each other, all thoroughly defended.
There was a fierce contest at every one of these barriers, and many gallant
knights fell in the attack, but the last one was the worst, for it was only
a stone's-throw from the battlements. The besieged rained stones on them
with their artillery, and the assault lasted more than an hour with pike
and battle-axe.

Then the Good Knight, seeing that this became tedious, cried to his
companions: "Gentlemen, these men give us too much play; let us charge on
foot and gain this barrier." Thirty or forty men-at-arms sprang from their
horses and with raised visors dashed at the barrier with their lances, but
the Venetians met them again and again with fresh relays of men. Then
Bayard shouted: "At this rate, gentlemen, they will keep us here for six
years; we must give them a desperate assault and let each man do as I do!"
This they promised, and the trumpet was sounded, when with one tremendous
rush they drove back the defenders by the length of a lance, and with a
ringing war-cry Bayard sprang over the barrier followed by his friends.
When the French saw the danger in which these gallant men were, there was
such a charge against the final barrier that the enemy was driven back in
disorder into the town. Thus the approaches were gained, and the Emperor's
artillery was brought forward, and remained there for six weeks until the
siege was raised.

A few days later the Good Knight heard, through one of his spies, that in
the castle of Bassano, about thirty miles off, there was a strong company
of cross-bowmen and horsemen, who made a point of sallying out from the
castle and seizing all the supplies of cattle which were on the way to the
camp. They were said to have four or five hundred oxen and cows already
within their walls. Bayard felt that this must be put a stop to, and his
picked companions readily joined him, for this fighting was their very life
and they asked for nothing better. So they set forth an hour before
daybreak and rode steadily towards Bassano, till they reached a place where
the spy pointed out to them a little wooden bridge which the band from
Treviso would have to cross, where two men could keep five hundred in
check. This the Good Knight left to be defended by a few men-at-arms and
archers, who were to remain in ambush until they had seen the troop from
Treviso go by, and await their return. Then Bayard gave directions to one
of his company to take thirty archers with him, and when he saw the enemy
well on their way he was to advance as though to skirmish with them, then
suddenly pretend to be frightened and ride off at full gallop in the
direction where the main French force was hidden behind rising ground. This
was all carried out, and the Good Knight with his men rushed forth upon the
pursuers, taking many prisoners, while the rest escaped in the direction of
Treviso, but were stopped at that wooden bridge and compelled to fight or
yield.

When the fighting was over, Bayard said: "Gentlemen, we really must take
that castle with all the spoils in it." When it was pointed out to him that
it was very strong and they had no artillery, he remarked that he knew a
way by which they might possess it in a quarter of an hour. So he sent for
the two captains who were taken and said to them: "I insist that the castle
be surrendered to me at once, for I know that you have the power to command
it, otherwise you will lose your heads." They saw that he was in earnest,
and one, who was the seneschal, sent orders to his nephew and the gates
were opened.

The Good Knight took possession of the castle, and within the walls of
Treviso found more than five hundred head of cattle and much other booty,
which was all sold later at Vicenza and divided amongst the victors. As
Bayard sat at table with the two Venetian captains, a young page of his,
named Boutieres, came in to show a prisoner he had taken during the
fighting--a big man twice his size. The boy had seen this standard-bearer
trying to escape, had made a rush at him with his lance, struck him to the
ground, and called upon him to surrender. He had given up his sword, to
Boutieres' great delight, and the lad of sixteen, with the standard he had
taken and his sturdy-looking prisoner, had caused great amusement in the
French company. When he was thus brought into the dining-hall before his
own captains, the standard-bearer looked very much ashamed of himself, and
protested that he had simply yielded to the force of numbers, not to that
boy. Thereupon Boutieres offered to give the man back his horse and his
arms and to fight him in single combat. If the standard-bearer won he
should go free without ransom; but if the young page won the man should
die. The Good Knight was delighted at this brave offer, but the Venetian
was afraid to accept it, and all the honour remained with the boy, who was
known to come of a brave race and proved himself worthy in the days to
come.

Most of the French army retired into the duchy of Milan, but Bayard appears
to have remained behind with the garrison of Verona. By one of those rapid
changes so common in Italian politics, before the end of the year Louis
XII. found himself deserted by most of the allies, the Pope, the King of
Spain, Henry VIII., and the Swiss having joined the "Holy League" to drive
the French out of Italy.




[Illustration: ANDREA GRITTI DOGE _of_ VENICE
_from the portrait by Titian Vecelli_.]

CHAPTER VI


While Bayard was with the garrison at Verona, in command of three or four
hundred men-at-arms who had been lent to the Emperor by the King of France,
he had some stirring adventures. It was winter time, and that year, 1509,
was long remembered for its severity. The soldiers in the town were obliged
to send for their horses' forage sometimes to a great distance, and they
were constantly losing both horses and varlets, who were waylaid by the
enemy, so that a large escort was necessary, for not a day passed without
some encounter.

Now there was a village called San Bonifacio about fifteen miles from
Verona, where a certain Venetian captain, named Giovanni Paolo Manfroni,
was stationed with a number of men, and he amused himself by chasing the
foraging parties up to the very gates of Verona. The Good Knight at last
became very angry at this bold defiance, and he resolved to put an end to
these raids by going out with the escort himself the next time that hay was
fetched from the farms round. He kept his plans as secret as possible, but
Manfroni had a spy in the city who managed to let him know what was on
foot, and he resolved to take so strong a force that he would make sure of
capturing the famous Bayard.

One Thursday morning the foragers set forth from Verona as usual, and in
their train were thirty or forty men-at-arms and archers under the command
of the captain, Pierre du Pont, a very wise and capable young man. The
party soon left the highroad to look out for the farms where they were to
receive the usual loads of hay. Meantime, the Good Knight, not suspecting
that his plan was betrayed, had taken a hundred men-at-arms and gone to a
little village called San Martino about six miles from Verona. From thence
he sent out some scouts, who were not long in returning with the news that
the enemy was in sight, about five hundred horsemen, who were marching
straight after the foragers. The Good Knight was delighted to hear it, and
at once set out to follow them with his company.

But Manfroni, who had heard of the whole manoeuvre from his spy, had
prepared an ambush in a deserted palace near, where he had about six
hundred pikemen and arquebusiers. These men were not to stir until they saw
him and his party in retreat, pretending to flee from the French pursuit;
then they were at once to follow and so completely enclose and defeat
Bayard's company.

The Good Knight had not gone two miles through the fields when he overtook
the Venetians and marched straight towards them, shouting, "Empire and
France!" They made some show of resistance, but soon began to retreat along
the lane towards their ambush, where they halted just beyond it, crying
"Marco! Marco!" and began to make a valiant defence. On hearing the
familiar cry of Venice, the foot-soldiers gave a tremendous shout and
rushed furiously upon the French, shooting with their arquebuses, a shot
from which struck Bayard's horse between the legs and killed him. Seeing
their dear master on the ground, his men-at-arms, who would all have died
for him, made a mighty charge, and a gentleman of Dauphine, named Grammont,
sprang from his horse and fought side by side with Bayard. But the two were
of no avail against the Venetians, who took them prisoners and were about
to disarm them.

Captain Pierre du Pont, who was with the forage party, heard the noise and
instantly galloped up, finding his captain and Grammont in evil case; for
already they were being drawn out of the crowd to be taken to a place of
safety. He was only just in time, but he struck out at the captors like a
lion, and the men, taken by surprise, let their prisoners escape, and
retreated to their troop, which was having a furious fight with the French.
The Good Knight and Grammont were soon on horseback again, and hastened
back to the relief of their men, who were now attacked front and back, with
four to one against them, and the arquebusiers were doing them a lot of
damage. Then the Good Knight said to his nephew, Captain Pierre du Pont:
"My friend, we are lost if we do not gain the highroad, but if we are once
there, we will retire in spite of them, and shall be saved, with the help
of God."

"I agree with you," replied his nephew. Then they began to retreat
steadily, step by step, towards the highroad, fighting all the way, and
they reached it at last, though not without much trouble, while the enemy
lost both foot-soldiers and horsemen. When the French at length reached the
highroad which led to Verona, they closed in together, and began to retire
very gently, turning upon the foe with a gallant attack every two hundred
feet.

But all the time they had those arquebusiers at their heels constantly
firing upon them, so that at the last charge once more the Good Knight
had his horse killed under him. Before it fell he sprang to the ground
and defended himself in a wonderful way with his sword; but he was
soon surrounded and would have been killed, but at that moment his
standard-bearer, du Fay, with his archers, made so desperate a charge that
he rescued his captain from the very midst of the Venetians, set him upon
another horse, and then closed in with the others.

The night was drawing near, and the Good Knight commanded that there should
be no more charging, as they had done enough for their honour, and the
gallant little party found a safe refuge in the village of San Martino, in
the midst of cypresses, whence they had started in the morning. This was
about four miles from Verona, and the Venetian captain felt that further
pursuit would be dangerous as help would probably arrive from Verona. So he
caused the retreat to sound, and set out to return to San Bonifacio, but on
the way his foot-soldiers, who were quite worn out, having fought for about
five hours, begged to be allowed to stay at a village some miles short of
San Bonifacio. Manfroni did not much approve of this, but he let them have
their way, while he and his horsemen rode on to their usual quarters,
feeling much disgusted that they had been galloped about all day with so
little to show for it.

That night the French lodged in the village of San Martino, and they
feasted joyfully upon such provisions as they could find, feeling very
proud of their success, for they had scarcely lost any men in comparison
with the enemy. They were still at supper when one of their spies arrived
from San Bonifacio, and he was brought before Bayard, who asked what the
Venetians were doing. He replied:

"Nothing much; they are in great force inside San Bonifacio, and the rumour
goes that they will soon have Verona, for they have a strong party within
the city. As I was starting the Captain Manfroni arrived, very hot and
angry, and I heard him say that he had been fighting against a lot of
devils from hell and not men. As I was coming here I passed through a
village which I found quite full of their foot-soldiers, who are spending
the night there, and to look at them I should say that they are quite tired
out."

Then said the Good Knight: "I warrant that those are their foot-soldiers we
fought against to-day, who would not walk any further. If you feel disposed
we will go and take them. The moon is bright to-night, let us feed our
horses and at about three or four o'clock we will go and wake them."

This suggestion was quite approved of; they all did their best with the
horses, and after having set the watch, they all went to rest. But Bayard
was too full of his enterprise to take any sleep; so towards three hours
after midnight he quietly roused his men and set forth with them on
horseback, riding in perfect silence to the village where the Venetian
foot-soldiers were staying. He found them, as he had expected, fast asleep
"like fat pigs," without any watch as far as he could see. The new-comers
began to shout, "Empire! Empire! France! France!" and to this joyous cry
the bumpkins awoke, coming one by one out of their shelter to be slain like
beasts. Their captain, accompanied by two or three hundred men, threw
himself into the market-place and tried to make a stand there; but no time
was given him, for he was charged from so many directions that he and all
his men were attacked and defeated, so that only three remained alive.
These were the captain and two other gentlemen, who were brothers, and
afterwards were exchanged for French gentlemen who were in prisons at
Venice.

Having accomplished their work, the Good Knight and his company made their
way back to Verona, where they were received with great honour. On the
other hand, when the Venetians heard of the loss of their men they were
furious, and the Doge Andrea Gritti sharply blamed Manfroni for leaving
them behind.

We may mention here that this Giovanni Paolo Manfroni was a splendid
soldier and one of the finest captains of men-at-arms in Italy at this
period.

Manfroni had a certain spy, who often went backwards and forwards between
Venona and San Bonifacio, and who served both him and the Good Knight; but
those treacherous spies always serve one better than the other, and this
one hoped for the most gain from the Venetian.

So one day Manfroni said to him: "You must go to Verona and let Captain
Bayard know that the Council of Venice wish me to be sent in command of
Lignano, a fortified town on the Adige, as the present governor is ordered
to the Levant with a number of galleys. Tell Bayard that you know for
certain that I start to-morrow at dawn with three hundred light horsemen,
and that I shall have no foot-soldiers with me. I am sure that he will
never let me pass without a skirmish, and if he comes I trust he will be
killed or taken, for I shall have an ambush at Isola della Scale (about
fifteen miles south of Verona) of two hundred men-at-arms and two thousand
foot-soldiers. If you manage for him to meet me there I promise on my faith
to give you two thousand ducats of gold."

This precious scoundrel readily promised that he would not fail to do so.
He went off straight to Verona, and to the lodging of the Good Knight,
where he was admitted at once, for all the people there believed him to be
entirely in the service of their master. They brought him in as soon as
Bayard had finished supper, and he was warmly welcomed. "Well, Vizentin, I
am glad to see you. You do not come without some reason; tell me, what news
have you?"

[Illustration: Seizure of the Spy.]

"My lord, I have very good news, thank God!" was the reply. The Good Knight
at once rose from table and drew the spy on one side, to learn what was
going on, who repeated the lesson he had learned. Bayard was delighted at
the prospect before him, and gave orders that Vizentin was to be well
feasted. Then he called together the Captain Pierre du Pont, La Varenne,
his flag-bearer du Fay, and a certain Burgundian captain of "landsknechte,"
Hannotin de Sucker, who had fought with him in most of his Italian wars. He
told these friends what he had heard from the spy, and how Manfroni was
going to Lignano on the morrow with only three hundred horsemen. Then he
added that, if his good companions would join him, these Venetians would
not finish their journey without a little fighting, but the matter must be
seen to at once.

It was settled that they should start at daybreak and take two hundred
men-at-arms. Hannotin de Sucker had his lodging at the other end of the
town, and while he was on his way home he chanced to see the spy coming out
of the house of a man who was known to be on the Venetian side. The
Burgundian captain at once suspected treason; he seized Vizentin by the
collar and asked him what he was doing. The man, taken by surprise, changed
colour and prevaricated so much that the captain at once took him back to
Bayard's lodging. He found his friend just going to bed, but the two sat
together over the fire, while the spy was carefully guarded.

Hannotin explained why he felt sure that there was something wrong. Bayard
at once sent for the spy, of whom he inquired his reason for going to the
house of Messire Baptiste Voltege, the suspected person. In his fright the
spy gave five or six different explanations; but the Good Knight said to
him: "Vizentin, tell the truth without hiding anything, and I promise, on
the word of a true gentleman, that whatever it may be, even if my death has
been conspired for, I will do you no harm. But, on the other hand, if I
catch you in a lie, you will be hung to-morrow at break of day."

The spy saw that he was caught, so he knelt down and begged for mercy,
which was again positively promised him. Then he told the whole story from
beginning to end of the proposed treachery; how Manfroni would have an
ambush of two hundred men-at-arms and two thousand foot-soldiers to make
sure of Bayard's destruction. The spy owned that he had been to the house
of Baptiste to tell him of this enterprise, and to advise him to find means
some night to have one of the city gates opened to the Venetians, but he
added that Baptiste had refused to do this.

When he had made an end of his confession the Good Knight said to him:
"Vizentin, my money has certainly been wasted upon you, for you are a bad
and treacherous man ... You have deserved death, but I will keep my promise
and you shall be safe with me, but I advise you to keep out of sight, for
others may not spare you."

The spy was taken away to be closely guarded, and Bayard said to his
friend, the Burgundian captain:

"What shall we do to this Captain Manfroni who thinks to take us by a
trick? We must pay him out, and if you do what I ask you we will carry out
one of those splendid adventures which were done a hundred years ago." "My
lord, you have only to command and you will be obeyed," was the simple
reply.

"Then go at once to the lodging of the Prince of Hainault, and with my
compliments tell him the whole story. Then you must persuade him to send us
to-morrow morning two thousand of his 'landsknechte,' and we will take them
with us and leave them somewhere in ambush. If something wonderful does not
result you may blame me!"

Hannotin de Sucker started at once and went to the quarters of the Prince,
who was asleep in bed. He was roused immediately and soon heard all that
his visitor had to tell. This courteous Prince, who loved war better than
anything else, was also such a devoted admirer of the Good Knight that he
could have refused him nothing. He replied that he only wished he had heard
of this sooner, as he would have joined the party himself, but Bayard could
dispose of his soldiers as if they were his own. He instantly sent his
secretary to four or five of his most trusted captains, who, to make a long
story short, were ready at daybreak to meet the men-at-arms who had known
of the expedition overnight. They all met at the city gate and set forth
from the city towards Isola della Scala, and the Good Knight said to
Hannotin: "You and the 'landsknechte' must remain in ambush at Servode (a
little village two miles from Isola), and do not be uneasy for I will draw
our foes under your very nose, so that you will have plenty of honour
to-day if you are a gallant comrade."

All was carried out as arranged, for when the men in ambush were left
behind, all the rest of the brave company galloped on to Isola, as if they
knew nothing of what awaited them. They were in an open plain, where there
was a good view from all sides, and presently they saw the Captain Manfroni
riding towards them with his small company of light horsemen. The Good
Knight sent forward his standard-bearer, du Fay, with some archers for a
little skirmish, while he rode after them at a good pace with the
men-at-arms. But he had not gone far when he saw, coming briskly out of the
town of Isola, the Venetian foot-soldiers and a troop of men-at-arms. He
made a show of being surprised, and bade the trumpeter sound to recall his
standard. When du Fay heard this, according to his orders, he began to
retire with his company, which closed up round him, and pretended to be
going straight back to Verona, but really went slowly towards the village
where their "landsknechte" were hiding. An archer had already been sent on
to tell Captain Sucker to make ready for the fight.

Meantime the men of Venice, with their combined troops, charged the small
company of Frenchmen, making such a noise that thunder would not have been
heard, for they felt quite sure that their prey could not escape them. The
French kept well together and skirmished so cleverly that they were soon
within a bow-shot from Servode, when the "landsknechte" of the Prince of
Hainault rushed forth in close ranks from their ambush, and at the word of
command from Bayard charged the Venetians, who were astounded. But they
were good fighting men and made a bold stand, although many were borne to
the ground by the terrible long spears of their enemies. Manfroni made a
splendid resistance, but he could do nothing to help his foot-soldiers,
who could not escape by flight, as they were too far from any refuge; and
he was compelled to see them cut up and destroyed before his eyes. The
Venetian captain soon saw that his only chance was to retreat or he must be
killed, if not taken prisoner, so he galloped off at full speed towards San
Bonifacio. He was followed for some distance, but the Good Knight then
caused the retreat to be sounded, and the pursuers returned, but with great
spoils of prisoners and horses.

The loss of the Venetians was very great, for none of the foot-soldiers
escaped, and there were about sixty prisoners of importance who were taken
to Verona, where the successful French, Burgundians, and "landsknechte"
were received with the utmost joy by their companions, whose only regret
was that they had missed the fray. Thus ended this gallant adventure which
brought great honour and praise to the Good Knight. When he returned to his
lodging he sent for the spy, to whom he said:

"Vizentin, according to my promise I will set you free. You can go to the
Venetian camp and ask the Captain Manfroni if the Captain Bayard is as
clever in war as he is. Say that if he wants to take me he will find me in
the fields."

He sent two of his archers to conduct the spy out of the town, and the man
went at once to San Bonifacio, where Manfroni had him taken and hung as a
traitor, without listening to any excuse.




[Illustration: POPE JULIUS THE SECOND
_from the portrait by Raphael Sanzio_.]

CHAPTER VII


When war began again in Italy at the close of the year 1510, Louis XII.
found that he had no allies except the Duke of Ferrara and some Swiss
mercenaries. Pope Julius II. had joined forces with the Venetians in his
eager desire to drive the French out of Italy, and he was also extremely
wroth with Alfonso, Duke of Ferrara. He sent word to the widowed Countess
of Mirandola that she should give up her city into his hands, as he
required it for his attack upon Ferrara.

When at length the brave defenders had been compelled to yield their
citadel, Pope Julius refused to take possession of the conquered city in
the usual way by riding in through the gate; he had a bridge thrown across
the frozen moat and climbed in through a breach in the walls. It must have
been a gallant sight to look upon, when he politely escorted the angry
Countess of Mirandola out of the home she had so bravely defended, while
she held her head high and boldly spoke her mind, with pride and assurance
as great as his own.

When news of the fall of Mirandola reached the Duke of Ferrara he expected
that the next move would be an attack on Ferrara itself. He therefore
destroyed the bridge which he had made across the Po, and retreated with
all his army to his own strong city. The Castello of Ferrara, in the very
heart of the city, standing four-square with its mighty crenellated towers,
was one of the most famous fortresses of Italy and was believed to be
impregnable; only by famine could it be taken.

The Pope's wisest captains and his nephew, the Duke of Urbino, pointed out
that Ferrara was thoroughly fortified, well provided with artillery of the
newest make, and was defended by an army of well-tried soldiers, amongst
whom was the French company commanded by Bayard. One noted Venetian captain
thus gave his opinion: "Holy Father, we must prevent any provisions
arriving at Ferrara by the river, and also from Argenta and the country
round, which is very rich and fertile. But this we shall scarcely
accomplish unless we take La Bastida, a place about twenty-five miles from
Ferrara; but if once this fortress is in our hands we can starve out the
city in two months, considering what a number of people are within its
walls."

Pope Julius saw the point at once and exclaimed: "Certainly, we must have
that place; I shall not rest until it is taken."

We may imagine the dismay of the governor of La Bastida when he saw a
formidable army arrive, for it happened at the time that he had only a weak
garrison. He instantly sent off a messenger to Ferrara, before the castle
was surrounded and the artillery set in position, pointing out the extreme
peril and the absolute need of immediate help. The trusty man made such
haste that he reached Ferrara about noon, having taken hardly six hours on
the way. It so chanced that he met Bayard at the city gate, and on the Good
Knight asking what news he brought, he replied:

"My lord, I come from La Bastida, which is besieged by seven or eight
thousand men, and the commander sends me to tell the Duke that if he does
not receive help he will not be able to hold the place until to-morrow
night if they try to take it by assault ... for he has only twenty-five men
of war within the walls...."

Bayard at once hastened with him to the Duke, whom he met riding in the
market-place with the lord of Montboison. They thought at first that a spy
had been taken, but soon learnt that he was the bearer of bad news. As the
Duke read the letter which the commander had written he turned pale, and
when he had finished he shrugged his shoulders and said: "If I lose La
Bastida I may as well abandon Ferrara, and I do not see how we can possibly
send help within the time mentioned, for he implores assistance before
to-morrow morning, and it is impossible."

"Why?" asked the lord of Montboison.

"Because it is five-and-twenty miles from here, and in this bad weather it
will be more than that," replied the Duke. "There is a narrow way for about
half a mile where the men will have to go one after the other. Besides,
there is another thing, for if our enemies knew of a certain passage twenty
men could hold it against ten thousand, but I trust they will not discover
it."

When the Good Knight saw how distressed the Duke was, he said:

"My lord, when a small matter is at stake we may hesitate; but when we are
threatened with utter destruction we must try any means. The enemies are
before La Bastida, and they are quite confident that we shall not dare to
leave this city to raise the siege, knowing that the great army of the Pope
is so near us. I have thought of a plan which will be easy to carry out, if
fortune is with us.

"You have in this town four or five thousand foot-soldiers, well hardened
and good soldiers; let us take two thousand of them with eight hundred
Swiss under Captain Jacob and send them this night in boats up the river.
You are still master of the Po as far as Argenta; they will go and wait for
us at the passage you spoke of. If they arrive there first they will take
it, and the men-at-arms who are in this town will ride by the road all this
night. We shall have good guides and will so manage as to arrive by
daybreak and thus join the others; our enemies will have no suspicion of
this enterprise. From the passage you spoke of it is three miles or less to
La Bastida; before they have time to put themselves in order of battle we
will attack them sharply, and my heart tells me that we shall defeat them."

The Duke, delighted, replied with a smile: "Upon my word, Sir Bayard,
nothing seems impossible to you! But I believe that if the gentlemen who
are here agree with you, we shall indeed win...." No one made any
difficulty; on the contrary, the captains of the men-at-arms were so
delighted that, as the chronicler says, "they thought they were in
Paradise." The boats were all prepared as quietly and secretly as possible,
for in the city there were known to be many friends of the Pope.

Fortunately it was the dead of winter, when the nights were long. As soon
as it was dark the foot-soldiers embarked in the boats, which were provided
with trusty and experienced boatmen. The horsemen, led by the Duke in
person, also set forth as soon as the twilight came; they took good guides,
and had a safe journey notwithstanding the stormy weather. Thus it
happened that half an hour before dawn they arrived at the narrow passage,
where all was lonely and quiet, at which they rejoiced greatly. They had
not been waiting half an hour before the boats arrived with the
foot-soldiers.

The men landed and then marched slowly by a narrow path until they reached
a very deep canal between the Po and La Bastida, where they had to cross a
little bridge so narrow that they had to go one after the other. This took
a whole hour to cross, so that it was now quite daylight, which made the
Duke anxious, more especially as, hearing no sound of artillery, he feared
the fortress had been taken. But just as he was speaking about it there
thundered forth three cannon shots, at which all the company was delighted.
They were now only a mile from the enemy, and the Good Knight said:

"Gentlemen, I have always heard it said that he is a fool who makes light
of his foes; we are now close to ours, and they are three to one. If they
knew of our enterprise it would be very bad for us, as they have artillery
and we have none. Besides, I believe that on this occasion all the flower
of the Pope's army is before us; we must take them by surprise if possible.
I would propose sending du Fay with fifteen or twenty horsemen to sound the
alarm on the side from which the enemy came, and Captain Pierre du Pont
with a hundred men-at-arms should be within a bow-shot to support him, and
we will also send him Captain Jacob with his Swiss. You, my lord," he said
to the Duke, "with my lord of Montboison, my companions and myself, we will
go straight to the siege, and I will go in front to give the alarm. If du
Fay is first in position and they attack him, we will go forward and
enclose them; but if our party is first, Captain Pierre du Pont and the
Swiss will do so on their side. That will astonish them so much that they
will not know what to do, for they will think we are three times as many
men as we are, and especially when all our trumpets sound forth at once."

No one had anything better to suggest, for indeed the Good Knight was so
great an authority in war that all were glad to follow where he led.

The attack was thus made on both sides, du Fay giving such a tremendous
alarm on the outer side of the camp that the enemies hastily began to put
on their armour, to mount their horses, and go straight towards where they
heard the trumpets. The foot-soldiers set about arranging themselves in
battle order, but fortunately this took so long that meantime the
assailants of du Fay were attacked and driven back by Pierre du Pont, while
the Swiss poured down upon the foot-soldiers, whose number would have
overwhelmed them had not the men-at-arms rode down upon the papal infantry
from the other side.

The Duke and the French company, with two thousand foot-soldiers, who had
arrived under the walls without being observed, now joined in the fray from
the other side, to the utter confusion of the enemy, who were completely
surrounded and cut to pieces. Some of the horsemen of the papal army made a
desperate attempt to rally, but Bayard and another captain called their
ensigns and rode straight at them, with the cry of: "France! France! The
Duke! the Duke!" and charged them with such vehemence that most of them
were brought to the ground. The fighting went on for a good hour, but at
last the camp was lost and those escaped who could, but they were not many.
This battle cost the Pope about three thousand men, all his artillery and
camp furnishing, and was the salvation of the duchy of Ferrara. More than
three hundred horses remained in the hands of the conquerors, besides many
prisoners of importance.

Indeed, we do not wonder that so much stress is laid upon this victory by
the chronicler of Bayard, as it was solely due to his energy and
resolution. The battle took place on February 11, 1511.

It was at the siege of Brescia that the fame of Bayard reached its highest
point. His splendid courage in volunteering to place himself in the
forefront of battle and face the dreaded hand-guns of the arquebusiers is
the more striking as he had a special hatred of these new arms which were
coming more and more into use. All this gunpowder business was detestable
to the great knight, who had been trained in the old school of chivalry,
where gentlemen showed their skill in the use of arms, and fought bravely
against each other, while a battle was a kind of glorified tournament. "It
is a shame," he used to say, "that a man of spirit should be exposed to be
killed by a miserable stone or iron ball against which he cannot defend
himself."

Bayard always seems to us singularly free from the superstitions of his
day, but we cannot forget that an astrologer had foretold his death from
one of these new machines of war.

When all preparations had been made for the assault of the city, the Duke
of Nemours said to the captains of the army: "My lords, there is one thing
that for God's sake we must consider. You know that if this town is taken
by assault, it will be ruined and pillaged, and many will be put to death,
which seems a great pity. We must try once, before they put it to the
touch, whether they will surrender."

This was agreed to, and the next morning a trumpeter was sent forth from
the citadel, who marched down to the first rampart of the enemy where the
Doge, Messire Andrea Gritti, and his captains came to meet him. The
trumpeter asked if he might enter the town, but was told that he might say
what he liked to those present who had the authority to answer him. Then he
gave his message, saying that if they would give up the city they should
all be free to go forth and their lives would be safe, but if it were taken
by assault they would probably all be killed.

The answer they gave was to bid him return, for the town belonged to the
Republic of Venice, and so would remain, and they would take good care that
no Frenchman should ever set foot within.

The trumpeter brought back his answer, and when it was heard, there was no
more delay for the men were already in battle order.

"Well, gentlemen, we must all do our best.... Let us march," said Gaston de
Foix, Duc de Nemours, "in the name of God and my lord St. Denis." Drums,
trumpets, and bugles sounded an alarm. The enemy replied with a burst of
artillery, and the attacking party from the citadel began their descent
down the hill, where the ground was very slippery, for there had been rain
in the night. The general and many other knights took off their broad,
plated shoes to gain a firmer hold with the felt slippers worn under the
armour, for no one wished to be left behind. At the first rampart there was
a fierce conflict, for it was splendidly defended, and while the Good
Knight's company cried "Bayard! Bayard! France!" the enemy replied with
"Marco! Marco!" making so much noise as to drown the sound of the
hand-guns. The Doge, Andrea Gritti, encouraged his followers by saying to
them in the Italian tongue: "Hold firm, my friends, the French will soon
be tired, and if we can defeat this Bayard, the others will never come on."

But in spite of all his encouragement his men began to give way, and seeing
this the Good Knight cried: "Push on, push on, comrades! It is ours; only
march forward and we have won." He himself was the first to enter and cross
the rampart with about a thousand men following after him, and so with much
fighting the first fort was taken with great loss of life to the defenders.

But in the very moment of victory the Good Knight was wounded, receiving
the blow of a pike in his thigh, which entered in so deeply that the iron
was broken and remained in the wound. He believed himself stricken to death
from the pain he suffered, and turning to his friend, the lord of Molart,
he said: "Companion, advance with your men, the city is gained; but I can
go no further for I am dying." He was losing so much blood that he felt he
must either die without confession, or else permit two of his archers to
carry him out of the melee and do their best to staunch the wound.

When the news spread that their hero and champion was mortally wounded the
whole army, captains and men alike, were all moved to avenge his death, and
fought with fierce courage. Nothing could resist them, and at length they
entered pell-mell into the city, where the citizens and the women threw
great stones and boiling water from the windows upon the invaders, doing
more harm than all the soldiers had done. But the men of Venice were
utterly defeated, and many thousands remained in their last sleep in the
great piazza and the narrow streets where they had been pursued by the
enemy. Of that proud army which had held Brescia with bold defiance, such
as were not slain were taken prisoners, and among these was the Doge of
Venice himself. Then followed an awful time of pillage and every form of
cruelty and disorder, as was ever the way in those days when a city was
taken by storm. The spoils taken were valued at three millions of crowns,
and this in the end proved the ruin of the French power in Italy, for so
many of the soldiers, demoralised by plunder, deserted with their
ill-gotten gains and went home.

Meantime the wounded Bayard was borne into the city by his two faithful
archers and taken to a quiet street from whence the tide of battle had
passed on. Here they knocked at the door of a fine house whose master had
fled to a monastery, leaving his wife in charge. The good lady opened it at
once to receive the wounded soldier, and Bayard, turning to his men, bade
them guard the house against all comers, being assured that when they heard
his name none would attempt to enter. "And rest assured that what you lose
in the matter of spoil I will make good to you," he added. The lady of the
house led the way to her guest-chamber, whither the Good Knight was
carried, and she threw herself on her knees before him, saying: "Noble
lord, I present to you this house and all that is in it, for it is yours by
right of war, but I pray you to spare my honour and my life and that of my
two young daughters...." She had hidden away the poor girls in an attic
under the hay, but Bayard soon set her mind at rest, and gave her his
knightly word that her house would be as safe as a sanctuary. Then he asked
if she knew of a surgeon, and she went to fetch her own doctor, under the
escort of one of the archers. When he arrived he dressed the wound, which
was very deep and jagged, but he assured his patient that he was in no
danger of death, and would probably be on horseback again in less than a
month.

Great was the joy of the Duc de Nemours and of all the French army when
this good report reached them, and the general, who remained in Brescia for
about a week, paid him a visit every day. He tried to comfort him by the
prospect of another battle before long against the Spaniards, and bade him
be quick and get well, for they could not do without him. The Good Knight
made reply that if there should be a battle he would not miss it for the
love he bore to his dear Gaston de Foix and for the King's service; rather
he would be carried thither in a litter.

Before leaving, when he had placed the hapless city in some kind of order
and government, Gaston sent the Good Knight many presents and five hundred
crowns, which he at once gave to his faithful archers. The Duke had,
indeed, no choice about his movements, for he received most urgent letters
from the King of France, who wanted the Spaniards to be driven out of
Lombardy as soon as possible, for France was threatened on every side, by
the King of England and by the Swiss.

The Good Knight was compelled to remain in bed for nearly five weeks, to
his great annoyance, for he received news from the French camp every day,
and there was constant talk of an approaching battle. So he sent for the
surgeon who attended him and told him that all this worry was making him
much worse, and that he must be allowed to join the camp. Seeing what kind
of warrior he had to deal with, the good man replied that the wound was not
closed but was healing well, and that there would be no danger in his
sitting on horseback, but the wound must be carefully dressed night and
morning by his barber. If any one had given Bayard a fortune he would not
have been so delighted, and he settled to start in two days' time. On the
morning when he was to leave after dinner, the good lady of the house came
to speak to him. She knew that by the laws of war she, her daughters, and
her husband (who had long since returned from the monastery where he had
taken refuge) were all prisoners of this French knight, and all that was in
the house belonged to him. But she had found him so kind and courteous that
she hoped to gain his favour by a handsome present, and she brought with
her one of her servants bearing a steel casket containing 2500 ducats. On
entering the Good Knight's chamber she fell on her knees before him, but he
would not suffer her to speak a word until she was seated by his side. Then
she poured out all her gratitude for his knightly courtesy and protection,
and at last offered him the casket, opening it to show what it contained.
But Bayard put it aside with a friendly smile, and replied:

"On my word, dear lady, I have never cared for money all my life! No riches
could ever be so precious to me as the kindness and devoted care which you
have shown to me during my stay with you, and I assure you that so long as
I live you will always have a faithful gentleman at your command. I thank
you very much for your ducats, but I pray that you will take them back...."
However, the lady was so much distressed at his refusal that he at length
accepted the casket, but begged her to send her daughters to wish him
good-bye. When they came and would have fallen on their knees before him,
he would not suffer such humility, but thanked them for all their kindness
in cheering him with their lute and spinet and singing during his illness,
and begged them to accept the ducats contained in their mother's casket,
which he poured out into their aprons whether they would or not. Overcome
by his courteous persuasion, the mother thanked him with tears in her eyes:
"Thou flower of knighthood to whom none can compare, may the Blessed
Saviour reward thee in this world and the next." When the Good Knight's
horses were brought round at mid-day, after dinner, the two fair maidens
brought him some presents of their own needlework, bracelets made with hair
bound with gold and silver threads, and a little embroidered purse, which
he gallantly placed in his sleeve, and the bracelets on his arms, with many
thanks, to the great delight of the girls. Thus with friendly words and
courtly farewells he took his leave, and rode away with a goodly company of
friends towards the camp near Ravenna, where he was welcomed with the
greatest joy and honour by all the French army.

When Gaston de Foix, Duke of Nemours, arrived at the camp before Ravenna he
assembled all the captains together to consider what was to be done, for
the French army began to suffer very much on account of the scarcity of
provisions, which could only be obtained with great difficulty. They were
very short of bread and wine, because the Venetians had cut off the
supplies from one side and the Spanish army held all the coast of Romagna.

There was also another reason for haste, which was not yet known to the
French leaders. Maximilian had long been uncertain and vacillating in his
alliances, but had now definitely decided to join the side of Pope Julius
and the King of Spain. As usual there were companies of German and Swiss
mercenaries both in the Italian army and also with the French, and these
owed some kind of allegiance to the sovereign of their land. Thus it was
that the Emperor had sent word to the companies of German "landsknechte"
that they were to retire home at once and were not to fight against the
Spaniards. Now it so happened that this letter had only been seen by the
Captain Jacob, who commanded these mercenaries in the French army, and he,
being a great friend of Bayard, privately asked his advice, first telling
him that having accepted the pay of the French King he had no intention of
thus betraying him in the hour of battle. But he suggested that it would be
well to hurry on the impending battle before other letters should come from
the Emperor and give the men an excuse for retiring. The Good Knight saw
how urgent the matter was and advised him to declare it to the general, the
Duc de Nemours.

Duke Gaston, who had now heard of the Emperor's letter, said that they had
no choice, and also that his uncle, the King of France, was sending
constant messengers to hurry on war operations as he was in sore straits.
Bayard was asked to give his opinion, and he modestly replied that he had
only just arrived and others might know more, but as far as he could learn,
the besieged were promised that a large army from Naples and Rome would
come to their help in a few days, certainly before Easter, and this was
Maundy Thursday. "And on the other hand," he added, "our men have no
provisions and the horses are reduced to eating willow leaves, so that each
day's delay makes it worse for us. You see, too, the King our master writes
to us every day to hasten our movements, therefore I advise that we give
battle. But we must use all caution for we have to do with brave and good
fighting men, and we cannot deny the risk and danger. There is one comfort:
the Spaniards have been in Romagna for a year, fed like fish in the water
till they are fat and full, while our men, having undergone much hardship,
have longer breath. Remember that to him who fights longest the camp will
remain."

At this every one smiled, for Bayard always had such a bright and pleasant
way of putting things that men loved to hear him. His advice was followed
and all was made ready for a determined assault on the city next day, which
was Good Friday. The captains and their men set forth in gallant mood, as
though they went to a wedding, and so fierce was the attack of the
artillery that before long a small breach was made in the fortification,
but the defenders fought so well that it was not possible to break through
and at length the retreat was sounded. This was really a fortunate thing,
as if the soldiery had begun pillaging the place the coming battle would
certainly have been lost, and the relieving army was now within two miles
of Ravenna.

It would be too long to follow the whole story of that fierce and desperate
conflict, where both sides fought with the utmost skill and valour. The
Spaniards certainly carried out their usual tactics of constantly taking
aim at the horses of the French riders, for they have a proverb which says:
"When the horse is dead the man-at-arms is lost." Their war-cry was:
"Spain! Spain! St. Iago!" to which the other side replied by another
furious onslaught to the shouts of "France! France!" And wherever the Good
Knight passed, "Bayard! Bayard!" was the clarion note which cheered on his
company, ever in the forefront of battle. The French artillery was used
with great success, and as for the young general, Gaston de Foix, he led
forward his men again and again with splendid success. It was late in the
day and already the tide of victory was on the side of the French, when the
Good Knight, who was riding in pursuit of the flying enemy, said to the
Duke: "Praise be to God, you have won the battle, my lord, and the world
will ring with your fame. I pray you to remain here by the bridge and rally
your men-at-arms to keep them from pillaging the camp. But do not leave, I
entreat, till we return." It would have been well, indeed, if he had
remembered this, but some time later, in the tumult and confusion, he saw
some Gascons being driven across the canal by a few Spanish fugitives, and
with his usual impetuous chivalry, Gaston threw himself to their rescue,
without waiting to see who followed him.

He found himself hemmed in between the canal and a deep ditch, attacked by
desperate men with pikes; his horse was killed and he fought on foot with
only his sword. His companions, who had quickly seen his danger, were
trampled down or thrust into the water, and in vain his cousin, de Lautrec,
shouted to the Spaniards, "Do not kill him; he is our general, the brother
of your Queen" (Germaine de Foix). The gallant young Duke fell covered with
wounds, and de Lautrec was left for dead, before their assailants turned
and continued their flight to Ravenna. It so chanced that some distance
farther the Good Knight met them, and would have attacked them, but they
pleaded humbly for their lives, which could make no difference now the
battle was won. Bayard let them go, little knowing that they had done to
death his dear lord and beloved friend, Gaston de Foix.

The Good Knight wrote to his uncle on April 14, 1512:


"Sir, if our King has gained the battle I vow to you that we poor gentlemen
have lost it; for while we were away in pursuit of the enemy ... my lord
of Nemours ... was killed and never was there such grief and lamentation
as overwhelms our camp, for we seem to have lost everything. If our dear
lord had lived to his full age (he was but twenty-four) he would have
surpassed all other princes, and his memory would have endured so long as
the world shall last.... Sir, yesterday morning the body of my lord
(Gaston de Foix, Duc de Nemours) was borne to Milan with the greatest
honour we could devise, with two hundred men-at-arms, the many banners
taken in this battle carried trailing on the ground before his body, with
his own standards triumphantly floating behind him.... We have lost many
other great captains, and amongst them my friend Jacob of the German
foot-soldiers ... and I assure you that for a hundred years the kingdom of
France will not recover from our loss....--Your humble servitor, BAYARD."

The brilliant victory won outside the walls of Ravenna was the last
successful engagement of the French army which, threatened on every side,
was soon "to melt away like mist flying before the wind." The day after the
battle Ravenna was pillaged by the French adventurers and "landsknechte"
with the usual unfortunate result, that they forsook their masters and
returned home with their booty.

This gallant young prince was indeed a terrible loss both to his friends
and to his country. His uncle, Louis XII., is said to have exclaimed, on
hearing of the death of the Duke of Nemours: "Would to God that I had lost
Italy, and that Gaston and the others who fell at Ravenna were still
alive!"

It was difficult to fill his place, but Chabannes la Palisse was chosen to
the command of the army, as Lautrec had been grievously wounded and was now
at Ferrara, where he ultimately recovered.

The French army was already weary and dispirited when the troops of the
Pope and his allies bore down upon them in great numbers; and after several
attempts at resistance they were compelled to retire to Pavia, which they
hoped to defend. However, they had barely time to fortify the various gates
before the enemy was upon them, two days later. By the advice of Bayard, a
bridge of boats was made across the river as a way of retreat, for the
stone bridge was sure to be guarded by the enemy, and, as we shall see,
this proved to be of immense value. By some means, the Swiss managed to
enter the town by the citadel and advanced to the market-place, where, on
the alarm being sounded, they were met by the foot-soldiers and some
men-at-arms, amongst whom were the Captain Louis d'Ars, who was Governor,
La Palisse, and the lord of Imbercourt. But, above all, the Good Knight did
incredible things, for with about twenty or thirty men-at-arms he held all
the Swiss at bay for about two hours in a narrow passage, fighting the
whole time with such desperate energy that he had two horses killed under
him.

It was now that the bridge of boats came into use, and the artillery was
first preparing to cross when Captain Pierre du Pont, Bayard's nephew, who
was keeping a watch on the enemy, came to tell the company fighting in the
market-place: "Gentlemen, retire at once; for above our bridge a number of
Swiss are arriving in little boats, ten at a time, and when they have
enough men they will enclose us in this city and we shall all be cut to
pieces."

He was so wise and valiant a leader that his words were obeyed, and the
French retreated, always fighting, as far as their bridge, hotly pursued,
so that there was heavy skirmishing. However, the horsemen passed over
safely, while about three hundred foot-soldiers remained behind to guard
the entrance of the bridge. But a great misfortune happened, for when the
French had just succeeded in taking across the last piece of artillery, a
long "culverin"[1] (cannon), named _Madame de Forli_,[2] which had been
re-taken from the Spaniards at Ravenna, was so heavy that it sank the first
boat, and the poor soldiers, seeing they were lost, escaped as best they
could, but many were killed and others drowned.

[Footnote 1: Cannon of 5-1/2 inches bore; weight of the shot 17-1/2 lbs.]

[Footnote 2: Named after the famous Catarina Sforza, the warlike Lady of
Forli.]

When the French had crossed the bridge they destroyed it, although they
were no longer pursued, but a great misfortune befell Bayard. He was, as
usual, in the place of danger, protecting the retreat of his company, when
he was wounded by the shot from the town of a small cannon called a
"fowler." It struck him between the shoulder and the neck with such force
that all the flesh was torn off to the bone, and those who saw the shot
thought he was killed. But although he was in agony and knew that he was
seriously wounded, he said to his companions: "Gentlemen, it is nothing."
They tried to staunch the wound with moss from the trees, and some of his
soldiers tore up their shirts for bandages, as there was no surgeon at
hand. It was in this unfortunate condition that the Good Knight accompanied
the French army on that sad retreat from place to place, until at last they
reached Piedmont and crossed the Alps.

Less than three months after the victory of Ravenna the triumphant allies
had re-taken Bologna, Parma, and Piacenza without a blow; had encouraged
Genoa to assert her independence; and Italy, with the exception of a few
citadels, had escaped from French rule.

Bayard, who suffered much from his wound, was carried to Grenoble, where
his good uncle the Bishop, who had first started him in his career of arms,
received him with the greatest affection. He was warmly welcomed and made
much of in his native land, and possibly the excitement, combined with his
serious wound, was too much for him, as he fell ill with fever and for more
than a fortnight his life was despaired of.

Prayers and supplications were made for him throughout the whole country,
especially in all the churches of Grenoble itself, and, as the chronicler
remarks, "there must have been some good person whose prayers were heard,"
for the Good Knight gradually grew better, and before many weeks he was as
well and as gay as ever. Never was any one more feasted and entertained
than he was during the three months when he remained with his uncle, the
Bishop of Grenoble. A very interesting letter has been preserved which this
good prelate wrote to the Queen of France at this time. He thanks her for
her great kindness in sending her doctor, Maitre Pierre, whose skill has
had so much effect in curing his nephew. He also informs Her Majesty that
he has spoken to Bayard about the marriage she suggests for him, but with
all due gratitude he does not find himself in a position to marry, and has
never given the subject a thought....

This is exactly what we might have expected from the good Anne of Brittany.
She had such a passion for match-making that she had obtained from the Pope
a "portable" altar, which always travelled with her, that she might have a
marriage solemnised at any time.

[Illustration: Bayard presented to the King of England.]




[Illustration: HENRY _the_ EIGHTH KING OF ENGLAND
_from the portrait by Hans Holbein_.]

CHAPTER VIII


The next war in which Bayard was engaged was that in which Louis XII. was
attacked by the King of Spain in Navarre. Henry VIII. was at the same time
preparing to invade the north of France, landing near Calais, and the Swiss
were already pouring into Burgundy.

As we may expect, Bayard was not long without being sent on some perilous
adventure. He was at the siege of Pampeluna with the deposed King Jean
d'Albret of Navarre and the lord of La Palisse, when they told him there
was a certain castle about four leagues off which it would be well for him
to take, as the garrison was a constant annoyance to the French. The Good
Knight at once set off with his own company, that of Captain Bonneval, a
certain number of adventurers, and two troops of "landsknechte." When he
arrived before the fortress, he sent a trumpeter to proclaim to those
within that they must yield it to their rightful sovereign, the King of
Navarre, in which case they would save their lives and goods, but if the
place had to be taken by assault they would have no mercy.

The Spaniards were valiant men and loyal subjects of the King of Spain,
and they made reply that they would not yield the fortress and still less
themselves. Upon this Bayard put his artillery in position and made such
good use of it that a breach was soon made in the walls, but it was high up
and not easy to make use of. The Good Knight then sounded the order to
assault and commanded the "landsknechte" to advance. Their interpreter said
that it was their rule, when a place was to be taken by assault, that they
should have double pay. The Good Knight would have nothing to do with their
rules, but he promised that if they took the place they should have what
they asked for. But not a single man of them would mount the breach.
Thereupon Bayard sounded the retreat, and then made an attack with the
artillery as though he wished to enlarge the breach, but he had another
plan. He called one of his men-at-arms, by name Little John, and said to
him: "My friend, you can do me a good service which will be well rewarded.
You see that tower at the corner of the castle; when you hear the assault
begin take ladders, and with thirty or forty men scale that tower, which
you will find undefended." So it turned out, for all the garrison went to
defend the breach, while Little John and his men mounted the tower unseen
and cried out, "France! France! Navarre! Navarre!" The defenders, finding
themselves assailed on every side, did their best; but the castle was soon
taken, and the whole place was pillaged and left in charge of the King of
Navarre's men.

In this year, 1513, died Julius II., the great warrior Pope, a constant foe
to the French, and he was succeeded by the Cardinal dei Medici, Pope Leo X.

Louis XII., having most reluctantly withdrawn his troops from Italy, now
prepared to meet an invasion of Picardy by the English. He sent a large
body of troops to the assistance of the lord of Piennes, Governor of
Picardy, commanded by the finest captains of the kingdom, and amongst these
was Bayard. In the month of June 1513 a large army had landed with Henry
VIII. near Calais; a most convenient place for the invasion of France, as
it was in possession of the English. A strong force was sent on to besiege
the town of Therouanne in Artois, but the King himself remained behind at
Calais for some tournaments and festivities. When he set forth, a few weeks
later, to join his army he had a very narrow escape of being taken prisoner
by Bayard, who met him on the way.

It happened that the English King was accompanied by about 12,000
foot-soldiers, of whom 4000 were landed, but he had no horsemen, while
Bayard commanded a detachment of nearly 1200 men-at-arms. The two armies
came within a cannon-shot of each other, and Henry VIII., seeing his
danger, dismounted from his horse and placed himself in the middle of the
"landsknechte." The French were only too eager to charge through the
foot-soldiers, and Bayard implored the Governor of Picardy, under whose
orders he was, to allow him to lead them on. "My lord, let us charge them!"
he exclaimed; "if they give way at the first charge we shall break through,
but if they make a strong stand we can always retire, for they are on foot
and we on horseback." But the lord of Piennes only replied: "Gentlemen, the
King my master has charged me on my life to risk nothing, but only to
defend his land; do what you please, but for my part I will never give my
consent."

The Good Knight, brought up in strict military discipline, was not one to
break the law of obedience, and he yielded with bitter disappointment in
his heart. The timid caution of the Governor of Picardy had thus lost him,
in all probability, the chance of a splendid adventure, for the capture of
King Henry VIII. at the very beginning of the war might have changed the
whole history of Europe.

As it was, the King was suffered to pass on his way, but Bayard obtained
leave to harass the retreating army, and with his company took possession
of a piece of artillery called _Saint John_, for Henry VIII. had twelve of
these big cannons, to which he gave the name of "his twelve apostles."

The King of England reached the camp outside Therouanne in safety, and a
few days later was joined by the Emperor Maximilian, who was welcomed with
much feasting. Their combined forces are said to have amounted to 40,000
men, and they soon began a vigorous bombardment of the city, which was
bravely defended with a strong garrison, who did their best with the
limited means at their disposal. Therouanne was a strongly-fortified city,
but the massive walls, which had formerly been impregnable, could not stand
against a long siege with this new artillery.

The besieged city was very short of provisions and the great object of the
French was to supply these; indeed Louis XII., who had advanced as far as
Amiens, was sending constant orders that this must be done at any risk. At
the same time he was very anxious to avoid a general engagement as his army
would be no match for the combined English and Burgundian forces. French
historians tell us that this was the cause of that disastrous encounter
which, to their great annoyance, has been called the "Battle of Spurs."
They point out that the troops were not sent to fight, but only to
revictual a besieged place, and that the King's orders were that, if
attacked, "they were to retreat at a walk, and if they were pressed, go
from a walk to a trot, and from a trot to a gallop, for they were to risk
nothing."

This was the French plan to send provisions for the beleaguered city, a
very difficult enterprise on account of the immense army which surrounded
it. It was arranged that the cavalry should make a feigned attack on the
side of Guinegaste, in order to draw the enemy in that direction, while
eight hundred "stradiots" (light horse, chiefly Albanians in the service of
France) were to make a dash on the other side, gallop through the defending
force, reach the moat and throw in the bundles of provisions which they
carried on the necks of their horses. This we are told the Albanians
actually succeeded in doing, and it seemed as if this bold stroke would be
successful, for the besieged, under cover of night, would be able to fetch
in the much-needed provisions.

The French men-at-arms, meantime, had advanced to the attack and, after
some skirmishing with the English and Imperial troops, were beginning to
retreat somewhat carelessly, when they suddenly saw a number of
foot-soldiers with artillery appearing on the top of the hill of
Guinegaste, preparing to bar their way. Only then did they become fully
aware of the imminent danger in which they were, and understood that, by
some treachery, their plans had been made known to the enemy, who had thus
made all preparations for their destruction.

King Henry VIII. had heard of the plan of relief, and before daybreak had
placed ten or twelve thousand English archers and four or five thousand
German foot-soldiers on a hillock with eight or ten pieces of artillery, in
order that when the French had passed by, his men might descend and
surround them, while in front he had ordered all the horsemen, both English
and Burgundian, to attack them. When the French soldiers found themselves
caught in this ambush, and the retreat was sounded by the trumpeters, they
turned back, but were so hotly pursued that the gentle trot soon became a
wild gallop and they fled in disorder, notwithstanding the cries of their
captains: "Turn, men-at-arms, turn, it is nothing!" The Good Knight's
company was hurried along with the others, but again and again he rallied
them, until at last he was left with only fourteen or fifteen men-at-arms
on a little bridge only wide enough for two horsemen to pass at a time,
while the stream was too deep to ford as it was dammed up to turn a mill.
Here Bayard came to a stand and cried to his companions: "My friends, we
can hold this bridge for an hour, and I will send an archer to tell my lord
of La Palisse that we have checked the enemy and this is the place to
attack them."

We can picture to ourselves how gallantly he fought, for he loved nothing
better than to defend a narrow bridge, but the pursuing army proved too
overwhelming, for a company of horsemen went round beyond the mill and
attacked the brave little party of defenders from behind. When Bayard saw
that their position was desperate, he cried: "Gentlemen, we yield
ourselves, for our valour will serve us nothing. Our horses are done up,
our friends are three leagues away, and when the English archers arrive
they will cut us to pieces." One by one the knights yielded, but Bayard saw
a Burgundian gentleman on the bank who, overcome by the great heat of that
August day, had taken off his "armet" (helmet) and was too exhausted to
think about taking prisoners. The Good Knight rode straight at him, held
his sword at the man's throat and cried: "Yield, man-at-arms, or you are
dead." Never was man more surprised than this Burgundian, who thought that
all the fighting was over, but with the cold steel threatening him there
was nothing for him but surrender. "I yield, as I am taken in this way, but
who are you?" he asked.

"I am the Captain Bayard and I also yield myself to you," was the reply.
"Take my sword, and I pray you let me go with you." So he was taken to the
English camp and well treated by the gentleman in his tent; but on the
fifth day Bayard said to him: "Sir, I should like to return to my own camp
for I grow weary of this." "But we have said nothing about your ransom,"
exclaimed the other. "My ransom?" said the Good Knight. "But what about
yours, for you were my prisoner first? We will fight out the matter, if you
like." But the gentleman had heard of Bayard's fame and was by no means
anxious to fight, surprised as he was at this new point of view. But he was
a courteous gentleman, and offered to abide by the decision of the
captains. Meantime the rumour spread that the great Bayard was in the camp,
and there was much excitement. The Emperor Maximilian sent for him and
feasted him well, expressing great delight at meeting him again. After much
pleasant talk he remarked: "In the days when we fought together it seems to
me that we were told Bayard never fled." "If I had fled, sire, I should not
be here now," he replied.

Presently the King of England arrived and desired that the Good Knight
might be presented to him, as he had always wished to make his acquaintance.
Then they began to talk about the French defeat, and both Henry and
Maximilian made some severe remarks, upon which the Good Knight exclaimed:
"Upon my soul! the French men-at-arms were in no wise to blame, for they
had express commands from their captains not to fight, because our force
was not to be compared with yours, for we had neither foot-soldiers nor
artillery. And indeed, high and noble lords, you must know that the
nobility of France is famous throughout the world. I do not speak of
myself."

"Indeed, my lord of Bayard," said the King of England, "if all were like
you I should soon have to raise the siege of this town. But now you are a
prisoner." "I do not own to it, sire, and I will appeal to the Emperor and
yourself." He then told the whole story in the presence of the gentleman
with whom he had the adventure, and who answered for the truth of it. The
Emperor and the King looked at each other, and Maximilian spoke first,
saying that Bayard was not a prisoner, but rather the other knight; still,
all things considered, he thought that they were quits, and that the Good
Knight might depart when it seemed well to the King of England. To this
suggestion Henry VIII. agreed, but required that Bayard should give his
word to remain for six weeks without bearing arms, after which time he
could return to his company. Meantime he should be free to visit all the
towns of Flanders. For this gracious permission the Good Knight humbly
thanked both the princes, and took leave of them after a few days, during
which he was treated with great honour. Henry VIII. made secret proposals
to Bayard that he should enter into his service, offering him high position
and great possessions. But this was labour lost, for, as the chronicler
says, "he was a most loyal Frenchman."

Therouanne, whose walls had been constantly bombarded with much destruction,
was soon compelled by famine to capitulate. The garrison were to march out
freely, with all their arms and armour; but the fortifications were
destroyed and the town partly burnt.




[Illustration: FRANCIS _the_ FIRST KING _of_ FRANCE
_from the portrait by Titian Vecelli_.]

CHAPTER IX


The next year, 1514, brought many changes in France. First came the death
of the good Queen Anne of Brittany, who was greatly lamented by her husband
and mourned by all her people. The next notable event was the marriage of
the Princess Claude, her daughter, to the young Duke of Angouleme, who was
to succeed to the throne under the name of Francis I.

He had not long to wait for his inheritance as Louis XII., having made an
alliance with England, was induced for political reasons to marry the
Princess Mary, sister of Henry VIII. The poor King was already in
ill-health, and he only survived his wedding three months, dying on New
Year's day, 1515. He had a splendid funeral at St. Denis, which was
scarcely over before all the great nobles of the realm put off their
mourning and hastened in splendid magnificence to Rheims to the coronation
of the new King, Francis I., a gay and handsome youth of twenty.

The young King at once set about carrying out the desire of his heart--the
conquest of Milan. Charles de Bourbon was made Constable of France, and a
great army was collected at Grenoble. But secret news was received that the
Swiss were guarding on the other side the only passes which were then
thought possible for the crossing of armies. One was the Mont Cenis, where
the descent is made by Susa, and the other was by the Mont Genevre.
Bourbon, however, heard of a new way by the Col d'Argentiere, and meantime
sent several French generals and the Chevalier Bayard to cross the
mountains by the Col de Cabre and make a sudden raid upon Prospero Colonna,
who with a band of Italian horsemen was awaiting the descent of the French
army into Piedmont. The gallant little company rode across the rocky Col,
where cavalry had never passed before, descended by Droniez into the plain
of Piedmont, crossed the Po at a ford, where they had to swim their horses,
inquired at the Castle of Carmagnola and found that Prospero Colonna and
his company had left barely a quarter of an hour before.

The captains considered what they should do: some were for advancing,
others hesitated, for if Colonna had any suspicion of their plan he
would call the Swiss to his help, for there was a large force in the
neighbourhood. It was Bayard who settled the question by saying: "Since we
have come thus far, my advice is that we continue the pursuit, and if we
come across them in the plain, it will be a pity if some of them do not
fall into our hands."

All cried that he was quite right, and that they must start as soon as
possible, but first it would be well if some one were sent on in advance,
in disguise, to find out the exact position of the enemy. This duty was
given to the lord of Moretto, who carried out the inquiry very quickly,
bringing back word that Colonna and his escort were preparing to dine at
Villafranca in full security.

They next settled the order of their match: Humbercourt was to go in front
with one hundred archers; a bow-shot behind him Bayard would follow with
one hundred men-at-arms, and then Chabannes de la Palisse and d'Aubigny
would bring up the rest of their men.

Prospero Colonna had good spies, and he heard from them as he was going to
Mass at Villafranca that the French were in the fields in great numbers. He
replied that he was quite sure it could only be Bayard and his company,
unless the others were able to fly over the mountains. As he was returning
from Mass, other spies came up to him with the news: "My lord, I have seen
close by more than a thousand French horsemen, and they are coming to find
you here." He was a little taken aback, and turned to one of his gentlemen,
to whom he said: "Take twenty horsemen and go along the road to Carmagnola
for two or three miles, and see if there is anything to alarm us."

All the same he commanded the Marshal of his bands to have the trumpet
sounded, and to start for Pignerol, where he would follow when he had eaten
a mouthful. Meantime the French were marching forward in haste, and were
about a mile and a half from Villafranca, when, coming out of a little
wood, they met the scouts sent by the lord Prospero to find them. When
these caught sight of the approaching enemy they turned straight round and
galloped off as hard as they could go. The lord of Humbercourt and his
archers pursued them at full speed, sending word to Bayard to make haste.

The French knights rode at such a pace that they reached the gate of the
town at the same time as the Italians, and with their cry of "France!
France!" they managed to keep the gate open until the arrival of the Good
Knight and the rest of their company, when after some sharp fighting it
was strongly held. They also secured the other gate of the town, but two
Albanians managed to escape and carry news of the disaster to a company of
four thousand Swiss about three miles off.

Prospero Colonna was surprised at dinner, and would have defended himself,
but when he saw that defence was hopeless he yielded himself most
reluctantly to this Bayard, whom he had vowed "that he would catch like a
pigeon in a cage." As he cursed his ill-fortune in having been thus taken
by surprise, instead of meeting the French in the open field, the Good
Knight with his usual courteous chivalry tried to comfort him, saying: "My
lord Prospero, it is the fortune of war! You lose now, and will win next
time! As for meeting us in the open field, it would be a great pleasure to
us French, for if you knew our men when they are roused to battle you would
not find it easy to escape...." The Italian lord replied coldly: "In any
case I should have been glad to have the chance of meeting!"

Besides Colonna, several great captains were taken prisoners, and the place
was found to be full of rich spoils, gold and silver plate, splendid
equipments, and above all in value, six or seven hundred valuable horses.
Unfortunately for the French they were not able to carry away all this, for
news arrived of the approach of the Swiss troop which had been summoned;
indeed they entered Villafranca at one gate as the French rode out with
their prisoners on the other side, but there could be no pursuit as the
Swiss were all on foot.

The chief military advantage of this wonderful raid was that it kept all
these Italian horsemen away from the coming battle at Marignano.

Francis I. was delighted to hear of Bayard's success, and finding that the
Swiss were retreating towards Milan he followed in pursuit of them, took
Novara on the way, and advanced with his army as far as Marignano.

A terrible melee followed, for as the light failed confusion increased. We
hear of a most striking adventure which befell the Good Knight Bayard late
in the evening. His horse had been killed under him, and the second which
he mounted became so frantic when his master charged the Swiss lances that
he broke his bridle and dashed into the midst of the enemy until he became
entangled in the vines trained from tree to tree. Bayard kept his presence
of mind, and in order to escape instant death, slipped gently from his
horse, cast off his helmet and the thigh-pieces of his armour, and then
managed to creep on hands and knees along a ditch until he reached his own
people. The first man he met was the Duke of Lorraine, who was much
surprised to see him on foot, and at once gave him a wonderful horse which
had once belonged to the Good Knight himself, and had been left for dead on
the field of Ravenna, but was found next day and brought back to Bayard,
who cured him. This was a most unexpected piece of good fortune, and he was
able to borrow a helmet from another friend and so return to the fight,
which continued for a while by moonlight.

We have a vivid account of the weird and strange night which followed, when
the trumpets of France sounded the retreat and the Swiss blew their
cowhorns, as is their custom, and the two armies, with neither ditch nor
hedge between them, awaited the coming day within a stone's-throw of each
other. Those who were mounted sat on their horses with only such food or
drink as they chanced to have with them ... "and it is the firm belief that
no man slept during all those hours." In the King's letter to his mother,
Louise of Savoie, he says "that he remained on horseback with his helmet
on, until he was compelled to rest for a while on a gun-carriage, under the
care of an Italian trumpeter ... when the young King asked for water, it
could only be obtained from the ditch close by."

When the morning broke, the battle began again with fresh vigour on both
sides; thousands of brave men fell, and the noblest names of France were
amongst the slain on that fatal field. In the end the victory remained with
the French, and the survivors of the vanquished Swiss retreated in good
order, for the King, who never knew when he might need their services, gave
orders that they were not to be pursued. When all was over, on the Friday
evening, Francis I., who had fought throughout with gallant spirit and
valour, requested the honour of knighthood from the noble Bayard. In this
the young King showed his just appreciation of his most gallant subject,
the very flower of French chivalry, the hero of so many battles.

The French army now continued its victorious march to Milan, which
surrendered at once, and the King, after leaving Charles de Bourbon as his
Lieutenant-General, went to meet Pope Leo X. at Bologna and soon after
returned to his own land. Bayard was left in Milan and did good service
when it was attacked later by the Emperor Maximilian.

In 1519 the Emperor Maximilian died, and was succeeded in his dominions by
his grandson, Charles V., already King of Spain. It was a great blow to
Francis I., who had used every effort to obtain this honour himself; and
the rivalry then started continued all his life. As Mezieres was in danger
of being attacked, Francis I. immediately issued orders that Bayard should
be sent to defend it, as there was no man in his kingdom he would sooner
trust for so important an enterprise.

This city was of immense importance at that moment, if it could be held
against the might of the Emperor until the French army should be made up to
its full strength and reach the frontier, where the Germans had arrived,
commanded by two great captains, the Count of Nassau and the famous
_condottiere_, Franz von Sickingen.

Bayard most gladly obeyed the King's command and lost no time in making his
way to Mezieres with certain young nobles, amongst whom was the young lord
Montmorency, and with a goodly company of men-at-arms. When he arrived he
found the place in a very poor condition to stand a siege, and he at once
set to work with his usual enthusiasm to improve the fortifications. He
worked himself as hard as any day labourer to encourage the others, and
there was never a man-at-arms or a foot-soldier who did not eagerly follow
his example. The Good Knight would say to them: "It shall not be our fault
if this place is taken, seeing what a fine company we are. Why, if we had
to defend a field with only a four-foot ditch round it, we would fight a
whole day before we should be beaten. But, thank God, here we have ditches,
walls, and ramparts, and I believe that before the enemy enters many of
their men will sleep in those ditches."

In short, such was the magic of his eloquence, that all his men thought
they were in the strongest place in the world. This was soon put to the
test when it was besieged on two sides, from beyond the River Meuse and
from the land. Count Sickingen had about fifteen thousand men, and the
other captain, Count Nassau, more than twenty thousand. A herald was sent
to Bayard to point out to him that he could not hold Mezieres against their
arms, that it would be a pity for so great and famous a knight to be taken
by assault, and that they would give him excellent terms. And much more of
the same flattering nature.

When the Good Knight had heard all the herald had to say, he asked no
man's advice, but replied with a smile: "My friend, I am surprised at
these gracious messages from your masters, whom I do not know. Herald,
you will return and say to them that as the King has done me the honour
to trust me, I hope with God's help to keep this frontier town so long
that your captains will be more tired of besieging it than I shall to be
besieged...." Then the herald was well feasted and sent away. He bore to
the camp the Good Knight's reply, which was by no means pleasant to my
lords, and there was present a captain who had seen service under Bayard in
Italy. He assured the company that so long as the Good Knight was alive
they would never enter into Mezieres; that when cowards fought under him
they became brave men, and that all his company would die with him at the
breach before the enemy set foot in the town ... and that his mere presence
was of more value than two thousand men....

This was not pleasant to hear, and the Emperor's captains made a furious
attack with their artillery on the ramparts, which continued during four
days. The Good Knight noticed that special damage was done to the walls
from the camp of Count Sickingen, and considered by what means he could be
induced to go back the other side of the river. So he wrote a letter to the
lord Robert de la Marck, who was at Sedan, in which he hinted at a rumour
he had heard that the Count might be persuaded to become an ally of the
King of France. Bayard added that he desired nothing more, but Sickingen
must lose no time, for his camp would soon be hemmed in by the approaching
Swiss and by a sortie well timed from the town. This information was to be
kept quite private....

The letter was written giving other particulars, and was then given to a
peasant with a crown and the order to take it at once to Sedan from the
Captain Bayard. The good man set off with it, but, as Bayard had foreseen,
he had not gone far before he was taken and gave up the letter to save his
life. This message greatly troubled Count Sickingen, who was already
suspicious of the other general, and was not slow to imagine that he had
been betrayed and left in the post of danger. The more he thought of it the
more his rage increased, and at last he gave orders to sound the retreat
and cross the river, to the dismay and indignation of Count Nassau, who saw
that this was practically raising the siege. Angry messages passed between
the two generals, until at length they were on the point of actual
fighting.

The Good Knight had been watching all this from the ramparts to his great
amusement, and he now thought it time to add to the confusion by a
well-aimed attack of artillery, which so added to the nervous alarms of the
besiegers that next morning they packed up their tents and camp equipment,
and the two Counts went off in different directions, while it was a long
time before they became friends again. Thus it was that Bayard kept at bay
the overwhelming forces of the enemy for three weeks, until the King of
France himself arrived with a great army. We see how it was that enemies of
the Good Knight could never get over a kind of supernatural terror both of
his splendid valour and his endless resources. King Francis sent for Bayard
to his camp, and on his way thither the indomitable captain retook the town
of Mouzon. He was received with the greatest honour by the King, who
bestowed on him the famous order of St. Michael and the command of a
hundred men-at-arms. He also made many promises of future greatness, and
both he and his mother, the Queen Louise, praised Bayard to the skies. But,
unfortunately, the only results of all this praise were a few empty honours
and an immense amount of jealousy and ill-feeling amongst the courtiers.
Indeed, we find that after this time Bayard never had any important charge
given to him, and never attained the position, which he so richly deserved,
of commander in time of war. It is very interesting to notice that the
"Loyal Servitor"--that faithful chronicler who followed Bayard through all
his campaigns, and probably often wrote at his dictation--never allows us
to suspect that the Good Knight felt any bitterness at this neglect. Not
one word of complaint is ever heard; he never murmured, he asked for
nothing; his only anxiety was to serve his country and his king.

If Bayard was not rewarded with the prizes of his profession he was
certainly always chosen when any dangerous or wearisome business was on
hand.

The Good Knight was not recalled to Court, and it is supposed that, besides
the jealousy which his brilliant deeds had awakened, he was also in
disgrace on account of his warm friendship for Charles de Bourbon, who was
now being driven to despair and ruin through the hatred of Louise de
Savoie.

Bayard having been made lieutenant of the Governor of Dauphine in 1515, it
was easy to keep him at a distance from Paris at his post, and with his
keen and devoted interest in all matters that concerned his country, these
years in a far-off province were a veritable exile. Several of his letters
written during this period have been preserved, and we have also a friendly
note from the King, written in December 1523, when he had settled to make
another expedition to Italy to recover his former conquests there and to
restore his prestige. It is evidently written in answer to an urgent appeal
from Bayard to be allowed to join him, and, probably in a moment of
impulse, he warmly agrees to employ his bravest captain; but, alas for
France! it was not to be in the position of command and responsibility
which his splendid talents and courage demanded. It was to be his last
expedition, with a hero's death as his only guerdon.

In the beginning of the year 1524 the King of France sent an army into
Italy under the command of the lord of Bonnivet, his admiral, who had no
qualifications for his high post beyond personal courage. He was a man
of narrow views, wilful and obstinate, and from these faults in a
commander-in-chief great disasters followed. A strong Imperial party,
supported by Charles de Bourbon and Giovanni dei Medici, held the city of
Milan, and the French camp was at a little town called Biagrasso, when
Bonnivet said to the Good Knight: "My lord Bayard, you must go to Rebec
with two hundred men-at-arms and the foot-soldiers of de Lorges, and so
find out what is going on in Milan and check the arrival of their
provisions." Now the Good Knight never murmured at any command given him,
but he saw at once what a wild and foolish scheme this was, and replied:
"My lord, the half of our army would scarcely be sufficient to defend that
village, placed where it is. I know our enemies, they are brave and
vigilant, and you are sending me to certain shame; I pray you therefore, my
lord, that you consider the matter well." But the Admiral persisted that it
would be all right, for not a mouse could leave Milan without his hearing
of it, until, much against his own judgment, Bayard set forth with the men
given to him. But he only took two of his own horses, for his mules and the
rest of his train he sent to Novara, as though foreseeing the loss of all
he had with him.

When he had reached this village of Rebec he considered how he could
fortify it; but there was no means of doing so except by putting up a few
barriers, for it could be entered on every side. The Good Knight wrote to
Bonnivet several times, pointing out what a dangerous place it was and that
he must have reinforcements if he was to hold it long, but he received no
answer. Meantime the enemy in Milan had learnt through spies that the Good
Knight was at Rebec with a small company, and greatly rejoiced, for it was
decided to go and surprise him by night. This was exactly what Bayard
feared, and he always placed half his men on the watch, and himself
remained on the look-out for several nights, until he fell ill and was
compelled to remain in his chamber. However, he ordered the captains who
were with him to keep a good watch on all sides, and they went, or
pretended to do so, until there came on a little rain, which sent them all
back except a few archers.

It was this very time which the Spaniards and Italians had chosen for their
attack. They marched on through the night, which was very dark, and in
order to recognise each other they all wore a white shirt over their
armour. When they arrived near the village they were amazed to see no one,
and began to fear that the Good Knight had heard of their enterprise and
had retired to Biagrasso. A hundred steps farther on they came upon the few
poor archers on the watch, who fled, crying, "Alarm! Alarm!" But they were
so hotly pursued that the foe was at the barriers as soon as they were.

The Good Knight, who in such danger never slept without his steel
gauntlets and thigh-pieces, with his cuirass by his side, was soon armed,
and mounted his horse, which was already saddled. Then, with five or six of
his own men-at-arms, he rode straight to the barrier, and was joined by de
Lorges and some of his foot-soldiers, who made a good fight. The village
was already surrounded, and eager search was made for Bayard, who was the
sole object of the expedition, and there was much shouting and confusion.
When the Good Knight at the barrier heard the drums of the enemy's
foot-soldiers, he said to the Captain Lorges: "My friend, if they pass this
barrier we are done for. I pray you, retire with your men, keep close
together and march straight for Biagrasso, while I remain with the horsemen
to protect your rear. We must leave the enemy our baggage, but let us save
the men." Lorges at once obeyed, and the retreat was carried out so
cleverly that not ten men we're lost. The Emperor's people were still
seeking for the Good Knight when he had already reached Biagrasso and
spoken his mind to the Admiral. Bayard was quite broken-hearted at the
misfortune which had befallen him, although it was certainly not his fault,
but there is more chance in war than in anything else.

Still, there was more than chance in these disasters of the French in
Italy. They had quite miscalculated the strength of their enemies, amongst
whom was now the famous general, Charles de Bourbon, late Constable of
France. The young French King, at a time when Spain, England, and Italy
were all against him, had most unwisely deprived Bourbon of the whole of
his vast estates by means of a legal quibble; and his greatest subject,
driven to desperation by this ungrateful treatment, had passed over to the
service of Charles V., and was now in command of the Spanish army. It was
he who urged the immediate pursuit of the French when Bonnivet, discouraged
by ill success and sickness in his camp, retreated from his strong position
at Biagrasso. He made one blunder after another, for now that it was too
late he sent a messenger to raise a levy of six thousand Swiss to join him
by way of Ivria.

According to his usual gallant custom, as the army retired with forced
marches towards the Alps, Bayard took command of the rear-guard, and as the
Spaniards followed day by day he bore all the brunt of the constant
skirmishing which took place. It was a most perilous office, for the enemy
was well provided with artillery, and when the Good Knight made a gallant
charge with his company and drove back the men-at-arms, he would be
attacked by a shower of stones from the arquebusiers. He seemed to bear a
charmed life, though ever in the post of danger, for others were wounded or
killed while he escaped unhurt until a certain fatal day when the
retreating French army had reached the valley of the Sesia beyond Novara.
Here it was that Bonnivet saw his expected troop of Swiss allies on the
opposite bank of the river, and at once sent word to them to cross over and
join him. But what was his dismay when the Swiss captains replied that the
King of France had not paid them or kept his word, and they had come to
fetch away their comrades who were in the French army. Worse still, when
this became known, all the Swiss mercenaries in his camp rose in open
rebellion against Bonnivet, and lost no time in crossing the river,
overjoyed to leave a losing cause and go back to their homes with so good
an excuse.

The unfortunate French commander was in despair and hoping to hide the
catastrophe from the pursuing enemy, he ordered a brisk skirmish, in which
he took part with plenty of courage and was severely wounded in the arm.
The Good Knight Bayard did prodigies of valour, driving back a whole
company of arquebusiers, but in the moment of triumph he was struck by the
stone from an arquebus and received mortal injury. Raising the hilt of his
sword in the sign of the cross, he cried aloud: "Miserere mei, Deus
secundum magnam misericordiam tuam!" He refused to be taken away, saying
that he had never turned his back on his enemy, and his faithful steward
Jacques Jeffrey and his squire lifted him from his horse and placed him
with his back to a tree, still facing the foe with a brave countenance.

We have a most pathetic and touching account of this last scene, in which
the Good Knight without Fear and without Reproach died as he had lived,
bearing himself with humble devotion towards God and loving care and
thought towards all men. His friends would have borne him away, but he
implored them to leave him and seek their own safety, for he was in such
terrible pain that he could not endure to be moved. He sent his last
salutations to the King his master, and to all his companions, and took an
affectionate leave of his heart-broken friends, who obeyed his command, all
but the one faithful attendant who remained with him to the end. This was
his steward, Jacques Jeffrey, and we are told of the poor man's grief and
despair, while his master sought to comfort him with brave and noble words.
"Jacques, my friend, cease your lament, for it is the will of God to take
me away from this world where by His grace I have long dwelt and received
more good things and honours than I deserve. The only regret that I have in
dying is that I have failed in my duty ... and I pray my Creator in His
infinite mercy to have pity on my poor soul...."

Nothing could exceed the consternation and sorrow which spread through the
French camp when the news reached them that Bayard was wounded and in
mortal agony. The same feeling was shared by his enemies, for to them the
name of Bayard represented the most perfect knight in all the world, the
pattern of chivalry whom every true man sought to imitate from afar.

In sad procession the captains of Spain and Italy came to do honour and
reverence to the dying hero. Amongst them the Marquis of Pescara (the
husband of Vittoria Colonna) found noble words to speak the praise and
admiration which filled the hearts of all. "Would to God, my gentle lord of
Bayard, that I had been wounded nigh unto death if only you were in health
again and my prisoner; for then I could have shown you how highly I esteem
your splendid prowess and valour ... since I first made acquaintance with
arms I have never heard of any knight who even approached you in every
virtue of chivalry.... Never was so great a loss for all Christendom....
But since there is no remedy for death, may God in His mercy take your soul
to be with Him...." Such were the tender and pitiful regrets from the
hostile camp for the cruel loss to all chivalry of the Good Knight without
Fear and without Reproach.

They would have tended him with devoted service, but Bayard knew that he
was past all human help, and only prayed that he might not be moved in
those last hours of agony. A stately tent was spread out above him to
protect him from the weather, and he was laid at rest beneath it with the
gentlest care. He asked for a priest, to whom he devoutly made his
confession, and with touching words of prayer and resignation to the will
of his heavenly Father, he gave back his soul to God on April 30, 1524.

With the greatest sorrow and mourning of both armies, his body was carried
to the church, where solemn services were held for him during two days, and
then Bayard was borne by his own people into Dauphine.

A great company came to meet the funeral procession at the foot of the
mountains, and he was borne with solemn state from church to church until
Notre Dame of Grenoble was reached, and here all the nobles of Dauphine and
the people of the city were gathered to do honour to their beloved hero
when the last sad rites were performed. He was mourned and lamented for
many a long day as the very flower of chivalry, the Good Knight without
Fear and without Reproach.

[Illustration: The Death of Bayard.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Bayard: The Good Knight Without Fear
And Without Reproach, by Christopher Hare

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BAYARD: THE GOOD KNIGHT ***

***** This file should be named 11363.txt or 11363.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/1/3/6/11363/

Produced by Ted Garvin, Andrea Ball, Thomas Ruley and the Online

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


