The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and
Instruction, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and Instruction
       Vol. 13, Issue 353, January 24, 1829

Author: Various

Release Date: March 1, 2004 [EBook #11390]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MIRROR OF LITERATURE, NO. 353 ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Garrett Alley, David King, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team





THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT, AND INTRUCTION.

VOL. 13, No. 353.] SATURDAY, JANUARY 24, 1829. [PRICE 2d.




VILLAS IN THE REGENT'S PARK


[Illustration: HANOVER LODGE.]

[Illustration: GROVE HOUSE.]

The villas of this district are among the most pleasing of all the
architectural creations that serve to increase its picturesque beauty.
Their structure is light and elegant, and very different from the brick
and mortar monstrosities that line the southern outlets of London.

The engravings on the annexed page represent two of a group seen to
advantage from Macclesfield Bridge, pictured in our 351st Number. The
first is

HANOVER LODGE,

the residence of Colonel Sir Robert Arbuthnot, K.C.B. The architectural
simplicity and beauty of this mansion can scarcely fail to excite the
admiration of the beholder. The entrance is by a handsome portico; and
the internal accommodations combine all the luxuries of a well-
proportioned dining-room, and a splendid suite of drawing-rooms,
extending above sixty feet in length, by eighteen feet in breadth. The
upper story comprises nine chambers, bathing-room, dressing-rooms, &c.;
and the domestic offices are in the first style of completeness.

The grounds are unusually picturesque, for they have none of the
geometrical formalities of the exploded school of landscape-gardening,
or of Nature trimmed and tortured into artificial embellishment. We have
often wondered where the old gardeners acquired their mathematical
education; they must have gone about with the square and compasses in
their pockets--for knowledge was then clasped up in ponderous folios.

The second engraving is

GROVE HOUSE,

the elegant residence of George Bellas Greenough, Esq., built from the
designs of Mr. Decimus Burton. This is a happy specimen of the villa
style of architecture. The garden front, represented in the print, is
divided into three portions. The centre is a tetrastyle portico of the
Ionic order, raised on a terrace. Between the columns are three handsome
windows. The two wings have recesses, "the soffites of which are
supported by three-quarter columns of the Doric order. Between these
columns are niches, each of which contains a statue. The absence of
other windows and doors from the front," (observes Mr. Elmes,) "gives a
remarkable and pleasing _casino_ or pleasure-house character to the
house."

The portico is purely Grecian, and the proportion of the pediment very
beautiful. The entrance front also consists of a centre and two wings;
but the former has no pediment. The door is beneath a spacious
semicircular portico of the true Doric order, which alternates with the
Ionic in the other parts of the building with an effect truly
harmonious.

Of the internal arrangements of Grove House we will vouch; but our
artist has endeavoured to convey some idea of the natural beauties with
which this little temple of art is environed; and the engraver has added
to the distinctness of the floral embellishments in the foreground.
Altogether, the effect breathes the freshness and quiet of a rural
retreat, although the wealth and fashion of a metropolis herd in the
same parish, and their gay equipages are probably whirling along the
adjacent road.

The exterior of the "COLOSSEUM" (of the interior of which building our
last Number contained a description) was intended for the embellishment
of the present Number. Our engraver promised--but, as Tillotson quotes
in one of his sermons, "promises and pie-crusts," &c. The engraving is,
however, intended for our next MIRROR, with some additional particulars
of the interior, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *


SEVERE FROST.

_(For the Mirror.)_


On the 25th of December, 1749, a most severe frost commenced; it
continued without intermission for several weeks, during which time the
people, especially the working classes, experienced dreadful hardships.
Many travellers were frozen to death in coaches, and even foot
passengers, in the streets of London, shared the same fate. Numerous
ships, barges, and boats, were sunk by the furious driving of the ice in
the Thames. Great were the distresses of the poor, and even those who
possessed all the comforts of life, confined themselves within doors,
for fear of being frozen if they ventured abroad.

The watermen of the river received great assistance from merchants, and
other gentlemen of the Royal Exchange; but the fishermen, gardeners,
bricklayers, and others, were reduced to a miserable extremity. These
poor men, presenting a sad aspect, assembled to the number of several
hundreds, and marched through the principal streets of the metropolis,
begging for bread and clothing. The fishermen carried a boat in
mourning, and the unfortunate mechanics exhibited their implements and
utensils. The citizens of London contributed largely to their relief, as
did most of the inhabitants of the main streets through which the
melancholy procession passed.

G.W.N.

       *       *       *       *       *


OTWAY, THE POET.

_(To the Editor of the Mirror.)_


Any anecdote relating to, or illustrative of, the works of this great
man is a public benefaction; and I, in common with all your readers, (no
doubt,) feel obliged to your correspondent for his history of Charles
Brandon, Duke of Suffolk; at least, so much of it as, it would seem, was
connected with the tragedy of the Orphan. Charles Brandon was, as
history informs us, a gay, young, rattling fellow, a constant exhibitant
at all tilts and tournaments at Whitehall and elsewhere; courageous,
"wittie and of goodlie persone," in fact, a regular dandy of bygone
days, a fine gallant, and of course a great favourite of his royal
master; but, notwithstanding all this, it is not clear to me that
Charles Brandon and his brother were the romantic originals of Polydore
and Castalio. I rather think, if Otway did form his characters on any
real occurrence of the sort, the distressing event must be laid to the
noble family now proprietors of Woburn.

Perhaps the _old nobleman_ misunderstood the duchess-dowager when she
explained the picture to him; or perhaps her grace did not choose to be
_quite_ so communicate as she could have been, and, therefore, fixed the
sad event upon the gay Charley Brandon, in whose constellation of gay
doings it would, indeed, be a romantic diamond of the first water.

Every body who knows the gallery at Woburn, must remember the remarkable
picture alluded to. There is in the same apartment a very fine
whole-length of Charles Brandon; but in no way can I see is it connected
with the work which has furnished this tragic anecdote. At some distance
from Brandon's portrait appears the first Francis, _Earl of Bedford_,
with a long white beard, and furred robe, and George, pendant,--an
illustrious personage of this house, who discharged several great
offices in the reigns of Mary and Elizabeth. Such was his hospitality,
that Elizabeth used good-humouredly to say, "Go to, Frank, go to; it is
you make all the beggars." He died, aged 58, on the 28th of July, 1585,
the day after his third son, _Francis_, was slain, happily unapprized of
the misfortune.

Now comes the interesting picture in connexion with Otway and his play.
This youth, _Francis_ and his elder brother, the Lord Edward Russell,
are represented in _small_ full-lengths, in two paintings; and so alike,
as scarcely to be distinguished one from the other; both dressed in
white, close jackets, and black and gold cloaks, and black bonnets. The
date by Lord Edward is aet. 22, 1573. He is represented grasping in one
hand some snakes with this motto, _Fides homini, serpentibus fraus_; and
in the back ground he is placed standing in a labyrinth, above which is
inscribed, _Fata viam invenient_. This young nobleman died before his
father. His brother _Francis_ has his accompaniments not less singular.
A lady, seemingly in distress, is represented sitting in the back
ground, surrounded with snakes, a dragon, crocodile, and cock. At a
distance are the sea and a ship under full sail. He, by the attendants,
was, perhaps, the Polydore of the history. Edward seems by his motto,
_Fides homini, serpentibus fraus_, to have been the Castalio, conscious
of his own integrity, and indignant at his brother's perfidy. The ship
probably alludes to the desertion of the lady. If it conveyed Francis to
Scotland, it was to his punishment, for he fell on July 27, 1585, in a
border affray, the day before his father's death.

There, make what you like of this. This is how matters stand at the
Abbey; but I cannot see how this remarkable picture connects itself with
Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk. I pause for elucidation.

BEPPO.

       *       *       *       *       *



ON THE CONSTANCY OF WOMAN.

_(For the Mirror.)_


True love has no reserves--LANSDOWNE.

There is not an accomplishment in the mind of a female more enchanting,
nor one which adds more dignity and grace to her person, than constancy.
Whatever share of beauty she may be possessed of, whether she may have
the tinge of Hebe on her cheeks, vying in colour with the damask rose,
and breath as fragrant--and the graceful and elegant gait of an
Ariel--still, unless she is endowed with this characteristic of a
virtuous and ingenuous mind, all her personal charms will fade away,
through neglect, like decaying fruit in autumn. The whole list of female
virtues are in their kind essential to the felicity of man; but there is
such beauty and grandeur of sentiment displayed in the exercise of
constancy, that it has been justly esteemed by the dramatic poets as the
chief excellence of their heroines. It nerves the arm of the warrior
when absent from the dear object of his devoted attachment, when he
reflects, that his confidence in her regard was never misplaced; but
yet, amidst the dangers of his profession, he sighs for his abode of
domestic happiness, where the breath of calumny never entered, and where
the wily and lustful seducer, if he dared to put his foot, shrunk back
aghast with shame and confusion, like Satan when he first beheld the
primitive innocence and concord between Adam and Eve in the Garden of
Eden. It adds a zest to the toils of the peasant, and his heart expands
with joy and gratitude when he returns in the evening to his ivy-mantled
cottage, and finds his wife assiduously engaged in the household duties
of his family. And it soothes the mind of the lunatic during the lucid
intervals of the aberration of his intellects, and tends more than
anything else to restore him to reason. In fact, there is no calamity
that is incident to man, but that female constancy will assuage. Whether
in sickness or health, in prosperity or poverty, in mirth or sadness,
(vicissitudes which form the common lot of mankind in their pilgrimage
through this life;) the loveliness of this inestimable blessing will
shine forth, like the sun on a misty morning, and preserve the even
temperature of the mind. To the youthful lover it is the polar star that
guides him from the shoals and quicksands of vice, among which his
wayward fancy and inexperience are too apt to lead him. But in the
matrimonial state, the pleasures arising from the exercise of this
virtue are manifold, as it sheds a galaxy of splendour around the social
hemisphere; for it is such a divine perfection, that Solomon has wisely
observed, that

  "A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband."

A husband so blessed in marriage, might exclaim with the lover in one of
Terence's comedies, "I protest solemnly that I will never forsake her;
no, not if I was sure to contract the enmity of mankind by this
resolution. Her I made the object of my wishes, and have obtained her;
our dispositions suit; and I will shake hands with them that would sow
dissension betwixt us; for death, and only death, shall take her from
me."

The eulogies of the poets in regard to this amiable trait in the female
character, are sublime and beautiful; but none, I think, have surpassed
in vivid fancy and depth of feeling, that of Lord Byron, in his elegant
poem of the _Corsair_. The following passage describing the grief of
Medora on the departure of Conrad, the pirate, is sketched with the
pencil of a poet who was transcendently gifted with a knowledge of the
inmost recesses of the human heart:--

  "And is he gone,"--on sudden solitude
  How oft that fearful question will intrude?
  "'Twas but an instant past--and here he stood!
  And now"--without the portal's porch she rush'd,
  And then at length her tears in freedom gush'd;
  Big, bright, and fast, unknown to her they fell.
  But still her lips refus'd to send--"Farewell!"
  "He's gone!"--against her heart that hand is driven,
  Convuls'd and quick--then gently rais'd to heav'n;
  She look'd and saw the heaving of the main:
  The white sail set--she dared not look again;
  But turn'd with sickening soul within the gate--
  "It is no dream--and I am desolate!"

  CANTO I.

The description of Conrad's return from his piratical cruise, the agony
of his mind when he finds that his lovely Medora had fallen a sacrifice
to her affectionate regard for him, and his sudden departure in a boat,
through despair, is equally grand and powerful, and exhibits a fine
specimen of the influence of female constancy even on the mind of a man
like Conrad, who, from the nature of his pursuits, was inured to the
infliction of wrongs on his fellow-creatures.

The anecdote of the behaviour of Arria towards her husband, Paetus,
related by Pliny, is one of the greatest instances of constancy and
magnanimity of mind to be met with in history. Paetus was imprisoned, and
condemned to die, for joining in a conspiracy against the Emperor,
Claudius. Arria, having provided herself with a dagger, one day observed
a more than usual gloom on the countenance of Paetus, when judging that
death by the executioner might be more terrible to him than the field of
glory, and perhaps, too, sensible that it was for her sake he wished to
live, she drew the dagger from her side, and stabbed herself before his
eyes. Then instantly plucking the weapon from her breast, she presented
it to her husband, saying, "My Paetus, it is not painful!" Read this, ye
votaries of voluptuousness. Reflect upon the fine moral lesson of
conjugal virtue that is conveyed in this domestic tragedy, ye brutal
contemners of female chastity, and of every virtue that emits a ray of
glory around the social circle of matrimonial happiness! Take into your
serious consideration this direful but noble proof of constancy, ye
giddy and thoughtless worshippers at the shrine of beauty, and know,
that a virtuous disposition is the brightest ornament of the female sex.

There is another instance of constancy of mind, under oppression, in
Otway's tragedy of _Venice Preserved_, in a dialogue between Jaffier and
Belvidera, where the former questions her with great tenderness of
feeling in regard to her future line of conduct in the gloomy prospect
of his adverse fortune. She replies to him with great animation and
pathos:

  "Oh, I will love thee, ev'n in madness love thee,
  Tho' my distracted senses should forsake me!
  Tho' the bare earth be all our resting place,
  Its roots our food, some cliff our habitation,
  I'll make this arm a pillow for thy head,
  And as thou sighing ly'st, and swell'd with sorrow,
  Creep to thy bosom, pour the balm of love
  Into thy soul, and kiss thee to thy rest."

This is a true and beautiful picture of constancy of mind, under those
rude blasts of adversity, which too frequently nip the growth of
affection. The only alternative against a decay of passion on such
occasions, is a sufficient portion of virtue, strong and well-grounded
love, and constancy of mind as firm as the rock. In short, without
constancy, there can be neither love, friendship, nor virtue, in the
world.

J.P.

       *       *       *       *       *


CAVE AT BLACKHEATH.

_(To the Editor of the Mirror.)_


Allow me to hand you an account of a very curious cavern at Blackheath,
fortuitously discovered in the year 1780, and which will form, I have no
doubt, a pleasing addition to the valued communication of your
correspondent _Halbert H_., in the 348th Number of the MIRROR, and prove
interesting to the greater portion of your numerous readers. It is
situated on the hill, (on the left hand side from London,) and is a very
spacious vaulted cavern, hewn through a solid chalk-stone rock, one
hundred feet below the surface. The Saxons, on their entrance into Kent,
upwards of 1,300 years ago, excavated several of these retreats; and
during the discord, horrid murders, and sanguinary conflicts with the
native Britons, for nearly five hundred years, used these underground
recesses, not only as safe receptacles for their persons, but also
secure depositaries for their wealth and plunder. After these times,
history informs us the caves were frequently resorted to, and occupied
by the disloyal and unprincipled rebels, headed by Jack Cade, in the
reign of Henry VI., about A.D. 1400, who infested Blackheath and its
neighbourhood, (as also mentioned by your correspondent;) since then by
several banditti, called Levellers, in the rebellious times of Oliver
Cromwell. The cave consists of three rooms, which are dry, and
illuminated; in one of which, at the end of the principal entrance, is a
well of soft, pure, and clear water, which, according to the opinion of
several eminent men, is seldom to be met with. The internal structure is
similar to the cave under the ruins of Reigate Castle, built by the
Saxons; where the barons of England, in the year 1212, with their
followers, (frequently amounting to five hundred persons,) held their
private meetings, and took up arms, previous to their obtaining Magna
Charta at Runny Mead, near Egham, in Surrey.

C.J.T.

       *       *       *       *       *


STANGING.

_(For the Mirror.)_


This odd custom is now _vice versa_. The stang is of Saxon origin, and
is practised in Lancashire, Cumberland, and Westmoreland, for the
purpose of exposing a kind of gyneocracy, or, the wife wearing the
galligaskins. When it is known (which it generally is) that a wife falls
out with her spouse, and beats him right well, the people of the town or
village procure a ladder, and instantly repair to his house, where one
of the party is powdered with flour--face blacked--cocked hat placed
upon his cranium--white sheet thrown over his shoulders--is seated
astride the ladder, with his back where his face should be--they hoist
him upon men's shoulders--and in his hands he carries a long brush,
tongs, and poker. A sort of mock proclamation is then made in doggerel
verse at the door of all the alehouses in the parish, or wapentake, as
follows:--

  "It is neither for your sake nor my sake
    That I ride stang;
  But it is for Nancy Thomson,
    Who did her husband hang.
  But if I hear tell that she doth rebel,
  Or him to complain, with fife and drum
    Then we will come,
  And ride the stang again.
    With a ran tan tang,
    And a ran tan tan tang," &c.

The conclusion of this local custom is generally ended at the market
cross, (if any,) or in the middle of the hamlet; after which, one of the
posse goes round with a hat, begging the contributions of those present;
they then regale themselves at some of the village ale-shops, out of the
proceeds of the day's merriment.--Brand and Strutt mention this custom;
as does Brigg, in his "Westmoreland as it was."

J.W.

_Preston, Lancashire._

       *       *       *       *       *



THE SKETCH-BOOK.


[The following characteristic sketch having been presented to me by a
friend as, to the best of his knowledge, an unpublished _morceau_ by the
celebrated Ettrick Shepherd, I have by his permission the pleasure of
adding it, to the many interesting _cabinet pictures_, already preserved
in this department of the MIRROR.--M.L.B.]


ROVER.


Rover is now about six years old. He was born half a year before our
eldest girl; and is accordingly looked upon as a kind of elder brother
by the children. He is a small, beautiful liver-coloured spaniel, but
not one of your goggle-eyed Blenheim breed. He is none of your lap dogs.
No, Rover has a soul above that. You may make him your friend, but he
scorns to be a pet. No one can see him without admiring him, and no one
can know him without loving him. He is as regularly inquired after as
any other member of the family; for who that has ever known Rover can
forget him? He has an instinctive perception of his master's friends, to
whom he metes out his caresses in the proportion of their attachment to
the chief object of his affections. When I return from an absence, or
when he meets an old friend of mine, or of his own (which is the same
thing to him) his ecstacy is unbounded; he tears and curvets about the
room as if mad; and if out of doors, he makes the welkin ring with his
clear and joyous note. When he sees a young person in company he
immediately selects him for a play fellow. He fetches a stick, coaxes
him out of the house, drops it at his feet; then retiring backwards,
barking, plainly indicates his desire to have it thrown for him. He is
never tired of his work. Indeed, I fear poor fellow, that his teeth,
which already show signs of premature decay, have suffered from the
diversion. But though Rover has a soul for fun, yet he is a game dog
too. There is not a better cocker in England. In fact he delights in
sport of every kind, and if he cannot have it with me, he will have it
on his own account. He frequently decoys the greyhounds out and finds
hares for them. Indeed he has done me some injury in this way, for if he
can find a pointer loose, he will, if possible, seduce him from his
duty, and take him off upon some lawless excursion; and it is not till
after an hour's whistling and hallooing that I see the truants sneaking
round to the back door, panting and smoking, with their tails knitted up
between their legs, and their long dripping tongues depending from their
watery mouths--_he_ the most bare-faced caitiff of the whole. In
general, however, he will have nothing to say to the canine species, for
notwithstanding the classification of Buffon, he considers he has a
prescriptive right to associate with man. He is, in fact, rather cross
with other dogs; but with children he is quite at home, doubtless
reckoning himself about on a level with them in the scale of rational
beings. Every boy in the village knows his name, and I often catch him
in the street with a posse of little, dirty urchins playing around him.
But he is not quite satisfied with this kind of company; for, if taking
a walk with any of the family, he will only just acknowledge his
plebeian play-fellow with a simple shake of the tail, equivalent to the
distant nod which a patrician school-boy bestows on the town-boy
school-fellow whom he chances to meet when in company with his
aristocratical relations. The only approach to bad feeling that I ever
discovered in Rover is a slight disposition to jealousy; but this in him
is more a virtue than a vice; for it springs entirely from affection,
and has nothing mean or malicious in it, one instance will suffice to
show how he expresses this feeling. One day a little stray dog attached
himself to me and followed me home; I took him into the house and had
him fed, intending to keep him until I could discover the owner. For
this act of kindness the dog expressed thanks in the usual way. Rover,
although used to play the truant, from the moment the little stranger
entered the premises, never quitted us till he saw him fairly off. His
manner towards us became more ingratiating than usual, and he seemed
desirous, by his assiduities and attentions, to show us, that we stood
in need of no other favourite or companion. But at the same time he
showed no animosity whatever towards his supposed rival. Here was reason
and refinement too. Besides the friends whom he meets in my house, Rover
also forms attachments of his own, in which he shows a great
discrimination. It is not every one who offers him a bone that he will
trust as a friend. He has one or two intimate acquaintances in the
village whom he regularly visits, and where in case of any remissness on
the part of the cook, he is sure to find a plate of meat. Rover is a
most feeling, sweet dispositioned dog--one instance of his affection and
kindheartedness I cannot omit. He had formed an attachment to a
labourer, who worked about my garden, and would frequently follow him to
his home, where he was caressed by the wife and children. It happened
that the poor wife was taken ill and died. The husband was seriously
afflicted, and showed a feeling above the common. At this time I
observed that Rover had quite lost his spirits, and appeared to pine.
Seeing him in this state one day, when in company with the widowed
labourer, and thinking in some measure to divert the poor fellow's
thoughts from his own sorrows, I remarked to him the state that Rover
was in, and asked him if he could guess the cause. "He is fretting after
poor Peggy," was his reply, giving vent at the same time to a flood of
tears.

JAMES HOGG.

       *       *       *       *       *



NOTES OF A READER.


OLD DANCING.


An "Old Subscriber," who loves a friend and a jest's prosperity, has
sent us a few leaves of "The Dancing Master," printed in 1728, which
form a curious contrast with Mr. Lindsay's elegant treatise, printed at
Mr. Clowes's _musical_ office. What will some of the quadrillers say to
the following exquisite morsel of dancing, entitled, "The Old Maid in
Tears?"--"Longways for as many as will".--(then the notes, and the
following instructions:)--"Note: Each strain is to be play'd twice
ov'er.--The first wo. holds her handkerchief on her face, and goes on
the outside, below the 3d wo. and comes up the middle to her place;
first man follows her (at the same time pointing and smiling at her) up
to his place. First man do the same, only he beckons his wo. to him.
First woman makes a motion of drying first one eye, then the other, and
claps her hands one after another on her sides, (the first man looks
surprizingly at her at the same time,) and turn her partner. First cu.
move with two slow steps down the middle and back again. The first cu.
sett and cast off."

As we love to keep up the dance, if we are not leading the reader a
dance, we give _A Dance in Hoops_, as described in a fashionable novel,
just published:--

When the whole party was put in motion, but little trace of a regular
dance remained; all was a perfect maze, and the _cutting_ in and out (as
the fraternity of the whip would phrase it) of these cumbrous machines
presented to the mind only the figure of a most formidable affray.

The nearest assimilation to this strange exhibition of the dance in full
career, at all familiar to our minds, is the prancing of the
basket-horses in Mr. Peake's humorous farce of _Quadrupeds_.

An entertaining variety of appearance arose also from the conformity of
the steps to the diversified measure of the tune. The jig measure, which
corresponds to the _canter_ in a horse's paces, produced a strong
bounding up and down of the hoop--and the gavotte measure, which
corresponds to the short trot, produced a tremulous and agitated motion.
The numerous ornaments, also, with which the hoops were bespread and
decorated--the festoons--the tassels--the rich embroidery--all of a most
_catching_ and _taking_ nature, every now and then affectionately
hitched together in unpremeditated and close embrace. To the parties in
action, it is not difficult to suppose these combinations might prove
something short of perfectly agreeable, more especially, as on such
occasions as these, some of the fair daughters of our courtly belles
were undergoing the awful ordeal of a first ball-room appearance, on
whom these contingencies would inflict ten-fold embarrassment.--_The
Ball, or a Glance at Almack's in 1829._

       *       *       *       *       *


FRENCH PAINTINGS.


General le Jeune has added a new picture to his collection of battle
paintings, exhibiting at the Egyptian Hall, Piccadilly. It represents
one of the general's perilous adventures in the Peninsular War, and is a
vigorous addition to these admirable productions of the French school.
The whole series will be found noticed at page 212 of our vol. xi.

       *       *       *       *       *


FLOWERS ON THE ALPS.


The flowers of the mountains--they must not be forgotten. It is worth a
botanist's while to traverse all these high passes; nay, it is worth the
while of a painter, or any one who delights to look upon graceful
flowers, or lovely hues, to pay a visit to these little wild nymphs of
Flora, at their homes in the mountains of St. Bernard. We are speaking
now, generally, of what may be seen throughout the whole of the route,
from Moutier, by the Little St. Bernard, to Aosta,--and thence again to
Martigny. There is no flower so small, so beautiful, so splendid in
colour, but its equal may be met with in these sequestered places. The
tenaciousness of flowers is not known; their hardihood is not
sufficiently admired. Wherever there is a handful of earth, there also
is a patch of wild-flowers. If there be a crevice in the rock,
sufficient to thrust in the edge of a knife, there will the winds carry
a few grains of dust, and there straight up springs a flower. In the
lower parts of the Alps, they cover the earth with beauty. Thousands,
and tens of thousands, blue, and yellow, and pink, and violet, and
white, of every shadow and every form, are to be seen, vying with each
other, and eclipsing every thing besides. Midway they meet you again,
sometimes fragrant, and always lovely; and in the topmost places, where
the larch, and the pine, and the rhododendron (the last living shrub)
are no longer to be seen, where you are just about to tread upon the
limit of perpetual snow, there still peep up and blossom the "Forget me
not," the Alpine ranunculus, and the white and blue gentian, the last of
which displays, even in this frore air, a blue of such intense and
splendid colour, as can scarcely be surpassed by the heavens themselves.
It is impossible not to be affected at thus meeting with these little
unsheltered things, at the edge of eternal barrenness. They are the last
gifts of beneficent, abundant Nature. Thus far she has struggled and
striven, vanquishing rocks and opposing elements, and sowing here a
forest of larches, and there a wood of pines, a clump of rhododendrons,
a patch of withered herbage, and, lastly, a bright blue flower. Like
some mild conqueror, who carries gifts and civilization into a savage
country, but is compelled to stop somewhere at last, she seems
determined that her parting present shall also be the most beautiful.
This is the limit of her sway. Here, where she has cast down these
lovely landmarks, her empire ceases. Beyond, rule the ice and the
storm!--_New Monthly Magazine._

       *       *       *       *       *


THE COMPANION TO THE ALMANAC.


This is the age of utility, and the little volume published under the
above title is altogether characteristic of the age. Its contents are
calculated to feed and foster the spirit of inquiry which is abroad.
People are beginning to find they are not so wise as they had hitherto
conceived themselves to be, or rather, that their knowledge on every-day
subjects is very scanty. We are therefore pleased to see in the present
"Companion" a popular paper on Comets; a series of attractive
Observations of a Naturalist; papers on the Management of Children,
Clothing, Economy in the Use of Bread and Flour, and a concise account
of Public Improvements during the year. All these are matters of
interest to every house and family in the empire. There is, besides, an
abundance of Parliamentary papers, judiciously abridged, from which the
reader may obtain more information than by passing six months in "both
your Houses," or reading a session of debates. The Table of Discoveries
is likewise a valuable feature; and the Chronological Table of European
Monarchs is almost a counterpart of a "Regal Tablet" sent to us, some
weeks since, for the MIRROR, and promised for insertion. There is,
however, one feature missing, which we noticed in the "Companion" of
last year, and we cannot but think that, to make room for its
introduction, some of the parliamentary matter in the present volume
might have been spared. The editor will be aware of our
disinterestedness in making this suggestion, and we hope will give us
credit accordingly.

       *       *       *       *       *


FLUTE PLAYING.


"Will you play upon this pipe?"

"My Lord, I cannot." So say we; but some novel instruction on the
subject may not be unacceptable to our piping friends. We recommend to
them "The Elements of Flute-playing, according to the most approved
principles of Fingering," by Thomas Lindsay, as containing more
practical and preceptive information than is usually to be met with in
such works. The advantage in the present treatise arises out of one of
the many recent improvements in the art of printing, viz., the adoption
of movable types for printing music, instead of by engraved pewter
plates; which method enables the instructor to amplify his precepts, or
didactic portion of his work, and thus simplify them to the pupil.
According, in Mr. Lindsay's treatise, we have upwards of forty pages of
elementary instructions, definitions, and concise treatises, copiously
interspersed with musical illustrations; whereas the engraved treatises
are generally meagre in their instructions, from the difficulty of
punching text illustrations. The article on _accentuation_ is, we are
told, the first successful attempt in any elementary work on the Flute,
to define this important subject. It is written in a lucid and popular
style, and is so attractive, that did our room allow, we might be
induced to insert part of it. Appended to the treatise are thirty pages
of Duettinos and Exercises, and altogether the work, (of which the
present is Part I.,) is well worth the attention of such as study
Flute-playing, which, as Mr. L. observes, is "one of those elegant and
delightful recreations, which constitutes, at once, the grace and the
solace of domestic life."

       *       *       *       *       *

  The sweetest flowers their odours shed
    In silence and alone;
  And Wisdom's hidden fount is fed
    By minds to fame unknown.

  _Bernard Barton._

       *       *       *       *       *


CHANGES OF INSECTS.


Insects are strikingly distinguished from other animals, by a succession
of changes in their organization and forms, and by their incapacity of
propagating before their last metamorphosis, which, in most of them,
takes place shortly before their death. Each of these transformations is
designated by so many terms, that it may not be useless to observe to
the reader, who has not previously paid attention to the subject, that
_larva, caterpillar, grub, maggot_, or _worm_, is the first state of
the insect on issuing from the egg; that _pupa, aurelia, chrysalis_, or
_nympha_ are the names by which the second metamorphosis is designated,
and that the last stage, when the insect assumes the appearance of a
butterfly, is called the _perfect state_.--_North American Review._

       *       *       *       *       *


"LITTLE SONGS FOR LITTLE SINGERS."


The little folks will soon have a microcosm--a world of their own. The
other day we noticed the "Boy's _Own_ Book," and the girls are promised
a match volume: children, too, have their own _camerae obscurae_; there
are the Cosmoramas at the Bazaar, as great in their way as Mr. Hornor's
Panorama at the Colosseum; besides half a dozen Juvenile Annuals, in
which all the literary children of larger growth write. At our theatres,
operas are sung by children, and the pantomimes are full of juvenile
fun. In short, every thing can be had adapted to all ages; till we begin
to think it is once a world and twice a little world. But we have
omitted the pretty little productions named at the head of this article.
They consist of seven little songs for little people, set to music on
small-sized paper, so that the little singer may hold the song after the
orchestra fashion, without hiding her smiles. 1. The Little Fish,
harmonized from _Nursery Rhymes_; 2. The Little Robin; 3. The Little
Spider and his Wife, from _Original Poems_; 4. The Little Star, from
_Nursery Rhymes_; 5. A Summer Evening, from the _Infant Minstrel_; 6.
Come Away, Come Away, to the air of the Swiss Boy, by Mr. Green, the
publisher; and, 7. The Little Lady Bird:--

  Lady Bird! Lady Bird! fly away home,
    The field-mouse is gone to her nest,
  The daisies have shut up their sleepy red eyes,
    And the bees and the birds are at rest.
  Lady Bird! Lady Bird! fly away home,
    The glow-worm is lighting his lamp,
  The dew's falling fast, and your fine speckled wings
    Will be wet with the close-clinging damp.
  Lady Bird! Lady Bird! fly away home,
    The fairy bells tinkle afar;
  Make haste, or they'll catch ye, and harness ye fast,
    With a cobweb, to Oberon's car.
  Lady Bird! Lady Bird! fly away now
    To your home in the old willow-tree,
  Where your children so dear have invited the ant,
    And a few cosy neighbours to tea.

There is some novelty and ingenuity in adapting the words and music of
songs for young singers. Love, war, and drinking songs are very well for
adults, but are out of time in the nursery or schoolroom; for these
predilections spring up quite early enough in the bosoms of mankind. We
should not forget the vignette lithographs to the little songs, which
are beautifully executed by Hullmandel. All beginners will do well to
see these songs, for we know many of the "larger growth" who are
_little_ singers.

       *       *       *       *       *



POPULAR SUPERSTITIONS.

WITCHCRAFT, &C.


MACB. How now, you secret, black, and mid-night hags? What is't you do?

WITCHES. A deed without a name.

MACB.

  I conjure you by that which you profess,
  (Howe'er you come to know it,) answer me;
  Though you untie the winds, and let them fight
  Against the churches--though the yesty waves
  Confound and swallow navigation up--
  Though bladed corn be lodg'd, and trees blown down--
  Though castles topple on their warder's heads--
  Though palaces and pyramids do slope
  Their heads to their foundations--though the
  treasure
  Of nature's germins tumble all together,
  Even till destruction sicken, answer me
  To what I ask you.                SHAKSPEARE.

In our two preceding papers,[1] we have briefly brought before the
attention of the reader, a few of the most prominent and striking
features connected with the history of the first (as the honourable
house hath it in 1602) "of those detestable slaves of the devil,
witches, sorcerers, enchanters and conjurors." And now we proceed to
offer a few concluding illustrations of the subject.

    [1] See vol xi. p. 391--vol. xii. p. 70.

In the early ages, to be possessed of a greater degree of learning and
science than the mass of mankind (at a time when even kings could not
read or write) was to be invested with a more than earthly share of
power; and the philosopher was in consequence subjected in many cases to
a suspicion at once dangerous and dishonourable: to use the language of
Coleridge, the real teachers and discoverers of truth were exposed to
the hazard of fire and faggot; a dungeon being the best shrine that was
vouchsafed to a Roger Bacon or a Galileo!

A few years since, a place was pointed out to the writer, on the borders
of Scotland, which had been even within the "memory of the oldest
inhabitant," used for the "trial" of witches; and a pool of water in an
adjacent stream is still to be seen, where the poor old creatures were
dragged to sink or swim; and our informant added, that a very great
number had perished on that spot. Indeed, in Scotland, a refinement of
cruelty was practised in the persecution of witches; the innocent
relations of a suspected criminal were tortured in her presence, in the
hope of extorting confession from her, in order to put an end to their
sufferings, after similar means had been used without effect on herself.
Even children of seven years of age were sometimes tortured in the
presence of their mothers for this design. In 1751, at Trigg, in
Hertfordshire, two harmless old people above seventy years of age, being
suspected of bewitching a publican, named Butterfield, a vast concourse
of people assembled for the purpose of ducking them, and the poor
wretches were seized, and "stripped naked by the mob, their thumbs tied
to their toes, and then dragged two miles and thrown into a muddy
stream;" the woman expired under the hands of her persecutors, but her
husband, though seriously injured, escaped with his life. One of the
ringleaders of this atrocious outrage, was tried and hung for the
offence.

The delusion respecting witches was greatly increased in the first
instance by a Bull issued by Pope Innocent III. in 1484, to the
inquisitors at Almaine, "exhorting them to discover, and empowering them
to destroy, all such as were guilty of witchcraft." The fraternity of
Witchfinders arose in consequence, and they seem to have been imbued
with the genuine spirit of inquisitors, delighting in hunting out and
dragging to the torture the innocent and harmless. They had the most
unlimited authority granted them, and the whole thunders of the Vatican
were directed to the destruction of witches and wizards. The bloody
scenes which followed, exceed description. In 1435, Cumanus (an
inquisitor) burnt forty-one poor women for witches, in the country of
Burlia, in one year. One inquisitor in Piedmont burnt a hundred in a
very short time; and in 1524, a thousand were burnt in one year in the
diocese of Como, and a hundred annually for a considerable period; on
all of whom the greatest cruelties were practised. The fraternity of
witchfinders soon found their way to this country, under the fostering
protection of the government; and it was of course their interest to
keep up the delusion by every means in their power. We have already
alluded to the cruelties exercised in Great Britain during the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries, and add an account of one of the cruel
ceremonies used to detect witches:--"Having taken the suspected witch,"
says Gaule, "she is placed in the middle of a room upon a stool or
table, cross-legged, or in some other uneasy posture, to which if she
submits not, she is then bound with cords. There she is watched and kept
without meat or sleep for the space of four-and-twenty hours; for (they
say) that within that time they shall see her imp come and suck. A
little hole is likewise made in the door for the imp to come in at; and
lest it should come in some less discernible shape, they that watch are
taught to be ever and anon sweeping the room, and if they see any
spiders or flies, to kill them. And if they cannot kill them, they may
be sure they are her imps!" Towards the conclusion of the seventeenth
century, the delusion and jugglery of witchcraft was in a great measure
overthrown by the firmness of the English judges; amongst the most
prominent of whom stands Chief Justice Holt. Indeed a statute was
shortly after passed, which made it _wilful murder_, should any of the
objects of persecution lose their lives. The popular belief, however, in
witchcraft still continued, and it was not till the ninth year of George
II., that the statutes against it were repealed. We believe there is
still an Irish statute unrepealed, which inflicts capital punishment on
witches.

All is now of the _past_. The "schoolmaster is abroad," and not only is
the belief in witches, but all the tribe of ghosts and spirits is fast
melting away. The latter have also added in no inconsiderable degree to
the sum of human suffering. The number of the good was small compared to
the evil, and though it was in their power to come in what shape or
guise they chose, "dilated or condensed, bright or obscure," yet it must
be confessed they generally chose to assume "forms forbidden," and their
visitations were much oftener accompanied with "blasts from hell" than
"airs from heaven." It has been justly remarked that "they were potent
agents in the hands of the priest and the tyrant to delude and to
enslave; for this business they were most admirably fitted, and most
faithfully did they perform it." Those inevitable evils which man is
destined to endure in this present state, are enough without the
addition of the almost unmingled bitterness of the infusion, which
superstition would pour into his cup.

_(To be continued.)_

       *       *       *       *       *



SPIRIT OF THE PUBLIC JOURNALS.


       *       *       *       *       *


LONDON LYRICS.--THE IMAGE BOY.


  Whoe'er has trudged, on frequent feet,
  From Charing Cross to Ludgate-street,
    That haunt of noise and wrangle,
  Has seen, on journeying through the Strand,
  A foreign image-vender stand
    Near Somerset's quadrangle.

  His coal-black eye, his balanced walk,
  His sable apron, white with chalk,
    His listless meditation,
  His curly locks, his sallow cheeks,
  His board of celebrated Greeks,
    Proclaim his trade and nation.

  Not on that board as erst, are seen
  A tawdry troop; our gracious Queen
    With tresses like a carrot,
  A milk-maid with a pea-green pail,
  A poodle with a golden tail,
    John Wesley, and a parrot;--

  No; far more classic is his stock;
  With ducal Arthur, Milton, Locke,
    He bears, unconscious roamer,
  Alemena's Jove-begotten Son,
  Cold Abelard's too tepid Nun,
    And pass-supported Homer.

  See yonder bust adorned with curls;
  'Tis her's, the Queen who melted pearls
    Marc Antony to wheedle.
  Her bark, her banquets, all are fled;
  And Time, who cut her vital thread,
    Has only spared her Needle.

  Stern Neptune, with his triple prong,
  Childe Harold, peer of peerless song,
    So frolic Fortune wills it,
  Stand next the Son of crazy Paul,
  Who hugg'd the intrusive King of Gaul
    Upon a raft at Tilsit.

  "Poor vagrant child of want and toll!
  The sun that warms thy native soil
    Has ripen'd not thy knowledge;
  'Tis obvious, from that vacant air,
  Though Padua gave thee birth, thou ne'er
    Didst graduate in her College.

  "'Tis true thou nam'st thy motley freight;
  But from what source their birth they date,
    Mythology or history.
  Old records, or the dreams of youth,
  Dark fable, or transparent truth,
    Is all to thee a mystery.

  "Come tell me, Vagrant, in a breath,
  Alcides' birth, his life, his death,
    Recount his dozen labours:
  Homer thou know'st--but of the woes
  Of Troy, thou'rt ignorant as those
    Dark Orange-boys, thy neighbours."

  'Twas thus, erect, I deign'd to pour
  My shower of lordly pity o'er
    The poor Italian wittol,
  As men are apt to do, to show
  Their 'vantage-ground o'er those who know
    Just less than their own little.

  When lo, methought Prometheus' flame
  Waved o'er a bust of deathless fame,
    And woke to life Childe Harold:
  The Bard aroused me from my dream
  Of pity, alias self-esteem,
    And thus indignant caroll'd:--

  "O thou, who thus in numbers pert
  And petulant, presum'st to flirt
    With Memory's Nine Daughters:
  Whose verse the next trade-winds that blow
  Down narrow Paternoster-row
    Shall 'whelm in Lethe's waters:

  "Slight is the difference I see
  Between yon Paduan youth and thee:
    He moulds, of Pans plaster,
  An urn by classic Chantrey's laws,--
  And thou a literary vase
    Of would-be alabaster.

  "Were I to arbitrate betwixt
  His terra cotta, plain or mix'd,
    And thy earth-gender'd sonnet;
  Small cause has he th' award to dread:--
  Thy Images are in the head,
    And his, poor boy, are on it!"

                    _New Monthly Magazine._

       *       *       *       *       *


PUNCH.


Punch was first made by the English at Nemle, near Goa, where they have
the _Nepa die Goa_, commonly called arrack. This fascinating liquor got
the name of _punch_, from its being composed of _five_ articles--that
word, in the Hindostanee language, signifying five. The legitimate
punch-makers, however, consider it a compound of _four_ articles only;
and some learned physicians have, therefore, named it _Diapente_ (from
Diatesseron,) and have given it according to the following
prescription--

  Rum, miscetur aqua--dulci miscetur acetum,
    fiet et ex tali foedere--nobile Punch.

and our worthy grand-fathers used to take a dose of it every night in
their lives, before going to bed, till doctor Cheyne alarmed them by the
information, that they were pouring liquid fire down their throats.
"Punch," said he, "is like opium, both in its nature and manner of
operation, and nearest arsenic in its deleterious and poisonous
qualities; and, so," added he, "I leave it to them, who, knowing this,
will yet drink on and die."

Who, that has drunk this agreeable accompaniment to calapash, at the
City of London Tavern, ever found themselves the worse for it? They may
have felt their genius inspired, or their nobler passions animated--but
_fire_ and _inflammation_ there was none. The old song says--

  It is the very best of physic.

and there have been very excellent physicians, who have confirmed the
opinion by their practice. What did the learned Dr. Sherard, the grave
Mr. Petiver, and the apothecary Mr. Tydall, drink in their herborizing
tour through Kent? Why--punch! and so much were they delighted with it,
at Winchelsea, that they made a special note in their journal, in honour
of the _Mayoress_, who made it, that the punch was not only excellent,
but that "each succeeding bowl was better than the former!"--_Brande's
Journal_.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHOICE OF A RESIDENCE.--ADVICE TO BACHELORS.


There is a sort of half-way between town and the country, which some
assert combines the advantages, others the defects, of each; and this is
a country-town. Here, indeed, a little money, a little learning, and a
little fashion, will go ten times as far as they will in London. Here, a
man who takes in the Quarterly or Edinburgh, is a literary character;
the lady who has one head-dress in the year from a Bond-street milliner,
becomes the oracle of fashion, "the observed of all observers;" here
dinners are talked of as excellent, at which neither French dishes nor
French wines were given, and a little raspberry ice would confer wide
celebrity on an evening party, and excite much animadversion and
surprise. Here, notwithstanding a pretty strong line of demarcation
between the different sets of society, every one appears to know every
body; the countenances and names of each are familiar; we want no slave,
who calls out the names; but are ready with a proper supply of
condescending nods, friendly greetings, and kind inquiries, to dispense
to each passenger according to his claims. Indeed, in calculating the
length of time requisite for arriving at a certain point, the inhabitant
of a country town should make due allowance for the necessary gossip
which must take place on the road, and for the frequent interchange of
bulletins of health, which is sure to occur; and after a residence of
any length in these sociable places, a sensation of solitude and
desertion is felt in those crowded streets of our metropolis, where the
full tide of population may roll past us for hours without bringing with
it a single glance of recognition or kindness. Here round games and
Casino still find refuge and support amidst a steady band of faithful
partizans; here old maids escape ridicule from being numerous, and old
bachelors acquire importance from being scarce. It is, indeed, to this
latter description of persons that I would especially recommend a
residence in a country town; and, as Dr. Johnson said, that "wherever he
might dine, he would wish to breakfast in Scotland;" so, wherever I may
pass my youth, let my days of old bachelorship, if to such I am doomed,
be spent in a country town. There the genteel male population forsake
their birthplace at an early age; and since war no longer exists to
supply their place with the irresistible military, the importance of a
single man, however small his attractions, however advanced his age, is
considerable; while a tolerably agreeable bachelor under sixty is the
object of universal attention, the cynosure of every lady's eye. In the
cathedral city, where I visited a friend some years since, there were
forty-five single women, from sixteen to fifty, and only three
marriageable men. Let any one imagine the delight of receiving the most
flattering attentions from fifteen women at once, some of them extremely
pretty and agreeable; or, I should rather say, from forty-five, since
the three bachelors, politically avoiding all appearance of preference,
were courted equally by nearly the whole phalanx of the sisterhood. One
of the enviable men, being only just of age, was indeed too young to
excite hopes in the more elderly ladies, but another more fortunate, if
he knew his happiness, ("_sua si bona norit_"), was exposed to the
attacks, more or less open, of every unmarried woman. Alas! he was
insensible to his privileges; a steady man of fifty-five, a dignitary of
the church, devoted to study, and shy in his habits, he seemed to shrink
from the kind attentions he received, and to wish for a less favoured, a
less glorious state of existence. His desires seemed limited to reading
the Fathers, writing sermons, and doing his duty as a divine; and he
appeared of opinion that no helpmate was required to fulfil them. But
still the indefatigable phalanx of forty-five, with three or four widows
as auxiliaries, continued their attacks, and his age, as I before
observed, was fatally encouraging to the hopes of each. The youngest
looked in their glasses and remembered the power of youth and beauty;
the middle-aged calculated on the good sense and propriety of character
of their object, and were "sure he would never marry a girl;" and the
most elderly exaggerated his gravity, thought of his shovel hat, and
seemed to suppose that every woman under fifty must be too giddy for its
wearer. Meanwhile, what a life he led!--his opinions law; his wishes
gospel; the cathedral crowded when he preached; churches attended;
schools visited; waltzing calumniated; novels concealed; shoulders
covered; petticoats lengthened--all to gain his approving eye. The fact
is, his sphere of useful influence was much enlarged by his single
state; as a married man, he could only have reformed his wife; as a
bachelor, he exercised undisputed power over every spinster in his
neighbourhood. He was, indeed, unconscious of, or ungratified by the
deference and incense he received; but the generality of men are less
insensible, and half the homage he so carefully rejected would have been
sufficient to intoxicate with delight and self-complacency the greater
part of his fraternity. What object in nature is more pitiable than a
London old bachelor, of moderate fortune and moderate parts? whose
conversational powers do not secure him invitations to dinners, when
stiffness of limb and a growing formality have obliged him to retreat
from quadrilles. The rich, we know, thrive everywhere, and at all
seasons, safe from neglect, secure from ridicule. I speak of those less
strongly fortified against the effects of time; those who, scarcely
considered good speculations in their best days, are now utterly
insignificant, concealed and jostled by a crowd of younger aspirants,
overlooked by mammas, except when needed to execute some troublesome
commission; and without a chance of receiving a single word or glance
from their daughters unmarked by that provoking ease and compassionate
familiarity, which tell them, better than words, that their day of
influence has closed for ever. Let such unhappy men fly from the scenes
of former pleasure and power, of former flirtation and gaiety, to the
quieter and surer triumphs of a country town. Here crowds of young
women, as certainly devoted to celibacy as the inmates of a nunnery,
accustomed from necessity to make beaux out of the most unprecedented
materials, and concoct flirtations in the most discouraging
circumstances, will welcome him with open arms, underrate his age,
overrate his merits, doubt if his hair is gray, deny that he wears false
teeth, accept his proffered arm with an air of triumph, and even hint a
wonder that he has given up dancing. To their innocent cheeks his glance
will have the long-lost power of calling up a blush; eyes as bright as
those which beamed upon his youth will sparkle at his approach; and
tender hearts, excluded by fate from palpitations for a more suitable
object, must per force beat quicker at his address. Here let him revel
in the enjoyment of unbounded influence, preserve it by careful
management to the latest possible moment, and at length gradually slide
from the agreeable old beau into the interesting invalid, and secure for
his days of gout, infirmity, and sickness, a host of attentive nurses,
of that amiable sex which delights and excels in offices of pity and
kindness; who will read him news, recount him gossip, play backgammon or
cribbage, knit him comfortables, make him jellies, and repay by
affectionate solicitude and unselfish attentions the unmeaning,
heartless, worthless admiration which he bestowed upon them in his
better days.--_New Monthly Magazine_.

       *       *       *       *       *



THE ANECDOTE GALLERY.


       *       *       *       *       *


OTHELLO.


On the crew of the Flora being treated to see _Othello_ at the
Portsmouth Theatre, Cassio's silly speech proved an exquisite relish to
the audience, where he apostrophizes heaven, "Forgive us our sins," and
endeavours to persuade his companion that he is sober. "Do not think,
gentlemen, I am drunk? this is my Ancient: this is my right hand, and
this is my left hand: I am not drunk now." "No, not _you_," roared a
Jack, who no doubt would have been a willing witness in Cassio's
defence, had he been brought to the gangway for inebriety. "I can stand
well enough," continued the representative of Cassio. "Then, hang it!
why don't you walk the _plank_ at once, and prove yourself sober?"
vociferated a long-tailed wag, determined not to slip this opportunity
of having a shot on the sly at his first lieutenant, who had only a
night or two before put his perpendicularity to a similar test.

At the last scene the shouts became alarming; volleys of imprecations
were hurled at his head--his limbs--his life. "What!" said one of the
rudest of the crew, "can the black brute cut her lifelines? She's a
reg'lar-built angel, and as like my Bet as two peas."--"Ay," said a
messmate, "it all comes of being jealous, and that's all as one as mad;
but you know, if he's as good as his word, he's sure to be hanged,--
that's one comfort!" When the Moor seized her in bed by the throat,
Desdemona shrieking for permission to repeat but one short prayer, and
he rancorously exclaims, in attempting to strangle her, "It is too
late!" the house, as it is said a French audience had done ere now,
could endure no more; and the sailors rose in their places, giving the
most alarming indications of angry excitement, and of a determination to
mingle in the murderous scene below. "I'm ----, Dick, if I can stand it
any longer," said the spokesman of the gallery. "You're _no_ man, if you
can sit and look on quietly; hands off, you blood-thirsty niggar," he
vociferated, and threw himself over the side of the gallery in a
twinkling; clambering down by a pillar into the boxes, and scrambled
across the pit, over every person in his way, till he reached the noisy
boatswain's mate. Him he "challenged to the rescue," and exclaimed,
"Now's your time, Ned,--Pipe the boarders away--all hands,--! if you're
a man as _loves_ a woman. _Now_, go it," said he, and dashed furiously
over all obstacles,--fiddles, flutes, and fiddlers. Smash went the
foot-lights--Caesar had passed the Rubicon. The contagion of feeling
became general; and his trusty legions, fired with the ambition that
inspired their leader, followed, sweeping all before them, till the
whole male population of the theatre crowded the stage _en masse_, amid
shouts of encouragement, or shrieks of terror; outraging, by their
mistaken humanity, all the propriety of this touching drama; and, for
once, rescuing the gentle Desdemona from the deadly grasp of the
murderous Moor, who fled in full costume, dagger in hand, from the
house, and through the dark streets of Dock, until he reached his home
in a state of inconceivable affright. The scene of confusion which
followed, it would be fruitless to attempt to describe. All was riot and
uproar.--_Sailors and Saints._

       *       *       *       *       *


DEATH OF DAUBENTON.


We have had countless instances of "the ruling passion strong in death;"
but perhaps we can adduce nothing more illustrative of that feeling than
the following fact, which may vie with the sublimity of Rousseau's
death, when he desired to look on the sun ere his eyes were closed in
the rayless tomb:--M. Daubenton, the scientific colleague of Buffon, and
the anatomical illustrator of his "Histoire Naturelle," on being chosen
a member of the Conservative Senate, was seized with apoplexy the first
time he assisted at the sessions of that body, and fell senseless into
the arms of his astonished colleagues. The most prompt assistance could
only restore him to feeling for a few moments, during which he showed
himself, what he had always been--a tranquil observer of nature. _He
felt with his fingers, which still retained sensation, the various parts
of his body, and pointed out to the assistants the progress of the
disease!_ He died on the 31st of December, 1799. The _Edinburgh
Philosophical Journal_ states, "it may be said of him, that he attained
happiness the most perfect, and the least mixed, that any man could hope
to attain. His life was marked by an undeviating pursuit of science; and
to him was Buffon indebted for instruction and example. Naturally of a
mild and conciliatory disposition, and gifted with cool and
dispassionate consideration, he was just such a preceptor as was
calculated to curb the imagination of Buffon, whose fiery and ardent
genius was apt to substitute theory for proof, and fancy for fact; and
often did the 'biting smile' of M. Daubenton check the ardency of
Buffon, and his well-weighed words arrest him in his headlong progress."
What more noble picture of scientific devotion can we imagine than the
feeble and aged Daubenton, shut up for whole days in his cabinet of
natural history, ardently exerting himself in the complex and weary task
of arranging the objects according to their several relations? But
Buffon, with the wayward negligence which clings to genius, did wrong to
his friend in publishing an edition of his "Histoire Naturelle" without
the dissections. Yet such a step, discountenanced by all the liberal
body of science, was forgiven by the philosophic and gentle Daubenton;
and Buffon made atonement for his aberration, by re-uniting himself to
the companion of his childhood, the participator in his studies, and the
preceptor of his genius.

H.

       *       *       *       *       *


STORY ON A MARCH.


An officer in India, whose stock of table-linen had been completely
exhausted during the campaign,--either by wear or tear or accident,--had
a few friends to dine with him. The dinner being announced to the party,
seated in the _al fresco_ drawing-room of a camp, the table appeared
spread with eatables, but without the usual covering of a cloth. The
master, who, perhaps, gave himself but little trouble about these
matters, or who probably relied upon his servant's capacity in the art
of borrowing, or, at all events, on his ingenuity on framing an excuse,
inquired, with an angry voice, why there was no table-cloth. The answer
was, "Massa not got;" with which reply, after apologizing to his guests,
he was compelled, for the present, to put up. The next morning he called
his servant, and rated him soundly, and perhaps beat him, (for I lament
to say that this was too much the practice with European masters in
India,) for exposing his poverty to the company; desiring him, another
time, if similarly circumstanced, to say that all the table-cloths were
gone to the wash. Another day, although the table appeared clothed in
the proper manner, the spoons, which had probably found their way to the
bazar, perhaps to provide the very articles of which the feast was
composed, were absent, whether with or without leave is immaterial.
"Where are all the spoons?" cried the apparently enraged master. "Gone
washerman, sar!" was the answer. Roars of laughter succeeded, and a
teacup did duty for the soup-ladle. The probable consequence of this
unlucky exposure of the domestic economy of the host, namely, a sound
drubbing to the poor maty-boy, brings to my mind an anecdote which,
being in a story-telling vein, I cannot resist the temptation of
introducing. It was related to me, with great humour, by one of the
principals in the transaction, whose candour exceeded his fear of shame.
He had been in the habit of beating his servants, till one in particular
complained that he would have him before Sir Henry Gwillam, then chief
justice at Madras, who had done all in his power to suppress the
disgraceful practice. Having a considerable balance to settle with his
maty-boy on the score of punishment, but fearing the presence of
witnesses, the master called him one day into a bungalow at the bottom
of his garden, at some distance from the house. "Now," said he as he
shut the door and put the key into his pocket, "you'll complain to Sir
Henry Gwillam, will you? There is nobody near to bear witness to what
you may say, and, with the blessing of God, I'll give it you
well."--"Massa sure nobody near?" asked the Indian.--"Yes, yes, I've
taken good care of that."--"Then I give massa one good beating." And
forthwith the maty-boy proceeded to put his threat into execution, till
the master, being the weaker of the two, was compelled to cry mercy;
which being at length granted, and the door opened with at least as much
alacrity as it was closed, Maotoo decamped without beat of drum, never
to appear again.--_Twelve Years' Military Adventures, &c._

       *       *       *       *       *



THE GATHERER.

  A snapper up of unconsidered trifles.
                               SHAKSPEARE.

       *       *       *       *       *


MEMENTO MORI.


_Inscribed on a Tombstone._

    When you look on my grave,
    And behold how they wave,
  The cypress, the yew, and the willow,
    You think 'tis the breeze
    That gives motion to these--
  'Tis the laughter that's shaking my pillow.

    I must laugh when I see
    A poor insect like thee
  Dare to pity the fate thou must own;
    Let a few moments slide,
    We shall lie side by side,
  And crumble to dust, bone for bone.

    Go, weep thine own doom,
    Thou wert born for the tomb--
  Thou hast lived, like myself, but to die;
    Whilst thou pity'st my lot,
    Secure fool, thou'st forgot
  Thou art no more immortal than I!
                                 H.B.A.

       *       *       *       *       *


TEA-DRINKING.


While the late Mr. Gifford was at Ashburton, he contracted an
acquaintance with a family of that place, consisting of females somewhat
advanced in age. On one occasion he ventured on the perilous exploit of
drinking tea with these elderly ladies. After having swallowed his usual
allowance of tea, he found, in spite of his remonstrances to the
contrary, that his hostess would by no means suffer him to give up, but
persisted in making him drink a most incredible quantity. "At last,"
said Gifford in telling the story, "being really overflooded with tea, I
put down my fourteenth cup, and exclaimed, with an air of resolution, 'I
neither can nor will drink any more.' The hostess then seeing she had
forced more down my throat than I liked, began to apologize, and added,
'but, dear Mr. Gifford, as you didn't put your spoon across your cup, I
supposed your refusals were nothing but good manners.'"

       *       *       *       *       *


PRECEDENCE.


An anecdote is told of a captain in the service, since dead, that whilst
carrying out a British ambassador to his station abroad, a quarrel arose
on the subject of precedency. High words were exchanged between them on
the quarter-deck, when, at length, the ambassador, thinking to silence
the captain, exclaimed, "Recollect, sir, _I_ am the representative of
his majesty!" "Then, sir," retorted the captain, "recollect that _here
I_ am _more_ than majesty itself. Can the king _seize a fellow up and
give him three dozen_?" Further argument was useless--the diplomatist
struck.

       *       *       *       *       *


MARCEL.


A lady who had been a pupil of this distinguished professor of dancing,
and remained subsequently his steady and zealous friend, succeeded in
obtaining for him from the government a pension for life. In her great
joy at having such a boon to put into his possession, she advanced to
him--the certificate in her hand--with a hurried and anxious step; when
M. Marcel, shocked at the style of presentation, struck the paper out of
her hand, demanding if she had forgotten his instructions? The lady
immediately picked it up, and presented it with due form and grace; on
which the accomplished Marcel, the enthusiastic professor of his art,
respectfully kissed her hand, and with a profound bow exclaimed, "Now I
know my own pupil!"

       *       *       *       *       *


ACROSTIC.


  C ould angel's voice, or poet's lays,
  A ttune my votive song to praise
  R esistless then I'd touch the lyre,
  O r chant her praise, whom all admire.
  L et candour, dearest maid, excuse;
  I claim no kindred to the muse,
  N or can a lowly song of mine
  E xpress the worth of Caroline.    A.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


"JACK OF BOTH SIDES."


This proverb is derived from the Greek, and applied to Theramenes, who
was at first a mighty stickler for the thirty tyrants' authority: but
when they began to abuse it by defending such outrageous practices, no
man more violently opposed it than he; and this (says Potter) got him
the nick-name of "_Jack of both sides_," from _Cothurnus_, which was a
kind of shoe that fitted both feet. P.T.W.

       *       *       *       *       *


PLAY OF "CAESAR IN EGYPT."


  When the pack'd audience from their posts retir'd,
  And Julius in a general hiss expir'd,
  Sage Booth to Cibber cried, "Compute your gains;
  These Egypt dogs, and their old dowdy queens,
  But ill requite these habits and these scenes!
  To rob Corneille for such a motley piece--
  His geese were swans, but, zounds, thy swans are geese."
  Rubbing his firm, invulnerable brow,
  The bard replied, "The critics must allow,
  'Twas ne'er in Caesar's destiny to run."
   Wils bow'd, and bless'd the gay, pacific pun.
              _Mist's Journal_, 1724.

       *       *       *       *       *


FRIENDSHIP AND LOVE.


  Friendship is like the cobbler's tye,
  That binds two soles in unity;
  But love is like the cobbler's awl,
  That pierces through the _soul_ and _all_.
                             W.J.

       *       *       *       *       *

Why is St. Giles's clock like a pelisse, and unlike a cloak?--Because it
shows the figure without confining the hands.

"STRICTOR."

       *       *       *       *       *


CORPORATION LEARNING.


The mayor of a country town, conceiving that the word _clause_ was in
the plural number, would often talk of a _claw_ in an act of parliament.

       *       *       *       *       *


A HUNDRED POUND NOTE.


The following pathetic soliloquy was found written on the back of a
hundred pound note of the National Bank, which passed through our hands
lately, and we are sorry we can now add our sympathies to those of our
poet on the transitory nature of those sublunary enjoyments:--

  "A little while ye hae been mine;
    Nae langer can I keep ye;
  I fear ye'll ne'er be mine again,
    Nor any ither like ye."

                         _Edinburgh Paper._

       *       *       *       *       *


FRENCH.--- ENGLISH.


_At Boulogne._

"NOTICE to Informe the gentries: Find Dogs and some to be sold."

_At Paris._

"M. Boursier, mershant, has the honour to give account at the English
and strangers, gentlemen and livings from East Indies, that he takes
charge of all species of goods or ventures, and all commissions. Like
all kinds of spices and fine eating things: keep likewise a general
staple of French and strangers wines, the all in confidence, and the
most reasonable prices."

_At Boulogne._

"Bed and table linen, plate, knives, and forks, also donkies to let.
Mangling done here."

_In the church al Calais._

  "Tronc pour les pauvres de L'hopital."
  "Trunk for the poor hospitable."

_At Dieppe._

_French despair._

  "Quand on a tout perdu et qu'on a plus despoir
  On prend l'devant sa chemise pour sa farie un mouchoir."

The above are all copied verbatim and literatim. J.G.R.

       *       *       *       *       *

When a Grand Vizier is favourably deposed, that is, without banishing or
putting him to death, it is signified to him by a messenger from the
Sultan, who goes to his table, and wipes the ink out of his golden pen;
this he understands as the sign of dismissal. W.G.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


TIME.


It is the remark of a sensible authoress, (Miss Hawkins,) that every
_day_ resembles a _trunk_ which has to be filled; and when we fancy that
we have packed it to the uttermost, we shall still find that by good
management it might, and would, have held more.--Our quotation is from
memory, but correct as to simile and substance; and we consider the
remark not less striking than quaint. M.L.B.

       *       *       *       *       *

On January 31 will be published, price 5_s_. with a Frontispiece, and
upwards of thirty other Engravings, the

ARCANA OF SCIENCE, AND ANNUAL REGISTER OF THE USEFUL ARTS, FOR 1829.

The MECHANICAL department contains ONE HUNDRED New Inventions and
Discoveries, with 14 _Engravings_.

CHEMICAL, SEVENTY articles, with 2 _Engravings_.

NATURAL HISTORY, 135 New Facts and Discoveries, with 7 _Engravings_.

ASTRONOMICAL and METEOROLOGICAL PHENOMENA--35 articles--6 _Engravings_.

AGRICULTURE, GARDENING, and RURAL ECONOMY, 30 _pages_.

DOMESTIC ECONOMY.

USEFUL ARTS.

FINE ARTS.

MISCELLANEOUS REGISTER, &c.

For Critical Opinions of the Volume for last year, see Gardener's,
New Monthly, and _London Magazines_, &c. &c.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror of Literature, Amusement,
and Instruction, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MIRROR OF LITERATURE, NO. 353 ***

***** This file should be named 11390.txt or 11390.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/1/3/9/11390/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Garrett Alley, David King, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


